### Accession
PXD025475

### Title
Proteomic profiling of exosomes isolated from invasive and proliferative melanoma cell lines and correlation with exosomes from plasma of human melanoma patients pre- and post-checkpoint inhibitor treatment

### Description
Over the last decades, exosomes have received increasing attention due to their involvement in numerous pathologies including cancer. Tumor-derived exosomes and exosomes derived from the tumor microenvironment are implicated in multiple mechanisms that support disease progression such as the escape of malignant cells from immunosurveillance, tumor cell growth, tumor angiogenesis, preparation of a pre-metastatic niche and remodeling of the extracellular matrix, thereby promoting dissemination and metastasis. Here, we performed protein expression phenotyping of exosomes derived from different invasive and proliferative melanoma cell lines (n=8) to provide a solid framework of gene expression programs, which - in a clinical setting - would be useful for prognosis and may also predict treatment response. Cell line characteristics have been published previously (Wenzina et al.,2020). Having identified a set of differentially expressed proteins in proliferative and invasive melanoma cell lines, we correlated them to the protein composition of plasma exosomes from melanoma patients pre and post immunotherapy treatment (n=7) as well as healthy controls (n=5).

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from cell culture supernatant or patient plasma by differential ultracentrifugation and lysed using Denaturing Solution (Invitrogen). Proteins were precipitated with dichlormethane/methanol and solubilized using 50mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) containing 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters), followed by reduction (5mM DTT, 30 min, 60°C), alkylation (15mM IAA, 30 min in the dark, RT) and digestion with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (1:20 w/w, o/n, 37°C). The nano chromatographic separation was performed using a nano-RSLC UltiMate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For sample loading and desalting, a PepMap C18trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) of 300 µm ID x 5 mm length, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size was used.  Nano HPLC Separation of digested proteins was performed using a C18 µPAC separation column (PharmaFluidics). The dimensions of the µPAC column were: 5 µm pillar diameter, 2.5 µm inter-pillar distance, 18 µm pillar height; 315 µm bed channel width and 200 cm column length. The pillars are superficially porous, end-capped with C18-chains. The aqueous loading mobile phase contained 2% ACN,0.1% TFA, and 0.01% HFBA cooled to 3°C, as described earlier (Schöbinger et al., 2016). The mobile phase transferred the sample from the sample loop to the trap column by the loading pump at 30 µl/min to the trapping column, which was operated in the column oven at 50°C. The trapping time was set to 10 min, which was sufficient to load the sample to the trapping column and wash possible salts and contaminants. The cooled mobile phase enabled trapping of the hydrophilic analytes at enhanced oven temperature. Peptides were separated and analyzed using positive nano HPLC-ESI-MS. The gradient elution was performed by mixing two mobile phases composed of the following solvents: Mobile phase A: 95% H2O, 5% ACN, 0.1% FA; Mobile phase B: 50% ACN, 30% MeOH, 10% TFE (2,2,2-Trifluoro ethanol), 10% - 0.1% FA.). At 200 minutes, the trapping column was switched back into the separation flow and equilibrated for the following run. The nano HPLC separation was performed on the µPAC separation column with a 2 m separation path. The flow rate of the nano HPLC pump was set to 800 nl/min for the first 10 minutes with gradual lowering to 600 nl/min for separation purposes. The gradual increase of the flow rate at the end of the separation run to 800 nl/min is performed for speeding the equilibration of the separation column. Details on developing and testing different gradients for the 200-cm µPAC column are described by Tóth et al., 2019. Detection of eluting peptides is performed using both UV at 214 nm (3nl UV cell, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive Plus). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus equipped with the Flex nano-ESI source and stainless-steel needle (20 µm ID x 10 µm tip ID). The needle voltage was set to 3.1 kV, scan range was 200-2000 m/z. Full MS resolution was set to 70000, AGC target to 3E6, and maximum injection time was set to 50 ms. For the MS/MS analysis, the mass resolution was set to 35.000, AGC target to 1E5, and the maximum injection time to 120 ms. The isolation width for MS/MS was set to m/z 1.5, and top 15 ions were selected for fragmentation, single charged ions and ions bearing a charge higher than +7 were excluded from MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 seconds. The NCE was set to 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS Data were searched against the human SwissProt protein database (Version November 2020) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using following parameters: 1) Taxonomy: Homo sapiens; 2) Modifications: carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, carboxymethylation on M as variable; 3) Peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.05Da; 4) Trypsin was selected as the enzyme used and two missed cleavages were allowed; 5) False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% and the decoy database search was used for estimating the FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell culture, Plasma, Lc-msms, Melanoma, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna / Department of Dermatology / Skin & Endothelium Research Division (SERD)
Medical University of Vienna / Department of Dermatology / Head of Skin & Endothelium Research Division (SERD)

### Submitter
Marianne Schnödl

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Petzelbauer
Medical University of Vienna / Department of Dermatology / Head of Skin & Endothelium Research Division (SERD)


