### Accession
PXD027700

### Title
Sampling and homogenization of nanoliter tissue with a nanosecond infrared laser (NIRL) for mass spectrometric proteomics

### Description
It was recently shown that ultrashort pulse infrared (IR) lasers, operating at the wavelength of the OH vibration stretching band of water, are highly efficient at softly sampling and homogenizing biological tissue. We utilized a nanosecond infrared laser (NIRL) for tissue sampling and homogenization with subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis for mass spectrometric proteomics. Sampling was performed with murine spleen and colon tissue with an ablation volume of 1.1 x 1.1 x0.4 mm³ (approx. 0.5 µl), determined with optical coherence tomography (OCT). The identified proteins of both tissues contained tissue type specific proteins correlating with the corresponding lists of the Human Protein Atlas. The results demonstrate that tissue sampling and homogenization of small tissue volumes less than 1 µL for subsequent mass spectrometric proteomics is feasible with a NIRL and therefore is an alternative towards sampling of tissue sections with laser capture microdissection (LCM).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation protocol Colon and spleen samples were ablated with Nanosecond infrared laser. The samples were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate including 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC buffer).The samples were boiled at 99°C for 5 minutes to denature proteins. Afterwards, samples were processed with a Probe Sonificator for one cycle at 30% power to destroy DNA and RNA molecules. According to a BCA Protein assay (the Pierce™, Thermo Scientific™), 10 μg of each sample were diluted to 100 μL with SDC buffer. For reduction of disulfide bonded cysteine residues 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to the samples and they were incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C. After that 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added to the samples for alkylation of the reduced cysteine residues and they were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C in the dark. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin to protein for 16 hours at 37°C. To quench trypsin and precipitate SDC 100% formic acid were added to a final concentration of 1% formic acid v/v. The samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16,000 g. The supernatant was collected and dried in SpeedVac™ vacuum concentrator. The digested samples were stored at -20°C until further use.  Mass spectrometric analysis The samples were resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA for a final concentration of 0.5 μg/μL. An Aliquot of 2 μL was injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system. Peptides were purified and desalted using an Thermo Scientific™ Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 Nano Trap pre-column (100 μm x 2 cm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size) and transferred to Thermo Scientific™ Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm, 100 Å pore size, 2 μm particle size) for chromatographic separation. Peptide elution was achieved by applying an 80-minute run per each sample with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min using a gradient with Eluent A consisting of 0.1% FA and eluent B of 0.1% FA in 90% acetonitrile. starting with 2% solvent B. Solvent B increased to 30% in 65 min followed by a linear gradient elevating the concentration to 90% in 70 min. Finally, the concentration of buffer B was reduced to 2% after 70.1 minutes. The eluting peptides were transferred into a quadrupole orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (QExactive

### Data Protocol
4.6 MS data processing  Obtained raw data from LC-MS/MS measurement of peptides were processed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.10. For protein identification, a reviewed murine Swissprot FASTA database without isoforms (Status August 2020) containing 17053 proteins was generated. The measured MS2 spectra were searched with the Andromeda algorithm against the theoretical fragment-spectra of tryptic peptides from the data base. The Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and the cyclisation of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 6,000 Da were accepted with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Only peptides with a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage sites were considered. The error tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first precursor search and to 4.5 ppm for the following main search. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. Using a reverted decoy, peptide database approach was set for protein identification to a false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold of < 0.01. Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. For quantification, all identified razor and unique peptides were considered. The label minimum ratio count was set to 1. Only unmodified peptides were used for quantification. 4.7 Statistical data analysis  Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5). The protein data were transformed into log2 values and further median normalized per sample. Principle component analysis (PCA) was performed for an overall sample amount of 6 samples including three murine colon and spleen samples. Therefore, protein data were filtered for no missing values resulting in 501 proteins. Statistical testing between murine spleen and colon samples was performed using two sample t-Test where only proteins identified with p-value < 0.05 and 1.5-fold change were considered as statistically significant different in abundance among the compared groups. Resulting proteins of two sample t-Test (p-value < 0.05, 1.5-fold change) between colon and spleen were further analyzed using the Human Protein Atlas (status July 2021).

### Publication Abstract
It was recently shown that ultrashort pulse infrared (IR) lasers, operating at the wavelength of the OH vibration stretching band of water, are highly efficient for sampling and homogenizing biological tissue. In this study we utilized a tunable nanosecond infrared laser (NIRL) for tissue sampling and homogenization with subsequent liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis for mass spectrometric proteomics. For the first time, laser sampling was performed with murine spleen and colon tissue. An ablation volume of 1.1 &#xd7; 1.1 &#xd7; 0.4 mm&#xb3; (approximately 0.5 &#xb5;L) was determined with optical coherence tomography (OCT). The results of bottom-up proteomics revealed proteins with significant abundance differences for both tissue types, which are in accordance with the corresponding data of the Human Protein Atlas. The results demonstrate that tissue sampling and homogenization of small tissue volumes less than 1 &#xb5;L for subsequent mass spectrometric proteomics is feasible with a NIRL.

### Keywords
Tissue sampling; nanosecond infrared laser, Laser ablation, Proteomics; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine  Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Manuela Moritz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hartmut Schlüter
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine  Section / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


