### Accession
PXD031231

### Title
Intestine proteome of Rhipicephalus microplus tick reveal key molecular features associated with resistant to ivermectin

### Description
Rhipicephalus microplus is among the critical tick parasite of cattle farming globally. However, the massive use of ivermectin last decades induced the generation of the tick-resistant population.  Unfortunately, despite extensive research the mode of action of ivermectin remains unclear. Due to the limited molecular information related to the resistance of R. microplus to ivermectin, we carried out a midgut comparative proteomics study between susceptible and resistant tick. Our tissues specificity approach also included tandem mass tags (TMT) couple to synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3. Our proteomics scrutiny exhibits key biological process associated with blood digestion and anticoagulation in midgut. In addition, we could observe the significant shutdown of the translation mechanism in susceptible thinks. At the same time, resistant thick exhibited the over-accumulation of cytochrome P450, glutathione-S-transferase, and ABC transporters. A similar trend was observed in proteins like glutathione peroxides glutaredoxin, sulfiredoxin, and disulfide-isomerase, which suggest a possible activation of the oxidative metabolism as a potential strategy to cope with ivermectin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred µg of crude protein extracts from each sample were reduced with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 45 min at 60 ºC, and then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 1 h at room temperature in darkness. The reaction was quenched with 30 mM DTT for 10 min. The proteins were precipitated overnight with five volumes of cold acetone. After centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC, the pellets were vacuum dried. Dried pellets were suspended in 100 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 0.1% SDS. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) at a 1:30 w/w trypsin:protein ratio overnight at 37 ºC. Then, freshly prepared trypsin was added at a 1:60 w/w ratio of trypsin:protein for 4 h at 37 ºC. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 9-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used according to the manufacturer's instructions in the following order: 126, 127N, and 127C for intestine tissues related to resistant ticks; 128N, 128C, and 129N for samples from susceptible ticks. According to the manufacturer's instructions, samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography spin columns (RPLC, Pierce). All fractions were then desalted using C18 cartridges (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a CentriVap (Labconco).

### Data Protocol
The spectra generated with decision tree-driven MS/MS and (SPS)-MS3 were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the search engines Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science), SEQUEST HT  (Eng et al., 1994), and AMANDA (Dorfer et al., 2014). The searches were directed against no redundant proteins of R. microplus deposited in the NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Parameters in the search included: full-tryptic protease specificity, allowing two missed cleavages. In addition, static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 9-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da). Dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da). For the SPS-MS3 method, in which identification was performed at a lower resolution in the linear ion trap, tolerances of ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da were applied.  The resulting peptide hits were filtered for a maximum of 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007). The reporter ion quantification for TMT tags was obtained with a PD software template at the MS3 level applying mass tolerances of ± 10 ppm in the case of the most confident centroid and a precursor co-isolation filter of 75%

### Publication Abstract
Rhipicephalus microplus is the most serious tick parasite for the livestock industry in tropical and subtropical regions. A cost-effective control method to manage the infestation of this parasite involves the use of chemicals such as ivermectin. However, massive overuse of ivermectin over recent decades has selected for ivermectin-resistant populations of R. microplus. Here, we carried out a comparative proteomic analysis of the midgut of ivermectin-susceptible versus ivermectin-resistant ticks using tandem mass tags coupled to synchronous precursor selection. In susceptible ticks, there was an over-representation of proteins associated with blood digestion and anticoagulation. In contrast, resistant ticks exhibited an over-accumulation of proteins involved in phase I and phase II of the detoxification metabolism, including cytochrome P450, glutathione-S-transferase, and ABC transporters, as well as many ribosomal and other translation-related proteins. This information provides new clues about the mechanisms of ivermectin resistance in R. microplus as well as suggesting potential novel molecular targets to cope with ivermectin-resistant populations of R. microplus. SIGNIFICANCE: Cattle farming is an important primary economic activity for food production all over the globe. However, this activity also has detrimental environmental impacts, including the overuse of ivermectin and other chemicals used to control parasite infestations. The overuse of ivermectin selected for parasites with resistance to this chemical, including tick species like R. microplus. There has been extensive to understand the mechanisms that mediate ivermectin resistance in arthropods, but many gaps remain for the full comprehension of this phenomenon. Understanding the biochemistry behind ivermectin resistance could provide new alternatives to fight these parasites. We therefore consider that determining the metabolic mechanisms involved in ivermectin resistance is of great relevance. The comparative proteomic analysis here reported shows the relevance of the active detoxifying metabolism in the midgut of resistant ticks, which may be key for the development of novel control methods.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Sps, Proteome, Ivermectin, Rhipicephalus microplus

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados, Instituto de Ecología A.C., Cluster BioMimic®, Carretera Antigua a Coatepec 351, El Haya, Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico; C.P. 91073

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr Ruiz-May Eliel
Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados, Instituto de Ecología A.C., Cluster BioMimic®, Carretera Antigua a Coatepec 351, El Haya, Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico; C.P. 91073


