### Accession
PXD003547

### Title
IEF fractionation OVCAR-5 cell line

### Description
Analysis of the ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-5. A standard trypsin digest was carried out on the OVCAR-5 cell lysates which were then analysed in the un-fractionated and fractionated forms. Fractionation was completed using a peptide IEF separation method. All samples were analysed by nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS using a QTOF.

### Sample Protocol
OVCAR-5 cells were lysed using a Precellys 24 bead beater. Briefly, the cells were placed in Precellys bead beating tubes in 1% (w/v) SDS and homogenised at 6,300 revolutions per minute for 3 x 1 minute cycles. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 minutes, supernatant was recovered and DNA was sheared using a Bioruptor set to “high” output for 6 x 30 second cycles with one minute breaks between each cycle in ice-cold water. Protein concentration was quantified using an EZQ protein assay. Protein extracts were digested using a modified FASP method as previously described by Wisniewski e.t al.(2009). Briefly, samples were made up to a volume of 200 μL with 7M urea (Merck), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (U-AmBic) and reduced by adding a final volume of DTT to 50 mM. Samples were loaded into Ultrafiltration spin columns (Sartorius Vivacon 500, 10,000 MWCO HY) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. 100 μL of 55 mM IAA in U-AmBic was added to the spin columns. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes and washed with 100 µL of U-AmBic twice, followed by one wash with 100 μL of 50 mM U-AmBic. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin gold at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 in 100 μL of 5 mM U-AmBic. 1 mg tryptic peptides from the OVCAR-5 cells was desalted, dried to completeness, re-suspended in 100 µl 10% (v/v) ACN.  335 mg of Sephadex G-100 SF (GE Healthcare) was mixed with 3 mL 10% (v/v) ACN and rehydrated for 72 hours at room temperature. 1 mg in 0.1 mL of OVCAR-5 cell digest was added to 180 µL Pharmalyte 3-10 (GE Healthcare) and 50 µL pI-marker mixture. 10% (v/v) ACN was added to a total volume of 4.5 mL and mixed carefully. The mixture was pipetted into a lane (Dimensions: (10 x 1) cm2) in a HD-PE tray, a layer of six Whatman 3MM Chr paper was wetted in the respective cathode (100 mM NaOH) or anode solution (100 mM H2SO4 ) and applied to the ends of the lane. The mixture was then distributed homogenously in the lane by short, rapid movements of the HD-PE tray. IEF was conducted using a Multiphor II apparatus (GE Healthcare) at 4 °C, with the voltage limited to 1500 V and current limited to 0.1 mA/ cm2 lane area until 1,000 Vhrs (1mg peptides) or 1,300 Vhrs (10 mg peptides) were reached. Following separation, 20 fractions were collected into 1.5 mL 0.22 µm cellulose acetate spin-filter-tubes using a spatula. Sephadex fractions were eluted with 3 x 200 µL 10% (v/v) ACN using a bench-top centrifuge. Elution of peptides was deemed complete at this point as no pI-marker was left visible in the Sephadex gel. In the case of the 1 mg of fractionated mouse brain peptides, the eluate was concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge until approximately 100 µL solution was left and diluted 1:10 in 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 97.9% water.   Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled to an Impact HD™ QTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via an Advance CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics). Approximately 1 µg from each of the 20 OVCAR-5 fractions and 1 µg from the un-fractionated OVCAR-5 digests were analysed. Peptide samples were pre-concentrated onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 μL/ min in 2% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) TFA for 10 minutes. For all samples peptide separation was performed using a 75 μm ID C18 column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/ minutes using a linear gradient from 5 to 45% B (A: 5% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) FA, B: 80% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) FA) over 130 minutes, followed by a 20 minute wash with 90% B, and a 20 minute equilibration with 5% A. MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 to 2,200 m/z in a data-dependent fashion using Bruker’s Shotgun Instant Expertise™ method. This method uses IDAS (intensity dependent acquisition speed) to adapt the speed of acquisition depending on the intensity of precursor ions (fixed cycle time), and RT2 (RealTime Re-Think) to exclude previously selected precursor ions from undergoing re-fragmentation unless the chromatographic peak intensity of the ion has increased by a factor of 5. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from acquisition. Collision energy ranged from 23% to 65% as determined by the m/z of the precursor ion.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human database (downloaded on the 13th of October 2015, containing 20,204 entries). The standard Bruker QTOF settings in MaxQuant were used with a mass error tolerance of 40 ppm. The variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl of cysteines were specified, with the digestion enzyme specified as trypsin. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, with a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Only unique and razor peptides were used when reporting protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Although acetylation is regarded as a common protein modification, a detailed proteome-wide profile of this post-translational modification may reveal important biological insight regarding differential acetylation of individual proteins. Here we optimized a novel peptide IEF fractionation method for use prior to LC-MS/MS analysis to obtain a more in depth coverage of N-terminally acetylated proteins from complex samples. Application of the method to the analysis of the serous ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-5 identified 344 N-terminally acetylated proteins, 12 of which are previously unreported. The protein peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A (PPIA) was detected in both the N-terminally acetylated and unmodified forms and was further analyzed by data-independent acquisition in carboplatin-responsive parental OVCAR-5 cells and carboplatin-resistant OVCAR-5 cells. This revealed a higher ratio of unacetylated to acetylated N-terminal PPIA in the parental compared with the carboplatin-resistant OVCAR-5 cells and a 4.1-fold increase in PPIA abundance overall in the parental cells relative to carboplatin-resistant OVCAR-5 cells (P = 0.015). In summary, the novel IEF peptide fractionation method presented here is robust, reproducible, and can be applied to the profiling of N-terminally acetylated proteins. All mass spectrometry data is available as a ProteomeXchange repository (PXD003547).

### Keywords
Ief fractionation lc-ms/ms ovarian cancer cell line

### Affiliations
Director Adelaide Proteomics Centre, School of Biological Sciences Deputy Director, The Institute for Photonics & Advanced Sensing (IPAS), School of Physical Sciences The University of Adelaide Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 5005
The University of Adelaide

### Submitter
Georgia Arentz

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hoffmann
Director Adelaide Proteomics Centre, School of Biological Sciences Deputy Director, The Institute for Photonics & Advanced Sensing (IPAS), School of Physical Sciences The University of Adelaide Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 5005


