### Accession
PXD028707

### Title
Determination of proteins labeling by Turbo-ID in PIGS-HRD1-CD55-TKO cells

### Description
To identify proteins that might physically interact with CD55

### Sample Protocol
For biotin labeling, the major process was followed the protocol described by Alice Ting group. PIGS-HRD1-CD55-TKO cells stably expressed TurboID-CD55(C) and TurboID-CD59(C) were labeled with biotin. Biotinylated material were enriched with StrepTactin Sepharose. The samples were further processing and labeled with TMT (6-plex) reagents (126-N: mixture, 127-N: CD55(C), 128-N: CD55(C), 129-N: CD59(C), 130-N: CD48(C), 131-N: CD48(C) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  The samples were first separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with an RSLC C18 column (1.9 μm ×100 μm ×20 cm).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0) was used to apply for a database search. TMT (6-plex) channels (126-N: mixture, 127-N: CD55(C), 128-N: CD55(C), 129-N: CD59(C), 130-N: CD48(C), 131-N: CD48(C)).

### Publication Abstract
GPI anchoring is an essential post-translational modification in eukaryotes that links proteins to the plasma membrane. In this issue, Liu et al. (2023. J. Cell Biol.https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202208159) suggest, for the first time, a regulation on demand of the GPI glycolipid precursor biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Erad, Cd55, Gpi anchored protein

### Affiliations
Jiangnan university
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,Osaka University,Japan

### Submitter
Yi-Shi Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,Osaka University,Japan


