### Accession
PXD029882

### Title
The oncogenic fusion protein DNAJB1-PRKACA can be specifically targeted by peptide-based immunotherapy in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
The DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript is the oncogenic driver in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma, a lethal disease lacking specific therapies. This study reports on the identification, characterization, and immunotherapeutic application of HLA-presented neoantigens specific for the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma. DNAJB1-PRKACA-derived HLA class I and HLA class II ligands induce multifunctional cytotoxic CD8+ and T-helper 1 CD4+ T cells, and their cellular processing and presentation in DNAJB1-PRKACA expressing tumor cells is demonstrated by mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidome analysis. Single-cell RNA sequencing further identifies multiple T cell receptors from DNAJB1-PRKACA-specific T cells. Vaccination of a fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma patient, suffering from recurrent short interval disease relapses, with DNAJB1-PRKACA-derived peptides under continued Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor therapy induces multifunctional CD4+ T cells, with an activated T-helper 1 phenotype and high T cell receptor clonality. Vaccine-induced DNAJB1-PRKACA-specific T cell responses persist over time and, in contrast to various previous treatments, are accompanied by durable relapse free survival of the patient for more than 21 months post vaccination. Our preclinical and clinical findings identify the DNAJB1-PRKACA protein as source for immunogenic neoepitopes and corresponding T cell receptors and provide efficacy in a single-patient study of T cell-based immunotherapy specifically targeting this oncogenic fusion.

### Sample Protocol
HLA ligandomics was performed by reversed phase liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry as previously described (Löffler et al. Genome Med 2019, Kowalewski and Stevanović Methods Mol Biol 2013, Nelde et al. Methods Mol Biol 2019). The monoclonal antibodies W6/32, Tü39 and L243 (in-house production at the Department of Immunology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany) were used for immunoaffinity purification of HLA class I and II-peptide complexes. Three technical replicate LC-MS runs were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer (v1.3, Thermo Fisher) was used to integrate the search results of the SequestHT search engine (University of Washington56) against the human proteome (Swiss-Prot database, 20 279 reviewed protein sequences, September 27th 2013) accompanied with the complete sequence of the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion protein. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Oxidized methionine was allowed as dynamic modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma, Fl-hcc, Hla ligands, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Bauer

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Sarah Walz
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


