### Accession
PXD019684

### Title
Aurora-A interactome in MV4-11 cells

### Description
To determine interactors of Aurora-A, HA tagged Aurora-A was immunoprecipitated from MV4-11 cells stably expressing HA tagged Aurora-A wild type and compared to MV4-11 cells expressing empty vector.

### Sample Protocol
MV4-11 cells stably expressing HA tagged Aurora-A or empty vector were seeded a day before harvest. Cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cells were lysed in 4 ml lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 180 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.2% NP-40) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors by homogenizing 15 times and sheared by sonicating four times 10 s with 45 s pausing (20% output) per 2 ml lysate. Proteins were solubilized from chromatin by incubating with Benzonase (100 units/ml; Novagen) for 40 min at 4°C with rotation. The soluble protein fraction was used for immunoprecipitation with 80 µl HA-coupled magnetic beads (Pierce Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 h at 4°C with rotation. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100, one more time with 5 min incubation with rotation, and then washed twice in lysis buffer without Triton X-100. Protein complexes were eluted in 100 μl 1x LDS Sample Buffer (NuPAGE Thermo Fisher Scientific) by incubating for 30 min at 37°C and 450 rpm. Then proteins were reduced by adding 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) to the eluate at a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min. Eluted proteins were alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes. Protein precipitation was performed overnight at -20°C with fourfold volume of acetone. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation, washed thrice with acetone and digested by LysC protease in 0.5% sodium deoxycholate for two hours at 30°C followed by the addition of trypsin at 37°C overnight (enzyme/protein 1/200). Sodium deoxycholate extraction was done with ethyl acetate and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were dried under vacuum to remove residual ethyl acetate, and desalted with three discs of C18 Empore SPE Disks (3M) in a 200 μl pipet tip. Elution was done twice with 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and the eluates were dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid before nanoLC-MS/MS. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 45-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nL/min. MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 5e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2. Database search was performed with Andromeda, within MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Human database. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). For protein quantitation, LFQ intensities were used. Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed. Missing LFQ intensities in control samples were imputed with values close to baseline if intensities in the corresponding IP samples were present. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. Missing logFC values for individual samples were imputed via MICE package in R, and the p values were recalculated using linear method in limma package in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aurora-a, Mv4-11

### Affiliations
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg

### Submitter
Bikash Adhikari

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wolf
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany


