### Accession
PXD040444

### Title
Genetically modified ID8 cells to study the role of GBP1 in ovarian cancer

### Description
Genetically modified ovarian cancer cells were used to study the role of GBP1.  Proteomics-based thermal stability assay (CETSA) was performed on GBP1 knockdown and overexpressing ID8 ovarian cancer cells.  Shotgun proteomics was also performed on these cells.

### Sample Protocol
For CETSA Analysis: ID8 engineered cell pellets were resuspended in PBS and 1x106 cells were transferred to a PCR tube. The CETSA method was applied to IGBP1-vehicle control, -overexpression, -scrambled control, and -knockdown ID8 cells. Samples underwent a temperature cycle of three minutes at different temperatures (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67 °C) followed by two minutes of room temperature incubation. Tubes were rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen, the cells were lysed with a freeze-thaw cycle, and the soluble and insoluble fractions were separated through centrifugation 30 minutes at 4 °C. An equal amount of soluble fraction from each temperature was then labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) using the manufacturer’s protocol (TMT10plex™). A 3 µL injection of each combined TMT-labeled peptide sample was injected using a Dionex Ultimate RSLC onto a PepMap C18 trap column with a flow rate set of 5 µL/min for 10 minutes. A 25 cm long C18 analytical (New Objective) packed in-house with BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 µm particle size (Waters) was used to separate TMT-labeled peptides by reversed-phase chromatography. A column heater (MSWIL) was used to heat to column to 60 °C. The gradient program consisted of holding mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 2% for the first 6.0 minutes to trap TMT-labeled peptides, slowly ramped up to 35% over the next 104 minutes followed by an increase to 85% over 5 minutes with a 5-minute hold. The analytical column was re-equilibrated with mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid in water) at 98% for 10 minutes prior to the next sample injection. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate at a constant flow rate throughout the gradient of 0.3 µL/min. Precursor ions were subject to collision-induced dissociation (CID) on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Top-speed for MS1 was set at 3 seconds with a mass scan range of 375-1600 m/z and a mass resolution of 120,000. The normalized AGC target was to 250 and the precursor fit filter at 50 percent threshold with a 0.7 m/z fit window. The fragmented ions were detected in the ion trap using Turbo scan rate with dynamic exclusion enabled for 60 seconds. The maximum injection time for MS2 was set to 35 ms with an AGC target value set to standard. TMT-labeled peptides were identified by enabling the Real-Time-Search algorithm with search time of 100 ms against the Swiss-Prot database reference to the human proteome (17,027 entries, 2019). Carbamidomethyl and TMT6plex on cysteine and lysine residues were added as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification for peptide identification. MS3 was performed on identified peptides by enabling synchronous precursor selection (SPS) algorithm with a scan mass range of 400-1600. The total number of SPS precursor ions allowed was set to 10 with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Selected precursor ions were subject to higher energy dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 65% in the Orbitrap detector. The mass resolution was set to 60,000 and a scan mass range at 100-500 m/z.   For shotgun proteomics analysis: A 10 µL injection of the combined TMT-labeled peptides (cells described above) were loaded on a PepMap 100 Å C 18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Dionex Ultimate Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a rate of 5 µl/min for 10 minutes with initial mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) at 98% and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 2%. A 25 cm long C18 analytical column (New Objective) packed in house with Magic C18 AQ resin (Michrom Bioresources) was used to separate TMT-labeled peptides by reversed-phase chromatography. A flow rate was set to 0.6 µL/min with gradient parameters as follows; mobile phase B was held at 2% B with a flow rate for the first 10 minutes, increased to 35% B over the next 100 minutes, and rapidly increased to 85% B over 2 minutes with a 7-minute hold time before bringing down mobile phase B to 2 % for column equilibration prior to next sample injection. Each TMT-labeled sample was analyzed in triplicate. A Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) hybrid mass spectrometer was used to ionized TMT-labeled peptides using 1.8 kV. The top 8 most abundant ions per MS1 scan were selected for higher energy dissociation (HCD) in a data-dependent fashion with a collisional energy set to 35 eV. A scan mass resolution of 30,000, FT AGC target of 1e6, and the scan mass range of 400-1800 m/z was set for MS1 precursor ions. For the MS2 scans, the mass range was set at 110-2000 m/z with a mass resolution of 30,000 and the AGC target set at 3e4 with dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw data analyzed using MaxQuant against the Swiss-Prot mouse reference proteome database, which contained 17,027 entries as of 2019. Proteins were identified and quantified based on matched peptides found in each individual MS2 spectrum, using the TMT6plex reporter ion intensities after correcting for isotope impurities. The database search included the digestion of proteins by trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and had a tolerance of 0.5 Da for precursor masses and 10 ppm for fragment masses. The analysis also considered the fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, lysine and N-terminal TMT6plex modification, as well as variable methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Guanylate-binding protein 1 (GBP1) is known as an interferon-&#x3b3;-induced GTPase. Here, we used genetically modified ovarian cancer (OC) cells to study the role of GBP1. The data generated show that GBP1 inhibition constrains the clonogenic potential of cancer cells. <i>In&#xa0;vivo</i> studies revealed that GBP1 overexpression in tumors promotes tumor progression and reduces median survival, whereas GBP1 inhibition delayed tumor progression with longer median survival. We employed proteomics-based thermal stability assay (CETSA) on GBP1 knockdown and overexpressed OC cells to study its molecular functions. CETSA results show that GBP1 interacts with many members of the proteasome. Furthermore, GBP1 inhibition sensitizes OC cells to paclitaxel treatment via accumulated ubiquitinylated proteins where GBP1 inhibition decreases the overall proteasomal activity. In contrast, GBP1-overexpressing cells acquired paclitaxel resistance via boosted cellular proteasomal activity. Overall, these studies expand the role of GBP1 in the activation of proteasomal machinery to acquire chemoresistance.

### Keywords
Knockdown, Overexpression, Gbp1, Ovarian cancer, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection School of Medicine Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection School of Medicine Stanford University


