### Accession
PXD017088

### Title
The integrin linked kinase is required for chemokine-triggered high affinity conformation of the leukocyte β2-integrin LFA-1The integrin linked kinase is required for chemokine-triggered high affinity conformation of the leukocyte β2-integrin LFA-1

### Description
Invasion of leukocytes, including neutrophils, in response to injury or infection relies on the orchestrated activation of integrins. The neutrophil integrin lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) has been implicated in the regulation of leukocyte adhesion by binding to ICAM-1 expressed on activated endothelial cells. The activation-dependent conformational change of LFA-1 to the high affinity conformation (H+) requires kindlin-3 binding to the tail of the β2-integrin. How the integrin linked kinase (ILK) affects activation of β2-integrins in leukocytes is currently unknown. Here, utilizing in vitro microfluidic adhesion chambers with conformation specific antibodies for neutrophil-like HL-60 cells,  we show that knockdown of ILK reduces the conformational change of β2-integrins to the H+ conformation. Consequently, ILK-deficient mice show defects of leukocyte adhesion and recruitment in a chemokine and integrin-dependent cremaster muscle model and in a clinically relevant model of renal-ischemia-reperfusion-injury. Absence of protein kinase C (PKC)-α, which is known to phosphorylate Kindlin-3, reproduces such phenotype in bone marrow chimeric mice. ILK is required for chemokine-induced upregulation of PKC-α activity. Mass spectrometry analysis and western blot analyses revealed a stimulation- and ILK-dependent phosphorylation of kindlin-3 upon activation. Our data thus show that ILK impacts kindlin-3-dependent conformational activation of LFA-1, thus contributing to an inflammatory response.

### Sample Protocol
HL60 cell expressing GFP-tagged kindlin-3 were lysed in 6M GdnHCl, 10mM TCEP, 10mM CAA, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8,5 and heated for 10 min to 95°C. Following centrifugation protein concetrations were determined from the supernatants by a Bradford Assay. 5mg of protein were digest with LysC (1:100)for 3 hrs and then with Trypsin(1:40)over night, followed by desalting with Sep-Pak Classic Cartridges. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using the High-select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Pierce). An aliquot of the obtained phosphopeptide preparation was directly analyzed by LC-MSMS using a 6 h gradient, the remains were subsequently subjected to basic reversed-phase fractionation using the high pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit(Pierce)and analyzed by LC-MSMS with shorter gradients. All samples were analysed on an Easy nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a nanolectrospray source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on a 25 cm column, in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Reprosil -Pur C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (spray voltage 2.1 kV; column temperature maintained at 45°C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany)). MS1 scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range to m/z 350–1650. AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Fragmentation of peptides was achieved by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a top15 method. Dynamic exclusion of previously identified peptides was allowed and set to 30 s, singly charged and peptides assigned with charge of 6 and more were excluded from the analysis. Data were recorded with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.6.5.0; Cox and Mann, 2008). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse human Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) including common lab contaminants. The allowed initial mass deviation was set to 7ppm and 20ppm in the search for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids was selected. The minimal score for a correctly identified modified peptide as set to 30. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the ‘match between runs’ option was turned on. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met), N - acetylation at the protein terminus and phosphorylation at Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunology, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Neutrophils, Mass spectrometry, Integrins

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


