### Accession
PXD025802

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei PH1-BioID proxisome

### Description
Kinesins are motor proteins found in all eukaryotic lineages that move along microtubule tracks to mediate several cellular processes such as mitosis and intracellular transport of cargo. In trypanosomatids, the kinesin protein superfamily has undergone a prominent expansion, giving these protists one of the most diverse kinesin repertoires in eukaryotes. This has led to the emergence of two trypanosomatid-restricted groups of kinesins. Here, we characterize in Trypanosoma brucei TbKifX2, a hitherto orphaned kinesin that belongs to one of these groups. TbKifX2 tightly interacts with TbPH1, a kinesin-like protein named after a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain present within its carboxy terminal tail. TbKifX2 recruits TbPH1 to the microtubule quartet (MtQ), a characteristic cytoskeletal structure that runs adjacent to the flagellar attachment zone filament from the basal body to the anterior of the cell. The proximal proteome of TbPH1 has revealed four proteins that localize to structures found adjacent to the length of the MtQ, further confirming that the likely TbKifX1/TbPH1 heterodimer binds the MtQ along its whole length. Simultaneous ablation of both TbKifX2 and TbPH1 leads to the formation of prominent extrusions from the cell posterior. Thus, we have attributed a morphogenesis role to these two trypanosomatid-restricted proteins, and the unique cytoskeletal structure represented by the MtQ. We hypothesize that the putative TbKiX2/TbPH1 heterodimer may transport a cytokinesis auxiliary factor(s) along the MtQ to or from the T. brucei posterior. The cohort of proteins found in proximity to TbPH1 may represent one of these factors directly or be involved in their trafficking during cell division in trypanosomatids.

### Sample Protocol
BioID For proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID), 109 PCF cells were extracted in PEME buffer (100 mM Pipes, pH 6.9, 1 mM MgSO4, 2 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM EDTA) containing 0.5% (v/v) NP-40 (Igepal) for 15 minutes at room temperature resulting in extract E1. Following centrifugation at 3,400 x g for 2 minutes, supernatant S1 was created and pellet P1 was further processed by extraction in lysis buffer (0.4% SDS, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4). Another centrifugation step at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes created supernatant S2. Both supernatants, S1 and S2, were then incubated with streptavidin-conjugated Dynabeads (company) for 4 hours at 4 °C. An aliquot of flow through samples F1 and F2 were retained for western blotting and the dynabeads were washed five times with PBS. A small sample of the beads was then resuspended in 2x SDS PAGE buffer and boiled, while the remainder of the beads was stored at -80 °C until further processing for mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spec Proteins immobilized on Dynabeads were digested with trypsin and nanoflow liquid chromatography was used for separation of the resulting peptides on Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B contained acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min with loading buffer composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After 4 minutes, the ventile was switched and Mobile phase B increased from 4% to 35% B at 60 min, 75% B at 61 min, hold for 8 minutes, and 4% B at 70 min, hold for 15 minutes until the end of the run. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1450 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30 and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 51, TriTrypDB, http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The experimental design included matching between runs for biological replicates. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. The obtained data was subsequently processed in Perseus version 1.6.14 as described in (Zoltner et al., 2020; doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_38).

### Publication Abstract
Kinesins are motor proteins found in all eukaryotic lineages that move along microtubules to mediate cellular processes such as mitosis and intracellular transport. In trypanosomatids, the kinesin superfamily has undergone a prominent expansion, resulting in one of the most diverse kinesin repertoires that includes the two kinetoplastid-restricted families X1 and X2. Here, we characterize in Trypanosoma brucei TbKifX2A, an orphaned X2 kinesin. TbKifX2A tightly interacts with TbPH1, a kinesin-like protein with a likely inactive motor domain, a rarely reported occurrence. Both TbKifX2A and TbPH1 localize to the microtubule quartet (MtQ), a characteristic but poorly understood cytoskeletal structure that wraps around the flagellar pocket as it extends to the cell body anterior. The proximal proteome of TbPH1 revealed two other interacting proteins, the flagellar pocket protein FP45 and intriguingly another X2 kinesin, TbKifX2C. Simultaneous ablation of TbKifX2A/TbPH1 results in the depletion of FP45 and TbKifX2C and also an expansion of the flagellar pocket, among other morphological defects. TbKifX2A is the first motor protein to be localized to the MtQ. The observation that TbKifX2C also associates with the MtQ suggests that the X2 kinesin family may have co-evolved with the MtQ, both kinetoplastid-specific traits.

### Keywords
Bioid, Kinesin-like protein, Trypanosoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice CZECH REPUBLIC
Institute of Parasitology
Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences
Branišovská 31
370 05 České Budějovice



### Submitter
Corinna Benz

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Lukes
Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice CZECH REPUBLIC


