### Accession
PXD039880

### Title
Discovery and characterization of a chemical probe targeting the zinc-finger ubiquitin-binding domain of HDAC6

### Description
Cellular selectivity of a chemical probe for the UBD of HDAC6. A biotinylated analog of HDAC6 chemical probe SGC-UBD253 bound to streptavidin beads was used to enrich HDAC6 from cytoplasmic fraction of HEK293 lysate. A triplicate of each condition - competition with probe, control, DMSO - was done.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate the cytoplasmic fraction, cell pellets were collected as above and resuspended in 3 mL hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.005% (v/v) Tween-20, 1X protease inhibitors), and kept on ice for 20 minutes, with vigorous vortexing for 5 seconds every 5 minutes. Cells were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 380 g and 4 oC, supernatant was collected and transferred to 2 mL tubes before being centrifuged again for 1 minute at 18,500 g and 4 oC. Cleared supernatant was collected and transferred to 2 mL tubes. NaCl was added to adjust the final concentration to 150 mM. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay and lysates were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ⁰C.  Twenty-five nanomoles of 33 was bound to 20 µL of Streptavidin Sepharose® High Performance (MilliporeSigma, GE17-5113-01)beads for 1 h at 4 ⁰C in PBS. The beads were washed 3x with hypotonic lysis buffer (above). Meanwhile, to each 1.5 mg of cytoplasmic fraction, a final compound concentration of 10 µM compound 25, 32 or DMSO (same volume of DMSO) was added and samples incubated for 1 h at 4 ⁰C. Protein and beads were then mixed and rocked for a further 1h at 4 ⁰C. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed 1 time with hypotonic lysis buffer (above) and transferred to a new tube wherethe beads were washed 3x with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. One  µg chymotrypsin was added for 15 min at RT before adding 1 µg trypsin . This solution was left for 2.25 h at 37 ⁰C. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM. After incubating for 30 minutes at 56 ⁰C, the reduced cysteines were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 min. An additional 1 µg trypsin was added and the solution was left overnight at 37 ⁰C. The digested peptides were analyzed using reversed-phase (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm), nano-HPLC (Vanquish Neo UHPLC) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™. Peptides were eluted from the column with an acetonitrile gradient starting from 3.2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid to 35.2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid using a linear gradient of 90 minutes. The MS1 scan had an accumulation time of 50 ms within a mass range of 400–1500Da, using orbitrap resolution of 120000, 60% RF lens, AGC target of 125% and 2400 volts. This was followed by MS/MS scans with a total cycle time of 3 seconds. Accumulation time of 50 ms and 33% HCD collision energy was used for each MS/MS scan. Each candidate ion was required to have a charge state from 2-7 and an AGC target of 400%, isolated using orbitrap resolution of 15,000. Previously analyzed candidate ions were dynamically excluded for 9 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were searched with FragPipe v18.0, using MSFragger v3.5 and Philosopher v4.4.0 [PMID: 28394336, PMID: 32669682]. Utilized the LFQ-MBR workflow using chymotrypsin/trypsin enzymatic digestion with human Uniprot ID UP000005640 (with decoys and contaminants appended). Differential protein expression was determined  using R Package DEP [https://doi.org/doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.DEP), and independently validated with ProDA [https://github.com/const-ae/proDA].

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibition is an attractive strategy for treating numerous cancers, and HDAC6 catalytic inhibitors are currently in clinical trials. The HDAC6 zinc-finger ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD) binds free C-terminal diglycine motifs of unanchored ubiquitin polymer chains and protein aggregates, playing an important role in autophagy and aggresome assembly. However, targeting this domain with small molecule antagonists remains an underdeveloped avenue of HDAC6-focused drug discovery. We report <b>SGC-UBD253</b> (<b>25</b>), a chemical probe potently targeting HDAC6-UBD in vitro with selectivity over nine other UBDs, except for weak USP16 binding. In cells, <b>25</b> is an effective antagonist of HDAC6-UBD at 1 &#x3bc;M, with marked proteome-wide selectivity. We identified <b>SGC-UBD253N</b> (<b>32</b>), a methylated derivative of <b>25</b> that is 300-fold less active, serving as a negative control. Together, <b>25</b> and <b>32</b> could enable further exploration of the biological function of the HDAC6-UBD and investigation of the therapeutic potential of targeting this domain.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Chemical probe, Ubd, Ubiquitin binding domain, Hdac6

### Affiliations
CSO, Structural Genomics Consortium Professor, Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto Sr. Scientist, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Suzanne Ackloo

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl H Arrowsmith
CSO, Structural Genomics Consortium Professor, Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto Sr. Scientist, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre


