### Accession
PXD007081

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cultured primary urinary cells from M. Fabry Patients

### Description
We analyzed the proteome of primary urinary cells from patients with M. Fabry as compared to primary urinary cells from healthy control samples

### Sample Protocol
We lysed the cells in urea, performed reduction and alkylation of the proteins, and performed tryptic digestion followed by STAGE-tip clean-up.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant for analysis. as indicated in the methods section of the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Fabry disease is a lysosomal storage disorder resulting from impaired alpha-galactosidase A (&#x3b1;-Gal A) enzyme activity due to mutations in the GLA gene. Currently, powerful diagnostic tools and in vivo research models to study Fabry disease are missing, which is a major obstacle for further improvements in diagnosis and therapy. Here, we explore the utility of urine-derived primary cells of Fabry disease patients. Viable cells were isolated and cultured from fresh urine void. The obtained cell culture, modeling the renal epithelium, is characterized by patient-specific information. We demonstrate that this non-invasive source of patient cells provides an adequate cellular in vivo model as cells exhibit decreased &#x3b1;-Gal A enzyme activity and concomitant globotriaosylceramide accumulation. Subsequent quantitative proteomic analyses revealed dysregulation of endosomal and lysosomal proteins indicating an involvement of the Coordinated Lysosomal Expression and Regulation (CLEAR) network in the disease pathology. This proteomic pattern resembled data from our previously described human podocyte model of Fabry disease. Taken together, the employment of urine-derived primary cells of Fabry disease patients might have diagnostic and prognostic implications in the future. Our findings pave the way towards a more detailed understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms and may allow the development of future tailored therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Human, Fabry's diseaes, Puc

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


