### Accession
PXD017105

### Title
identify H2AK119ub1 specific interactors using SILAC-MS methods

### Description
in this study, we performed the SILAC-MS to identify H2AK119ub1 specific binding proteins.Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive equipped with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific)

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were cultured in light (R0K0) or heavy (R10K8) SILAC medium, respectively. 10x15cm plates of 293T cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS. The volume of cells was measured, then re-suspended in 5 volume of buffer A (10mM Tris-HCl PH=7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl, 0.5mM DTT and 0.2mM PMSF) and centrifuged 4,000rpm at 4°C 10min. Cell pellets were homogenized with B pestle in 2 volume of buffer A (10x) and centrifuged 12,000rpm at 4°C 10min. nuclear pellets were re-suspended in 2ml buffer C (20mM Tris-HCl PH=7.9, 20% glycerol, 1.5mM MgCl2, 420mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.2mM EDTA, 0.5mM DTT and 0.5mM PMSF) and homogenized with B pestle 10 times on ice. Finally, nuclear extract was dialyzed into buffer C with 150 mM NaCl. For the SILAC pull-down assays, biotin-labeled-mononucleosomes were immobilized on dynabeads Myone C1. Immobilized H2A mononucleosomes were incubated with light nuclear extract and immobilized H2AK119ub1 mononucleosomes were incubated with heavy nuclear extract in binding buffer, respectively (forward experiment). After 2hrs incubation, pull-down materials were washed with binding buffer 5 times, and then eluted with 1xSDS sample buffer. Equal amount of H2A (light) and H2AK119ub1 (heavy) pull-down samples were combined and subjected to in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. In the reverse experiment, immobilized H2AK119ub1 mononucleosomes were incubated with light nuclear extract and immobilized H2A mononucleosomes were incubated with heavy nuclear extract.  Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive equipped with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 2.2.0.388 using Sequest HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for FDR (false discovery rate) analysis. The Uniprot human protein database (updated on 10-2017) was used for searching the data

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Prorein interaction, Silac-ms, H2a ubiqutination

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics， Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Zhao Jicheng

### Lab Head
Dr Li Guo Hong
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


