### Accession
PXD002425

### Title
An impaired respiratory electron chain triggers down-regulation of the energy metabolism and de-ubiquitination of solute carrier amino acid transporters

### Description
We integrated metabolome and proteome profiles of the parental cell line 143B.TK- versus ρ0, including PTM analyses such as phosphorylation and ubiquitination to characterize the impact of the absence of mtDNA for the entire cell. For quantitative proteome profiling, we used a shotgun LC-MS/MS approach including the classical SILAC labeling. For comprehensive metabolome profiling, we applied a targeted LC-MS approach, based on multiple reaction monitoring (MRM).</br></br>Our study revealed that mtDNA depletion leads to a non-uniform down-regulation of the mitochondrial energy metabolism in ρ0 cells on the proteome level. Metabolites of the TCA cycle were highly dysregulated which in turn had an impact on the amino acid levels, which were up regulated. Perturbation of the mitochondrial energy metabolism could lead to an activation of the retrograde response, indicated by sets of up-regulated signaling pathways in ρ0 cells, further supported by altered phosphorylation in signaling pathways and the cytoskeleton as well as de-ubiquitination of SLC transporters.

### Sample Protocol
The osteosarcoma cell line 143B.TK- (ATCC-CRL-8303) was obtained from LGC Standards and was the parental line of recently generated ρ0 cells. The wild-type cell line 143B.TK- and the according ρ0 cells were cultivated in SILAC DMEM (Silantes, Munich, Germany, without L-lysine and L-arginine) containing 4.5 g/L glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, supplemented with 5% dialyzed FBS (Silantes, Munich, Germany), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin-Neomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA), 100 µg/mL bromodeoxyuridine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 50 µg/mL uridine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells were labeled with light (L) or heavy (H) isotopes of arginine (12C614N4, 13C615N4; 30 mg/L) and lysine (12C614N2, 13C615N2; 80 mg/L; both: Silantes, Munich, Germany) and grown to confluency in one 300 cm2 polystyrene flask per replicate. Proteomic experiments were done in biological quadruplicates, including a label-switch. For metabolome profiling and enzymatic measurements, light SILAC labeled cultures were grown in biological triplicates.<br><br>Sample processing details for metabolite and protein profiling are available at PMID: (upon publication)

### Data Protocol
The proteomics data were analyzed with the MaxQuant data analysis workflow version 1.5.0.0 with the Andromeda search engine. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% for protein, peptide spectrum match and site decoy fraction level. Tryptic peptides were required to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm after time dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were searched by Andromeda in the human proteome database UniProtKB with 88.717 entries, released in 11/2014, combined with common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein Acetylation and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications for the total cell lysates; additionally Phospho (STY) and GlyGly (K) were set as variable modification for the according enriched samples. Further downstream analysis of the results was performed with String, GSEA, Enrichr, Perseus and Prism, according to our publication.<br><br>Relative quantification of the metabolomics data was performed using MultiQuantTM software v.2.1.1. Integration settings were a Gaussian smooth width of 2 points and a peak splitting factor of 2. Peak integrations were reviewed manually and normalized according to the protein content and subsequently by internal standards. The average of all MRM ion ratios per metabolite was used for relative quantification between sample cohorts.

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of genes have been associated with respiratory chain disease (RCD), the most common inborn error of metabolism so far. Elimination of the respiratory electron chain by depleting the entire mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA, &#x3c1;(0) cells) has therefore one of the most severe impacts on the energy metabolism in eukaryotic cells. In this study, proteomic data sets including the post-translational modifications (PTMs) phosphorylation and ubiquitination were integrated with metabolomic data sets and selected enzyme activities in the osteosarcoma cell line 143B.TK(-) A shotgun based SILAC LC-MS proteomics and a targeted metabolomics approach was applied to elucidate the consequences of the &#x3c1;(0) state. Pathway and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses revealed a nonuniform down-regulation of the respiratory electron chain, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and the pyruvate metabolism in &#x3c1;(0) cells. Metabolites of the TCA cycle were dysregulated, such as a reduction of citric acid and cis-aconitic acid (six and 2.5-fold), and an increase of lactic acid, oxalacetic acid (both twofold), and succinic acid (fivefold) in &#x3c1;(0) cells. Signaling pathways such as GPCR, EGFR, G12/13 alpha, and Rho GTPases were up-regulated in &#x3c1;(0) cells, which could be indicative for the mitochondrial retrograde response, a pathway of communication from mitochondria to the nucleus. This was supported by our phosphoproteome data, which revealed two main processes, GTPase-related signal transduction and cytoskeleton organization. Furthermore, a general de-ubiquitination in &#x3c1;(0) cells was observed, for example, 80S ribosomal proteins were in average threefold and SLC amino acid transporters fivefold de-ubiquitinated. The latter might cause the observed significant increase of amino acid levels in &#x3c1;(0) cells. We conclude that an elimination of the respiratory electron chain, e.g. mtDNA depletion, not only leads to an uneven down-regulation of mitochondrial energy pathways, but also triggers the retrograde response.

### Keywords
Oxphos deficiency, Ubiquitination, Retrograde response, Metabolome profiling, Proteome profiling, Ρ0 cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-72, 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Ina Gielisch

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-72, 14195 Berlin, Germany


