### Accession
PXD031252

### Title
GRK2/3-regulated, but not constitutive, phosphorylation of the G protein-coupled receptor GPR84 controls arrestin interactions and subsequent function

### Description
Although the GPR84 activators 2-HTP and 6-OAU promoted phosphorylation of human GPR84 and its interactions with arrestin-3, PSB-16671 and DL-175 did not. Replacement of all 21 serine and threonine residues within the third intracellular loop, but not the 2 serines in the C-terminal tail, eliminated incorporation of [32P] promoted by 2-HTP and greatly reduced receptor-arrestin-3 interactions. Mass spectrometry indicated that GPR84 was phosphorylated constitutively on residues Ser221 and Ser224 whilst a range of sites became phosphorylated in response to 2-HTP. An antiserum able to identify pSer221/pSer224 recognised GPR84 from cells treated both with and without 2-THP, whilst an antiserum able to identify pThr263/pThr264 recognised GPR84 only after exposure to 2-HTP. Treatment with neither PSB-16671 nor DL-175 was able to promote receptor recognition by this antiserum. 2-HTP-mediated phosphorylation of Thr263/Thr264 was prevented by two chemically distinct GPR84 antagonists but neither affected constitutive phosphorylation of Ser221/Ser224.  2-HTP-mediated phosphorylation of Thr263/Thr264 but not constitutive phosphorylation of Ser221/Ser224 was prevented by GRK2/3 inhibition. Mutation of residues Thr263 and Thr264 to alanine generated a variant of GPR84 as limited in 2-HTP-induced interactions with arrestin-3 as when all 21 serine and threonine were eliminated from the third intracellular loop. By contrast this mutant was unaffected in capacity to reduce cAMP levels in response to 2-HTP. Homology modelling and mutagenesis provided molecular insight into differences in agonist function.  These studies define key residues, regulated by GRK2/3, that define effective interactions with arrestins and provide novel tools to monitor the phosphorylation and functional status of GPR84.

### Sample Protocol
GPR84 modified to containan an YFP tag at it's C-terminus was overexpressed in HEK293.  Cells were treated with agonist and GPR84 was isolated by immunoaffinity chromatography using GFP-TRAP resin.  Samples were separated by SDS PAGE, bands representing GRP84 were extracted, digested with trypsin and resulting peptides analysed by LC/ms-ms using an LTQ Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.04) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1 Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. The UniprotHuman_2013_08 database (88378 entries) and a custom database containing the sequence of GPR84YFP was searched.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
GPR84 is an immune cell-expressed, proinflammatory receptor currently being assessed as a therapeutic target in conditions including fibrosis and inflammatory bowel disease. Although it was previously shown that the orthosteric GPR84 activators 2-HTP and 6-OAU promoted its interactions with arrestin-3, a G protein-biased agonist DL-175 did not. Here, we show that replacement of all 21 serine and threonine residues within i-loop 3 of GPR84, but not the two serines in the C-terminal tail, eliminated the incorporation of [<sup>32</sup>P] and greatly reduced receptor-arrestin-3 interactions promoted by 2-HTP. GPR84 was phosphorylated constitutively on residues Ser<sup>221</sup> and Ser<sup>224</sup>, while various other amino acids are phosphorylated in response to 2-HTP. Consistent with this, an antiserum able to identify pSer<sup>221</sup>/pSer<sup>224</sup> recognized GPR84 from cells treated with and without activators, whereas an antiserum able to identify pThr<sup>263</sup>/pThr<sup>264</sup> only recognized GPR84 after exposure to 2-HTP and not DL-175. Two distinct GPR84 antagonists as well as inhibition of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2/3 prevented phosphorylation of pThr<sup>263</sup>/pThr<sup>264</sup>, but neither strategy affected constitutive phosphorylation of Ser<sup>221</sup>/Ser<sup>224</sup>. Furthermore, mutation of residues Thr<sup>263</sup> and Thr<sup>264</sup> to alanine generated a variant of GPR84 also limited in 2-HTP-induced interactions with arrestin-2 and -3. By contrast, this mutant was unaffected in its capacity to reduce cAMP levels. Taken together, these results define a key pair of threonine residues, regulated only by subsets of GPR84 small molecule activators and by GRK2/3 that define effective interactions with arrestins and provide novel tools to monitor the phosphorylation and functional status of GPR84.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Gpcr

### Affiliations
The Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cellular and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Adrian Butcher

### Lab Head
Dr Graeme Milligan
The Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cellular and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom


