### Accession
PXD007051

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals network rewiring to a pro-adhesion state in Annexin-1-deficient mammary epithelial cells

### Description
Background Annexin-1 (ANXA1) plays pivotal roles in regulating various physiological processes including inflammation, proliferation and apoptosis, and deregulations of ANXA1 functions have been associated with tumorigenesis and metastasis events in several cancers. Though ANXA1 levels correlate with breast cancer disease status and outcome, its distinct functional involvement in breast cancer initiation and progression remains unclear. We hypothesized ANXA1-responsive kinase signaling alteration and associated phosphorylation signaling underlie early events in breast cancer initiation events and hence profiled ANXA1-dependent phosphorylation changes in mammary gland epithelial cells.  Methods Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of mammary gland epithelial cells derived from ANXA1-heterozygous and ANXA1-deficient mice was carried out using SILAC-based mass spectrometry. Kinase and signaling changes underlying ANXA1 perturbations were derived by upstream kinase prediction and integrated network analysis of altered proteins and phosphoproteins.   Results We identified a total of 8,110 unique phosphorylation sites, of which 582 phosphorylation sites on 372 proteins showed ANXA1-responsive changes. A majority of these phosphorylation changes occurred on proteins associated with cytoskeletal reorganization spanning the focal adhesion, stress fibers, and also the microtubule network pressing on new roles for ANXA1 in regulating microtubule dynamics. Comparative analysis of regulated global proteome and phosphoproteome highlighted key differences in translational and post-translational effects of ANXA1, and stressed on a close-coordinated rewiring of the cell adhesion network. Kinase prediction analysis suggested activity modulation of CAMK2, PAK, ERK, and IKK kinases upon loss of ANXA1. Integrative analysis revealed regulation of WNT and also Hippo signaling pathways in ANXA1-deficient mammary epithelial cells, wherein there is a downregulation of transcriptional effects of TEAD suggestive of ANXA1-responsive transcriptional rewiring.  Conclusions The phosphoproteome landscape uncovered several novel perspectives for ANXA1 in mammary gland biology and stressed on its involvement in key signaling pathways modulating cell adhesion and migration that could contribute to breast cancer initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates preparation  SILAC-adapted cell lines previously established from mammary gland epithelial cells of ANXA1-heterozygous and ANXA1-deficient mice were used in this study [21]. The SILAC-adapted ‘heavy’- and ‘light’-labeled cells were lysed with 4% SDS (w/v), 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 and 100mM DTT at room temperature. Protein was quantified using the RCDC assay kit (Bio-Rad) prior to equal mixing of identically concentrated 'light' and 'heavy' SILAC labeled ANXA1+/- and ANXA1-/- lysates.  Reduction, Alkylation and Digestion  Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed as described with slight modifications [23]. In short, the sample was mixed with 5 mL UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and PEG (with a final PEG concentration of 0.5%)  in a 15 mL 30 kDa Amicon filter (Millipore) followed by centrifugation at 3,850 x g for 45 minutes at room temperature. The retentate was rinsed with 4 mL of UA and followed by 2 mL of UA. 2 mL of 50 mM iodacetamide in UA was then added and incubated for 20 minutes in the dark followed by centrifugation to remove the iodoacetamide. Samples were washed one more time with 2 mL of UA, followed  by three washes of 2 mL 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. The trypsin to protein ratio is 1:100 (w/w). After overnight digestion at 37°C the peptide solution was collected by centrifugation. The amount of peptide obtained was measured using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific).  Phosphopeptide Enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched from the tryptic peptides as described with slight modifications [23]. Briefly, around 6 mg of FASP digested tryptic peptides were diluted 4 times with 1M Glycolic Acid / 80% Acetonitrile (v/v)/ 2 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) and added to 13 mgs of ‘Titansphere TiO2 10 μm’ (GL Sciences, Inc.,Japan). After incubating the mixture for 10 minutes at room temperature, the sample was centrifuged at 4000g for 3 seconds.  The supernatant was collected and the above process was repeated with another portion of the beads. The beads were washed 4 times with 1M Glycolic Acid / 80% Acetonitrile (v/v)/ 2 % TFA (v/v) solution and 4 times with 80% Acetonitrile (v/v)/ 0.1 % TFA (v/v) solution after transferring to a 200 μL pipet tip plugged with two layers of C8 empore disks (3 M Empore). Finally, elution of the phosphopeptides was carried out using 500 uL 40% Acetonitrile (v/v) containing 15% NH4OH (m/v) followed by vacuum-concentration to ∼40 μL.  Anion Exchange Fractionation of Phosphopeptides Fractionation of phosphopeptides were carried out as described with slight modifications [24]. Briefly, phosphopeptides were diluted 5 times in Britton & Robinson buffer composed of 20 mM CH3COOH, 20 mM H3PO4, 20 mM H3BO3 and NaOH, pH 11. The sample was then fractionated on a micropipette tip with 6 layers of 3 M Empore Anion Exchange disk (Varian, 1214-5012) stacked into it. Loading of peptides were carried out at pH 11 and fractions were subsequently eluted with buffer solutions of pH 8, 6, 5, 4, and 3, respectively into their respective C18 stage tips.  Mass Spectrometry Full scan MS spectra corresponding to m/z 300-1400 were acquired using  Orbitrap or Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher) for all samples with a resolution of  r = 60,000 at m/z 400, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 500 ms.  For each scan, the top ten most intense peptide ions with intensity threshold >2000 and charge state ≥2 were isolated sequentially to a target value of 1e4., and  the  precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation in a linear ion trap using normalized collision energy of 35%. A dynamic exclusion with duration of 30 s was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) [25, 26] against uniprot 2013-01 mouse database containing 262 commonly observed contaminants. Raw mass spectrometry data corresponding to our previously published proteome profiling carried out under similar experimental set up was also included for analysis. Database searches were performed allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages upon trypsin digestion, two labelled amino acids, and an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine/threonine/tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Peptide and protein quantification of SILAC pairs were performed using default settings at a maximum false discovery rate of 0.01. Only those proteins supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of six amino acids were considered identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mammary epithelial cells, Phosphoproteomics, Network analysis, Proteomics, Annexin-1, Breast cancer, Adhesion

### Affiliations
IMCB
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673

### Submitter
Sheena Wee

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673


