### Accession
PXD002623

### Title
Comparative shotgun proteomics of aqueous humor for cataract, glaucoma and pseudoexfoliation eye disorders.

### Description
The aim of this work was to characterize proteome of aqueous humor from subjects with various eye conditions such as cataract, glaucoma and pseudoexfoliation syndrome by high-resolution chromate-mass-spectrometry. Twenty nine human aqueous humor samples were processed by shotgun proteomics. Data was searched using MaxQuant package. Totally, 263 protein groups were identified. Label-free quantitation reported some differentially expressed proteins in aqueous humor proteome for the aforementioned eye diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation method (Wiśniewski et al., Nat Methods. 2009. 6(5):359-62). Briefly, samples were loaded on Microcon filters YM-30 (Millipore) and washed with 8 M urea, followed by protein alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea in the darkness for 20 min. After alkylation, filters were washed twice with 8 M urea and twice with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to the samples at a protein to enzyme ratio 100:1 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were collected from the filters by centrifugation.  LC-MS/MS and MS Data Analysis. Using an Agilent HPLC system 1100 Series (Agilent Technologies, USA) 4 µg of peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid were loaded onto a trap column Zorbax 300SB–C18, 5x 0.3mm (Agilent Technologies, USA). After washing with 5% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were separated on a 150 mm x 75 µm Zorbax 300SB-C18 reverse phase analytical column (Agilent Technologies, USA) over a 30 min gradient of 5-60% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a fused silica emitter with an internal diameter of 8 µm (New Objective, USA). Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode. The data was acquired with a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 400) for MS and 15,000 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans. Survey MS scan was followed by MS/MS spectra of the five most abundant precursors. For peptide fragmentation higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was set to 35 eV, the signal threshold was set to 5000 for an isolation window of 2 m/z and the first mass of HCD spectra was set to 100 m/z. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from targeting for 90 seconds. Singly charged ions and ion with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering MS/MS scans. The automatic gain control target value was regulated at 1 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and at 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. All samples were analyzed in two or more technical replications using this method.

### Data Protocol
Samples annotation. The total number of ‘raw’ files is 86 of 29 human aqueous humor samples which were taken from four diseases groups. In the file names: ‘k’ stands for cataract (n = 11); kp – pseudoexfoliative cataract (n = 5); g – open-angle glaucoma (n = 7); gp – pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (n = 6).  MaxQuant processing. All raw files were processed using MaxQuant package, version 1.5.2.8 [Neuhauser et al, 2013], which has Andromeda as a database search engine. The MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search, precursor and the fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications, such as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, as well as carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Twenty-nine human aqueous humor samples from patients with eye diseases such as cataract and glaucoma with and without pseudoexfoliation syndrome were characterized by LC-high resolution MS analysis. In total, 269 protein groups were identified with 1% false discovery rate including 32 groups that were not reported previously for this biological fluid. Since the samples were analyzed individually, but not pooled, 36 proteins were identified in all samples, comprising the constitutive proteome of the fluid. The most dominant molecular function of aqueous humor proteins as determined by GO analysis is endopeptidase inhibitor activity. Label-free protein quantification showed no significant difference between glaucoma and cataract aqueous humor proteomes. At the same time, we found decrease in the level of apolipoprotein D as a marker of the pseudoexfoliation syndrome. The data are available from ProteomeXchange repository (PXD002623).

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Eye disease, Cataract, Proteomics, Pseudoexfoliation syndrome, Aqueous humor, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics Department of Personalized Medicine Institute of Biomedical Chemistry Moscow
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Russia

### Submitter
Irina Ilina

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Moshkovskii
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics Department of Personalized Medicine Institute of Biomedical Chemistry Moscow


