### Accession
PXD022146

### Title
MigExpress discovers essential cell migration control genes in non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
Cell migration is an essential process in health and disease - especially in cancer metastasis. The difficulty to assess migration in high throughput presents a methodological hurdle - hence, only very few screens revealed factors controlling this important process.  Here, we introduce MigExpress as a platform for the "identification of Migration control genes by differential Expression". MigExpress exploits the combination of in-depth molecular profiling and the robust quantitative analysis of migration capacity in a broad panel of samples and identifies migration-associated genes by their differential expression in slowly versus fast migrating cells.  We applied MigExpress to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most frequent cause of cancer mortality mainly due to metastasis. In 54 NSCLC cell lines, we comprehensively determined mRNA and protein expression. Correlating the transcriptome and proteome profiles with the quantified migration properties led to the discovery and validation of FLNC, DSE, CPA4, TUBB6 and BICC1 as migration control factors in NSCLC cells, which also negatively correlated with patient survival. Notably, FLNC was the least expressed filamin in NSCLC, but the only one controlling cell migration and correlating with patient survival and metastatic disease stage.

### Sample Protocol
Cells at 80% confluency were scraped and lysed on ice in lysis buffer (40 mM Tris pH 7.6, 8 M Urea) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The concentration of protein was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. The sample preparation for mass spectrometry included in-solution tryptic digestion followed by solid phase extraction (SPE) peptide purification (SepPAK). Samples were tagged with TMT10plex™ reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific™, Zecha, J., et al. (2019) Mol. Cell. Proteomics) fractionated into 32 fractions using trimodal mixed mode chromatography (Yu, P., et al. (2017) Analytical Chemistry) and subjected to mass spectrometric measurements using data depended acquisition (DDA) and multi-notch MS3 mode (McAlister, G. C., et al. (2014) Analytical Chemistry) on a Thermo Scientific™ Fusion™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer (gradient length per fraction 1 hour).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1, Tyanova, S., et al. (2016), Nature Protocols). To normalize protein intensity distributions between all cell lines, 11 quantiles from 25% to 75% (by a step of 5%) were calculated for each cell line respectively. These quantiles were aligned to the first sample based on a linear model, i.e. intercept and slope were used to transform all protein intensities of the corresponding cell line. Next, we normalized the quantitative proteomic data across all TMT10-plex experiments using a common reference sample (pooled sample of three lung cancer cell lines: A549, NCI-H460 and PC9) that was entailed in two out of 10 TMT channels in each TMT experiment. Based on the channel means of this reference sample protein-specific correction factors were computed for each TMT10plex experiment respectively (Schott, A. S., et al. (2017) J. Proteome Res.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc), Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Tandem mass tags (tmt), Isobaric labeling, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Chen Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


