### Accession
PXD016437

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of urine liquid biopsy samples in muscle invasive bladder urothelial carcinoma

### Description
We performed mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of urine samples of patients with BLCA with stroma invasion or muscle invasion to identify prognosis markers for use in liquid-based cytology (LBC).

### Sample Protocol
Individual liquid-based cytology and FFPE tissue sections of 13 mm diameter and 10 μm thickness were scraped for each case to collect well-preserved populations of stained or unstained cells in individual Eppendorf tubes. Cell pellets were lysed with 100 μl of SDS extraction buffer (4% SDS; 100 mm Tris, pH 7.4; and 1 mm TCEP). Samples were lysed by sonication and boiling at 95 °C for 30 min. Proteins were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation procedure. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 Stage Tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) via a nano electrospray source. Peptide samples were separated on a two-column system, consisting of a trap column and an analytic column (75 μm × 50 cm) with a 120 min gradient from 7% to 32% acetonitrile at 300 nl/min and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Column temperature was maintained at 60 °C using a column heater. Survey scans (350 to 1650 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. A top-20 method was used to select precursor ions with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired at an HCD-normalized collision energy of 30, with a resolution of 17,500, at m/z 200. The maximum ion injection times for the full scan and MS/MS scan were 20 and 100 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. Primary searches were performed using a 6-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion. Peptides with a minimum length of six amino-acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification level. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the 'Match between Runs' option on the MaxQuant platform.

### Publication Abstract
Bladder urothelial carcinoma (BUC) is the most lethal malignancy of the urinary tract. Treatment for the disease highly depends on the invasiveness of cancer cells. Therefore, a predictive biomarker needs to be identified for invasive BUC. In this study, we employed proteomics methods on urine liquid-based cytology (LBC) samples and a BUC cell line library to determine a novel predictive biomarker for invasive BUC. Furthermore, an in vitro three-dimensional (3D) invasion study for biological significance and diagnostic validation through immunocytochemistry (ICC) were also performed. The proteomic analysis suggested moesin (<i>MSN</i>) as a potential biomarker to predict the invasiveness of BUC. The in vitro 3D invasion study showed that inhibition of <i>MSN</i> significantly decreased invasiveness in BUC cell lines. Further validation using ICC ultimately confirmed moesin (<i>MSN</i>) as a potential biomarker to predict the invasiveness of BUC (<i>p</i> = 0.023). In conclusion, we suggest moesin as a potential diagnostic marker for early detection of BUC with invasion in LBC and as a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Cytology, Lable free quantification, Urothelial carcinoma

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


