### Accession
PXD040818

### Title
Proteomic mapping reveals dysregulated angiogenesis in the cerebral arteries of rats with early-onset hypertension

### Description
Using data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry analysis, we determined the protein changes in cerebral arteries in pre- and early-onset hypertension from the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), a model that resembles essential hypertension. Our analysis identified 125 proteins with expression levels that were significantly up- or downregulated in 12-week old SHRs compared to normotensive Wistar Kyoto rats. Using an angiogenesis enrichment analysis, we identified a critical imbalance in angiogenic proteins, promoting an anti-angiogenic profile in cerebral arteries at the early-onset of hypertension. In a comparison to previously published data, we demonstrate that this angiogenic imbalance is not present in mesenteric and renal arteries from age-matched SHRs. Finally, we identified two proteins (Fbln5 and Cdh13), whose expression levels were critically altered in cerebral arteries compared to the other arterial beds. The observation of an angiogenic imbalance in cerebral arteries from the SHR reveals critical protein changes in the cerebrovasculature at the early-onset of hypertension and provides novel insight into the early pathology of cerebrovascular disease.

### Sample Protocol
Following cervical dislocation, the brain was excised delicately and placed in cold physiological salt solution saturated with carbogen (O2 95%; CO2 5%) at pH 7.4. The circle of Willis with primary cerebral arteries (posterior, anterior and middle cerebral arteries) were collected in 1.5 ml Lobind centrifugation tubes (Eppendorf), snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. The cerebral arteries were homogenized in 100 μl of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 1% NP-40 and 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) by three rounds of chopping the tissue using dissection scissors and a handheld homogenizer. Medial prefrontal cortex regions (3 mm x 3 mm x 3 mm) were homogenized in 150 μl lysis buffer. Homogenates were centrifuged at 11,000g for 10 min at 4C to obtain the supernatant.Digestion buffer containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to the homogenized tissue extracts followed by heat-treatment for 5 min at 95C. Samples were cooled on ice and prepared by filter-aided sample preparation15 using flat spin filters (Microcon-10kDa). Samples were reduced and alkylated in digestion buffer containing 1:50 (v:v) tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (0.5 M, Sigma) and 1:10 (v:v) 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at 37C. Samples were digested overnight at 37C with 1 μg Typsin/LysC mix (Promega) and 0.01% ProteaseMAX (Promega). Centrifugation at 14,000g for 15 min was used in between the different steps. Peptides were desalted using stage-tips containing a Poly-styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer modified with sulfonic acid groups (SDB-RPS; 3M) material.   Samples were analysed on a Bruker timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) in the positive ion mode with a Captivespray ion source on-line connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSnano chromatography systems (Thermo Fisher). Peptides from rat tissue were separated on an Aurora column with captive spray insert (C18 1.6 uM particles, 25 cm, 75 μm inner diameter; IonOptics) at 60C. A solvent gradient of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) over 140 min, at a flow rate of 600 nL/min, were used, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in DIA PASEF mode with 1.1 s cycle time and TIMS ramp time of 100.0 ms. MS scan range was set to 100–1700 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw data-independent acquisition (DIA) files were analyzed with DIA-NN software (v.1.8.0) using UniProt FASTA database (UP000002494_10116.fasta (21,587 entries) and UP000002494_10116_additional.fasta (9981 entries), August 2020) and deep learning-based spectra to generate a library. In DIA-NN, the options ‘FASTA digest for library-free search/library generation’ and ‘Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction’ were enabled and all other settings were left default. Number of unique proteins at 1% FDR were obtained from the report file generated by DIA-NN. Protein quantities were obtained from the unique gene list in DIA-NN (report.unique_genes_matrix.tsv) and implemented in Perseus (v1.6.14.0)16. Data was log2 transformed and filtered for by 3 valid values in at least one group. Statistical comparisons between 12-week old rat groups was made using the limma package for R to enable batch correction and calculation of statistical significance levels and fold change difference per protein. Furthermore, two-sided Student’s t-test in Perseus was used to compare PFC groups and pre-hypertensive groups with permutation-based FDR (<0.05) and 250 randomizations. Missing values were only imputed for PCA (width =0.4, down shift = 1.8). ECM and angiogenesis enrichments were achieved by comparing with a curated gene list and selecting overlapping proteins for further analysis. The pro- or antiangiogenic property of angiogenesis-associated proteins was manually determined by literature mining. Hierarchical clustering was created based on z-scored LFQ values and generated by average linkage, preprocessing with k-means, and Euclidean distance. The z-score normalization was calculated by subtracting mean intensity from each protein value across all samples followed by division by the standard deviation. ClueGO (v2.5.8) in Cytoscape (v3.9.1) was used to generate protein-protein interaction networks and enrichment analysis of significantly regulated proteins. The enrichment analysis was performed using Rattus norvegicus as selected organism, and the Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes (GO-BiologicalProcess, CellularComponent, ImmuneSystemProcess, MolecularFunction-EBI-UniProt-GOA-ACAP-ARAP, downloaded 15.01.2021) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, downloaded 15.01.2021) as ontology reference sets. The following settings were used; GO Tree interval = 3-8; GO Term/Pathway selection = 3 min #Genes, 4% genes; Kappa-score = 0.4; Enrichment/Depletion (Twosided hypergeometric test with Benferroni step down, p ≤ 0.05; GO term fusion was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertension is associated with the presence of vascular abnormalities, including remodeling and rarefaction. These processes play an important role in cerebrovascular disease development; however, the mechanistic changes leading to these diseases are not well characterized. Using data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry analysis, here we determined the protein changes in cerebral arteries in pre- and early-onset hypertension from the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), a model that resembles essential hypertension in humans. Our analysis identified 125 proteins with expression levels that were significantly upregulated or downregulated in 12-week-old spontaneously hypertensive rats compared to normotensive Wistar Kyoto rats. Using an angiogenesis enrichment analysis, we further identified a critical imbalance in angiogenic proteins that promoted an anti-angiogenic profile in cerebral arteries at early onset of hypertension. In a comparison to previously published data, we demonstrate that this angiogenic imbalance is not present in mesenteric and renal arteries from age-matched SHRs. Finally, we identified two proteins (Fbln5 and Cdh13), whose expression levels were critically altered in cerebral arteries compared to the other arterial beds. The observation of an angiogenic imbalance in cerebral arteries from the SHR reveals critical protein changes in the cerebrovasculature at the early onset of hypertension and provides novel insights into the early pathology of cerebrovascular disease.

### Keywords
Hypertension, Angiogenesis, Timstof pro, Rat, Dia, Cerebral artery

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

### Submitter
Joakim Bastrup

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Jepps
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.


