### Accession
PXD013794

### Title
Proteomics characterization of extracellular vesicles sorted by flow cytometry reveals a disease-specific molecular cross-talk from cerebrospinal fluid and tears in multiple sclerosis

### Description
Several proteomics studies have been conducted to identify new cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in Multiple Sclerosis (MuS). However, the complexity of CSF and its invasive collection, limits its use. Therefore, the goal of biomarker research in MuS is to identify novel distinctive targets in CSF or in easily accessible biofluids. Tears represent an interesting matrix for this purpose, because (1) tears are related to the central nervous system (CNS) and (2) the CNS contains Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) derived from brain cells. These EVs are emerging new biomarkers associated to several neurological disorders. Here we applied an optimized flow cytometer for the identification and subtyping of EVs from CSF and tears. We found, for the first time, microglia-derived and neural-derived EVs in tears. The flow cytometer was used to sort and purify 106 EVs from untouched CSF and tears of MuS patients and healthy subjects. Purified EVs were analysed with shotgun proteomics analysis, revealing that EVs from both CSF and tears of MuS patients conveyed similar proteins. Our data demonstrated a specific EVs-mediated molecular cross talk between CSF and tears, which opens the door to new diagnostic perspectives for MuS.

### Sample Protocol
CSF and tears samples collection CSF samples, taken by a routine lumbar puncture at L3/L4 or L4/L5 interspace, were always collected in the morning on the first day of patient observation. Each sample (around 3 mL) was centrifuged 200 rcf at 4°C, for 10 minutes. Supernatant was snap-frozen at -80°C. Pooled CSF was used for EV purification and for proteomics analysis of isolated CSF EVs. Tear samples from HCs and MuS patients were collected on graduated Schirmer’s strip (EasyOpht, Busto Arsizio, VA, Italy) as previously described (PMID: 23580065). Briefly, tears were collected by gently putting the strip in the lower lid and waiting for 5 minutes the imbibition of the strip. Then the imbibed strip was placed in a 2.0 ml Eppendorf tube and stored at  80°C. Imbibed Schirmer’s strips were treated as previously reported (PMID: 23580065). Briefly, the Schirmer’s strips were cut into 2–3 mm paper pieces and transferred into 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tube (Eppendorf®, Hamburg, Germany). After adding 200 µL of PBS 0.01 M, each sample was gently mixed. After, the 0.5 mL tubes containing the piece of the Strip in PBS were cut off on the bottom and then put into another 2.0 mL tube and centrifuged. The extracted liquid solutions were transferred into 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and used for EV sorting and analysis. Samples were stained using 1 µl of 0.2 mM lipophilic cationic dye (LCS; stock solution), a Pan-EV dye recently optimized in our laboratories (patent pending, code: 02018000003981). Samples were incubated at RT for 45 minutes in the dark; 300 µl of 1X binding buffer (BD Biosciences) were finally added to each tube and 1 million of EVs were separated by instrumental cell sorting (100 µm nozzle, FACSAria III, BD Biosciences), on the basis of their positivity to LCD and negativity to Phalloidin FITC-conjugated (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. P5282). EV purty was measured overtime. Purified EV dimensions have been determined through DLS (90Plus/BI-MAS Zeta Plus, Brookhaven Instruments Corp.).  One milion of purified EVs from pooled CSF and tears were employed for proteomics investigation. Filter-aided proteome preparation (FASP) tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). EVs digested proteins from each sample were analysed in triplicate by Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Proxeon EASY-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Milan, Italy) chromatographic system coupled to a Maxis HD UHR-TOF (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on the EASY-Column C18 trapping column (2 cm L., 100 µm I.D, 5 µm ps, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and subsequently separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (75 µm I.D., 25 cm L, 5 µm ps, Thermo Fisher Scientific) nano scale chromatographic column. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min with a total run time of 90 minutes and the following chromatographic gradient: from 2 to 10% of B in 30’ followed by 10 to 18% in 20’, from 18 to 26% in 10’, from 26 to 50% in 25’ and finally from 50 to 90 % in 15’. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer, typically providing a 60,000 full width at half maximum (FMHW) resolution throughout the mass range, was equipped with a nanoESI spray source. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity and Auto MS/MS mode (Data Dependent Acquisition - DDA), using N2 as collision gas for CID fragmentation. Precursors in the range 350 to 2,200 m/z (excluding 1,220.0–1,224.5 m/z) with a preferred charge state +2 to +5 (excluding singly charged ions) and absolute intensity above 4,706 counts were selected for fragmentation in a maximum cycle time of 3 seconds. After acquiring one MS/MS spectrum, the precursors were actively excluded from selection for 30 seconds but reconsidered if the intensity increased more than 10 times compared to the previous measured value. Isolation width and collision energy for MS/MS fragmentation were set according to the mass and charge state of the precursor ions (from 3 to 9 Da and from 21 eV to 55 eV). In-source reference lock mass (1,221.9906 m/z) was acquired online throughout the runs.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were processed using PEAKS Studio v7.5 software (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) using the function ‘correct precursor only’. The mass lists were searched against nextprot database (including isoforms as of June 2017; 42,151 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Nonspecific cleavage to both ends of the peptides were allowed with maximum of 2 missed cleavages. 10 ppm and 0.05 Da were set as the highest error mass tolerances for precursors and fragments, respectively. Quantitative information on the proteins detected was obtained by label free quantification analysis performed using the integrated tool PEAKS-Q, part of the PEAKS Studio suite. Protein abundance used for the proteomics assessment of sorted EVs from CSF, was measured as -10log p/MW, after Peaks data processing. [PMID: 28828861]. D’Agostino and Pearson omnibus normality test, Student’s t-test, andMann Whitney U-test were performed for data comparisons, using GraphPad Prism v.5 (GraphPad software, Inc. USA). Functional enrichment and interaction network analysis of proteins was obtained through Functional Enrichment analysis tool (FunRich software) and depicted graphically in the form of Chord diagrams (Circos software). STRING database was used to highlight Protein Protein Interaction (PPI), including direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations of identified proteins in each condition. Protein ratio obtained in each comparison were undergone to “Core Analysis” through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) bioinformatics tool, for functional annotation of proteins, as well as canonical pathway analysis, network discovery, functional analysis and upstream analysis. IPA were also used to identify functionally related genes that correspond to specific canonical pathways that were most significant to the data set. We considered molecules and/or relationships in all species and a confidence setting as high predicted or experimental observed (excluding medium predicted).  IPA provides, also, the principal disease and function categories resulting from some of the modulated proteins of uploaded dataset.  Upstream regulator analysis by IPA, based on prior knowledge of expected effects between transcriptional regulators and their target genes, was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Several proteomics studies have been conducted to identify new cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in Multiple Sclerosis (MuS). However, the complexity of CSF and its invasive collection, limits its use. Therefore, the goal of biomarker research in MuS is to identify novel distinctive targets in CSF or in easily accessible biofluids. Tears represent an interesting matrix for this purpose, because (1) tears are related to the central nervous system (CNS) and (2) the CNS contains Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) derived from brain cells. These EVs are emerging new biomarkers associated to several neurological disorders. Here we applied an optimized flow cytometer for the identification and subtyping of EVs from CSF and tears. We found, for the first time, microglia-derived and neural-derived EVs in tears. The flow cytometer was used to sort and purify 10<sup>6</sup> EVs from untouched CSF and tears of MuS patients and healthy subjects. Purified EVs were analyzed with shotgun proteomics analysis, revealing that EVs from both CSF and tears of MuS patients conveyed similar proteins. Our data demonstrated a specific EVs-mediated molecular cross talk between CSF and tears, which opens the door to new diagnostic perspectives for MuS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013794. SIGNIFICANCE: Proteomics characterization of released Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) in CSF and tears of Multiple Sclerosis patients represents a pioneering application that helped in recognizing information about the biologically relevant molecules. We found, for the first time, microglia-derived and neural-derived EVs in tears. Moreover, purified EVs revealed that both CSF and tears of Multiple Sclerosis patients conveyed similar proteins involved in inflammation, angiogenesis and immune response signalling. We think that our data will contribute to enhance knowledge in Multiple Sclerosis mechanisms and help in biomarker discovery. Moreover tears represent one of the most convenient body fluid for biomarker discovery in Multiple Sclerosis, since it is an high informative and easy accessible. The opportunity to export such a platform to a territory monitoring plan opens the door to new diagnostic perspectives for Multiple Sclerosis.

### Keywords
Proteomics; extracellular vesicles; facs sorting; csf; tears; multiple sclerosis.

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University ‘‘G. d’Annunzio’’ of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara 

### Submitter
Piero Del Boccio

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Department of Pharmacy, University ‘‘G. d’Annunzio’’ of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy


