### Accession
PXD022445

### Title
Transcriptional repression of MFG-E8 causes disturbance in the homeostasis of Cell cycle through DOCK/ZP4/STAT signaling in mammary epithelial cells

### Description
The mammary gland is a unique apocrine gland made up of a branching network of ducts that end in alveoli. It is an ideal system to study the molecular mechanisms associated with cell proliferation, differentiation, and oncogenesis. MFG-E8, also known as Lactadherin, is a vital glycoprotein related to the milk fat globule membrane and initially identified to get secreted in bovine milk. Our previous report suggests that a high level of MFG-E8 is indicative of high milk yield in dairy animals. Here, we showed that MFGE-E8 controls the cell growth and morphology of epithelial cells through a network of regulatory transcription factors. To understand the comprehensive action, we downregulated its expression in MECs by MFG-E8 specific shRNA. We generated a knockdown proteome profile of differentially expressed proteins through a quantitative iTRAQ experiment on a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-TOF). The downregulation of MFG-E8 resulted in reduced phagocytosis and cell migration ability, whereas it also leads to more lifespan to knockdown vis-a-vis healthy cells, which is confirmed through BrdU, MTT, Neutral red, and Caspase 3/7. The bioinformatics analysis revealed that MFG-E8 knockdown perturbs a large number of intracellular signaling, eventually leading to cessation in cell growth.  Based on the Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis and directed network, we found that MFG-E8 is activated by CX3CL1, TP63, and CSF2 and leads to the activation of SOCS3 and CCL2 for the regulation of cell proliferation. We further proved that the depletion of MFG-E8 resulted in activated cytoskeletal remodeling by MFG-E8 knockdown, which results in the activation of three independent pathways ZP4/JAK-STAT5, DOCK1/STAT3, and PIP3/AKT/mTOR. Overall, this study suggests that MFG-E8 expression in mammary epithelial cells is an indication of intracellular deterioration in cell health.  To date, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that explores the downstream targets of MFG-E8 involved in the regulation of mammary epithelial cell health.

### Sample Protocol
For the preparation of the proteomics sample, KD_MEC_MFG-E8 (KD_MEC) and Puro_MEC_MFG-E8 cells (WT_MEC) were cultured for 80% confluence, washed 3 times with PBS. The cells were harvested using 500 μL of lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-Cl (pH7.8), 0.3% SDS, 200 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA] containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and vortexed. Subsequently, sonication was performed using the ten cycles (pulse ON 5 sec and OFF 7 sec) with an interval of 120 sec. The undisrupted cells were removed by centrifugation at 2500g for 15 min, and the supernatant was transferred to another tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding ten volumes of cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -200C. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 12,000g for 20 min. The protein concentration in the cell-free extract was determined using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences), according to manufacturer protocol.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated by a q-TOF control (version 24.8) using the Hystar post-processing program to automatically subtract baseline, smoothen peaks and to generate centroid data before submission to Mascot (2.4.1 Matrix Science, UK). Mascot MS/MS ion search criteria were as follows: Data Base- IPI Bovine, taxonomy- another mammalian, enzyme for digestion: trypsin, allowing up to one missed cleavage, variable modification as oxidation of methionine, fixed modification as cysteine carbamidomethylation peptide tolerance of 50 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da. The “ion score cutoff” was manually set to 15 thereby eliminating the lowest quality matches. To eliminate false positive identification data was searched with 1% FDR at both protein and peptide levels. The identified proteins were classified on the basis of gene ontology (GO) using bioinformatics software tools such as STRING, and Cytoscape using ClueGo plugin and KEGG pathway, PANTHER analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The mammary gland is a unique apocrine gland made up of a branching network of ducts that end in alveoli. It is an ideal system to study the molecular mechanisms associated with cell proliferation, differentiation, and oncogenesis. MFG-E8, also known as Lactadherin, is a vital glycoprotein related to the milk fat globule membrane and initially identified to get secreted in bovine milk. Our previous report suggests that a high level of MFG-E8 is indicative of high milk yield in dairy animals. Here, we showed that MFG-E8 controls the cell growth and morphology of epithelial cells through a network of regulatory transcription factors. To understand the comprehensive action, we downregulated its expression in MECs by MFG-E8 specific shRNA. We generated a knockdown proteome profile of differentially expressed proteins through a quantitative iTRAQ experiment on a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-TOF). The downregulation of MFG-E8 resulted in reduced phagocytosis and cell migration ability, whereas it also leads to more lifespan to knockdown vis-a-vis healthy cells, which is confirmed through BrdU, MTT, and Caspase 3/7. The bioinformatics analysis revealed that MFG-E8 knockdown perturbs a large number of intracellular signaling, eventually leading to cessation in cell growth. Based on the directed network analysis, we found that MFG-E8 is activated by CX3CL1, TP63, and CSF2 and leads to the activation of SOCS3 and CCL2 for the regulation of cell proliferation. We further proved that the depletion of MFG-E8 resulted in activated cytoskeletal remodeling by MFG-E8 knockdown, which results in the activation of three independent pathways ZP4/JAK-STAT5, DOCK1/STAT3, and PIP3/AKT/mTOR. Overall, this study suggests that MFG-E8 expression in mammary epithelial cells is an indication of intracellular deterioration in cell health. To date, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that explores the downstream targets of MFG-E8 involved in the regulation of mammary epithelial cell health.

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Cytoscape, Quantitative proteomics, Kegg, Milk fat globule epithelial growth factor-8

### Affiliations
National Dairy Research Institute
NDRI, Proteomics lab, Karnal, Haryana India

### Submitter
Syed Azmal Ali

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Moahnty
NDRI, Proteomics lab, Karnal, Haryana India


