### Accession
PXD001501

### Title
Rb and the APC/C coactivator FZR1 determine CDK4/6-Cyclin D requirement in C. elegans and human cancer cells

### Description
Cyclin dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) in complex with D-type cyclins promote cell cycle entry, at least in part through phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb). The CDK4/6-cyclin D-Rb pathway is commonly deregulated in human cancer, often through CDK4/6 or D-type cyclin overexpression, or inactivation of the CDK4/6 antagonist p16/CDKN2A. Importantly, a substantial fraction of cancers depend on continuous CDK4/6-cyclin D kinase activity and are sensitive to CDK4/6-specific inhibitors. Here, we investigate critical CDK4/6-cyclin D functions that may determine the sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibitors, making use of the essential roles of CDK4/6 (CDK-4) and cyclin D (CYD-1) in the nematode C. elegans. In an unbiased screen, we found that simultaneous loss of C. elegans Rb (lin-35) and down-regulation of the APC/C substrate specificity factor FZR1/Cdh1 completely overcomes CDK-4/CYD-1 requirement. Furthermore, CDK-4/CYD-1 phosphorylates specific residues in the LIN-35 Rb spacer domain and FZR-1 N-terminus that correspond to inactivating phosphorylations of the human homologs. Thus, CDK-4/CYD-1 appears to promote cell cycle entry by antagonizing not only transcriptional repression by LIN-35 Rb but also protein degradation by APC/CFZR-1. Simultaneous knockdown of Rb and FZR1 in human breast cancer cells synergistically overcomes arrest by the CDK4/6-specific inhibitor PD 00332991. These results reveal APC/CFZR1 as a putative CDK4/6-Cyclin D target and important contributing factor in the response to CDK4/6-inhibitor treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Gel lanes (WT and KD) were cut into different bands, which were treated with 6.5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 60 C for reduction and 54 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min for alkylation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin at 37 C. The resulting peptides were extracted with 10% formic acid. The samples were analyzed using a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) connected to an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The injected samples were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm  100 µm) at a maximum pressure of 600 bar with solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 µm, 40 cm  50 µm) at an stable temperature of 40 C. Peptides were chromatographically separated by a 90 min gradient from 7% to 30% solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 100 nL/min. The column eluent was directly introduced into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. The electrospray voltage was set to 1.7 kV using a fused silica capillary (360 µm o.d.; 20 µm i.d.; 10 µm tip i.d., constructed in-house). The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS using a Top10 method (HCD fragmentation). Alternativley, samples were also analyzed in an Agilent HPLC 1200 series (Agilent) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) using a data dependent decision tree as before (Muñoz et al. 2012 EMBO).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific). Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4) was used as search engine against a combined database of the human and E.coli proteomes in which GST-Frz1 and GST- Lin35 sequences were added. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications. The PhosphoRS 3.0 node was used for the phosphosite localization. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The following parameters were used: 50 ppm for the precursor mass tolerance and 0.05 Da for the fragment ion tolerance (0.5 Da for ion trap data). Data filtering was performed using Percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate. Additional filters were applied: search engine rank 1 peptides, minimum of 7 residues per peptide and Mascot ion score above 20. Extracted ion chromatograms were obtained for each phosphopeptide in both the kinase dead (KD) and wild type kinase (CDK4) experiments. The intensities of all the phosphopeptides containing the same phosphosite(s) were summed (e.g. missed cleavages, methionine oxidation) to obtain a total signal in each experiment. The intensities for the different charge states of the same phosphopeptide (e.g. 2+, 3+, 4+...) were also summed. When multiple phosphopeptides were identified from the same chromatographic peak, only one value was used for the calculation.. Normal peptides (i.e. non-phosphopeptides) from FZR1 were used to normalize the data between these two samples.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) in complex with D-type cyclins promote cell cycle entry. Most human cancers contain overactive CDK4/6-cyclin D, and CDK4/6-specific inhibitors are promising anti-cancer therapeutics. Here, we investigate the critical functions of CDK4/6-cyclin D kinases, starting from an unbiased screen in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. We found that simultaneous mutation of lin-35, a retinoblastoma (Rb)-related gene, and fzr-1, an orthologue to the APC/C co-activator Cdh1, completely eliminates the essential requirement of CDK4/6-cyclin D (CDK-4/CYD-1) in C. elegans. CDK-4/CYD-1 phosphorylates specific residues in the LIN-35 Rb spacer domain and FZR-1 amino terminus, resembling inactivating phosphorylations of the human proteins. In human breast cancer cells, simultaneous knockdown of Rb and FZR1 synergistically bypasses cell division arrest induced by the CDK4/6-specific inhibitor PD-0332991. Our data identify FZR1 as a candidate CDK4/6-cyclin D substrate and point to an APC/C(FZR1) activity as an important determinant in response to CDK4/6-inhibitors.

### Keywords
Lin-35 fzr1

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Alba Cristobal

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht The Netherlands


