### Accession
PXD019881

### Title
Isobaric matching between runs and novel PSM-level normalization in MaxQuant strongly improve reporter ion-based quantification - Peli1 knock-out mice dataset

### Description
Isobaric labeling has the promise of combining high sample multiplexing with precise quantification. However, normalization issues and the missing value problem of complete n-plexes hamper quantification across more than one n-plex. Here we introduce two novel algorithms implemented in MaxQuant that substantially improve the data analysis with multiple n-plexes. First, isobaric matching between runs (IMBR) makes use of the three-dimensional MS1 features to transfer identifications from identified to unidentified MS/MS spectra between LC-MS runs in order to utilize reporter ion intensities in unidentified spectra for quantification. On typical datasets, we observe a significant gain in quantifiable n-plexesMS/MS spectra that can be used for quantification. Second, we introduce a novel PSM-level normalization, applicable to data with and without common reference channel. It is a weighted median-based method, in which the weights reflect the number of ions that were used for fragmentation. On a typical dataset, we observe complete removal of batch effects and dominance of the biological sample grouping after normalization. This dataset is one of the datasets used for the study. It is TMT 10-plex with a reference channel.

### Sample Protocol
This dataset is originally from PRIDE (PXD003710 - https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD003710). Please check the website for the detailed description of the sample processing protocol.

### Data Protocol
For this dataset we used mouse UniProt sequences (UP000000589, reviewed at 24-07-2018, 16992 proteins)for searching. All searches were performed with oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages, and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 4600 Da. The initial mass tolerance was 20 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. PSM and protein FDRs were both applied at 1%. In general, values of parameters in MaxQuant have not been changed from their default values unless explicitly stated. Moreover, isobaric match between runs and PSM-level weighted ratio normalization are applied for the analysis

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling has the promise of combining high sample multiplexing with precise quantification. However, normalization issues and the missing value problem of complete <i>n</i>-plexes hamper quantification across more than one <i>n</i>-plex. Here, we introduce two novel algorithms implemented in MaxQuant that substantially improve the data analysis with multiple <i>n</i>-plexes. First, isobaric matching between runs makes use of the three-dimensional MS1 features to transfer identifications from identified to unidentified MS/MS spectra between liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry runs in order to utilize reporter ion intensities in unidentified spectra for quantification. On typical datasets, we observe a significant gain in MS/MS spectra that can be used for quantification. Second, we introduce a novel PSM-level normalization, applicable to data with and without the common reference channel. It is a weighted median-based method, in which the weights reflect the number of ions that were used for fragmentation. On a typical dataset, we observe complete removal of batch effects and dominance of the biological sample grouping after normalization. Furthermore, we provide many novel processing and normalization options in Perseus, the companion software for the downstream analysis of quantitative proteomics results. All novel tools and algorithms are available with the regular MaxQuant and Perseus releases, which are downloadable at http://maxquant.org.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Multiplexed quantification, Normalization, Isobaric labeling, Match between runs

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of BIochemistry

### Submitter
Sung-Huan Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen Cox
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


