### Accession
PXD040335

### Title
Pyruvate kinase M2 modification by a lipid peroxidation byproduct acrolein contributes to kidney fibrosis

### Description
This study used a proteomic approach with an anti-Acr-PC antibody followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to identify several acrolein-modified protein targets. Among these protein targets, pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) was found to be modified by acrolein at Cys358, leading to the inactivation of PKM2 contributing to the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis through HIF1 accumulation, aberrant glycolysis, and upregulation of EMT in HFD-STZ-induced DN mice. Finally, PKM2 activity and renal fibrosis in DN mice can be reduced by acrolein scavengers such as hydralazine and carnosine. These results imply that acrolein-modified PKM2 contributes to renal fibrosis in the pathogenesis of DN.

### Sample Protocol
Two-dimensional (2-D) electrophoresis and image analysis. Kidney tissues were lysed with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer with phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails and then harvested by centrifugation. A bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Pierce, Dallas, TX, USA)) was used to assess protein concentrations. Approximately 50 g of protein samples were desalted by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The desalted samples were centrifuged at 70,000 rpm at 22°C for 1 h. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out with the extracted protein on an Ettan IPGphor 3 IEF (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA, USA) using Immobiline DryStrips (pI 3-10, GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). After IEF separation, the proteins were separated in the second dimension using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and the subsequent Western blot analysis and silver staining in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for image analysis. UVP GelStudio imagers (UVP, Analytik Jena US, Upland, CA, USA) were used to scan 2-D gels in transmission mode. In-gel digestion. Proteins (50 µg) were separated by 8% SDS-PAGE and the gel was stained with Coomassie blue R250 solution. The bands were excised based on the molecular weight of PKM2 or excised from silver-stained gels. The gel pieces were distained with distaining solution (25mM NH4HCO3, 10% Na2S2O3, and K3Fe(CN)6). After washing with 25mM NH4HCO3 and 25mM NH4HCO3/ 50% acetonitrile, the distained gel pieces were dried in SpeedVic. Dried gel pieces, rehydrated in 25mM NH4HCO3 containing trypsin, and incubated at 37 °C for overnight. The supernatants were collected and the remaining peptides were extracted by the repetitive extraction with 25mM NH4HCO3 and 25mM NH4HCO3/ 50% acetonitrile (ACN). After collecting and drying the supernatants, the dried digests were stored at -20 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis and informatics analyses. The protein digests were analyzed in an Agilent 1200 nanoflow HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For the setting of LTQ-Orbitrap, multiple selective ion monitoring events with Orbitrap collecting various overlapping range of m/z was set up specifically, 300-800, 625-1075, 925-1375, 1225-1675, and 1525-1975 m/z. Full scans with Orbitrap analyses were collected in the range of 200 to 2000 m/z as the last event. To identify various peptides, the Dynamic Exclusion function in Data Dependent Settings was enabled, with the Repeat Count set to 2, Exclusion Duration set to 180 seconds, and Exclusion list Size set to 50 signals. Only charge 2 and charge 3 ions were not rejected after Charge State Rejection was enabled. The top three ions in the survey scan that fulfill the above criteria were analyzed for the MS/MS with LTQ collision cell/mass analyzer. File Converter in Xcalibur SR 2.0 (TheroFisher, USA) and in-house programs written in Visual Basic for Application (VBA) were used to extract the MS/MS and calculate the charge and masses of the precursor ions. All MS/MS data were utilized in subsequent searches by the TurboSEQUEST program (Thermo Electron) using the UniProt protein sequence database for mouse proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Renal fibrosis is a hallmark of diabetic nephropathy (DN) and is characterized by an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program and aberrant glycolysis. The underlying mechanisms of renal fibrosis are still poorly understood, and existing treatments are only marginally effective. Therefore, it is crucial to comprehend the pathophysiological mechanisms behind the development of renal fibrosis and to generate novel therapeutic approaches. Acrolein, an &#x3b1;-,&#x3b2;-unsaturated aldehyde, is endogenously produced during lipid peroxidation. Acrolein shows high reactivity with proteins to form acrolein-protein conjugates (Acr-PCs), resulting in alterations in protein function. In previous research, we found elevated levels of Acr-PCs along with kidney injuries in high-fat diet-streptozotocin (HFD-STZ)-induced DN mice. This study used a proteomic approach with an anti-Acr-PC antibody followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to identify several acrolein-modified protein targets. Among these protein targets, pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) was found to be modified by acrolein at Cys358, leading to the inactivation of PKM2 contributing to the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis through HIF1&#x3b1; accumulation, aberrant glycolysis, and upregulation of EMT in HFD-STZ-induced DN mice. Finally, PKM2 activity and renal fibrosis in DN mice can be reduced by acrolein scavengers such as hydralazine and carnosine. These results imply that acrolein-modified PKM2 contributes to renal fibrosis in the pathogenesis of DN.

### Keywords
Renal fibrosis; acrolein; pyruvate kinase m2; hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha; hydralazine; carnosine.

### Affiliations
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Department of Pharmacology, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

### Submitter
Hsiang-Tsui Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsiang-Tsui Wang
Department of Pharmacology, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University


