### Accession
PXD013271

### Title
Multilayered control of protein turnover by TORC1 and ATG1

### Description
To study TORC1-Atg1 signaling comprehensively and to identify potential additional foci of crosstalk, we chose a mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics strategy combing global proteomics screens in vivo with targeted analyses using in vitro kinase reactions. We present the currently largest compendium of rapamycin-sensitive phosphorylation events in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, identify numerous unknown TORC1 and Atg1 downstream phosphorylation events, and characterize hitherto unknown, functionally relevant TORC1 target sites on defined Atg proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For in vivo analyses, we labeled cells by SILAC, treated them +/- rapamycin, generated cell lysates, performed in solution digestions with LysC and trypsin, fractionated samples by high pH-RP chromatography and analyzed phosphopeptides by TiO2-based enrichment. To determine protein abundances we also measured peptides in the TiO2-FT. In vitro kinase assays were performed using 18O4-labeled ATP and purified substrates and kinases from yeast.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 using a full-length Saccharomyces cerevisiae Uniprot database (version March 2016). Double and triple SILAC labeling was used as quantification mode (0/0, 4/6, 8/10 OR 0/0, 8/10). In vitro analyses were processed using XICs.

### Publication Abstract
The target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) is a master regulator of cell homeostasis, which promotes anabolic reactions and synchronously inhibits catabolic processes such as autophagy-mediated protein degradation. Its prime autophagy target is Atg13, a subunit of the Atg1 kinase complex that acts as the gatekeeper of canonical autophagy. To study whether the activities of TORC1 and Atg1 are coupled through additional, more intricate control mechanisms than simply this linear pathway, we analyzed the epistatic relationship between TORC1 and Atg1 by using quantitative phosphoproteomics. Our in&#xa0;vivo data, combined with targeted in&#xa0;vitro TORC1 and Atg1 kinase assays, not only uncover numerous TORC1 and Atg1 effectors, but also suggest distinct bi-directional regulatory feedback loops and characterize Atg29 as a commonly regulated downstream target of both TORC1 and Atg1. Thus, an exquisitely multilayered regulatory network appears to coordinate TORC1 and Atg1 activities to robustly tune autophagy in response to nutritional cues.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Torc1, Rapamycin, Autophagy, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


