### Accession
PXD035851

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of ex vivo fibrils associated with extreme AA amyloidosis prevalence in a cat shelter

### Description
We present the 3.3 Å cryo-EM structure of an AA amyloid extracted post-mortem from the diseased kidney of a DSH cat with renal failure. The structure reveals a cross-beta architecture assembled from two 76-residue long proto-filaments. Despite >70% sequence homology to mouse and human SAA, the cat SAA variant adopts a unique amyloid fold exhibiting type-2 polymorphism. Based on shared disease profiles and almost identical sequences, we propose a similar amyloid fold of deposits identified previously in captive cheetah.

### Sample Protocol
Fibril proteins were solubilized in 8M urea, 0.1M dithiotreitol, and quantified (Swuec et al, Nature Commun. Thirty μg of solubilized and reduced proteins were alkylated (iodoacetamide, final concentration 150 mM, 1 h, RT, dark) and diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (final urea concentration 1.3 M). Proteins were trypsin-digested for 16 h at 37 °C (trypsin:protein ratio 1:20 w/w) (Sequence grade modified trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were purified using Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). In detail, peptides were washed on a trap column and separated using a PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm), with a linear gradient of eluent B (formic acid 0.1% in acetonitrile) from 2% to 40% in 70 minutes and from 40% to 95% in 10 minutes, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Acquisition of full mass spectra was performed in positive ion mode in the 400-1500 m/z range (resolution 70000 FWHM, automatic gain control 1e6, maximum injection time 120 ms). The ten most intense precursor ions (charge states +2, +3 and +4) were selected for fragmentation (HCD), with normalized collision energy of 27%, isolation window 2.0 m/z and 30 sec dynamic exclusion. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 FWHM, automatic gain control 5e4 and maximum injection time 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software, version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), against the proteome of Felis catus (downloaded from Uniprot on September 2019, 34292 entries). Semi-tryptic cleavage with 2 maximum missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 Da were specified. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021) of cysteines was set as static modification (FDR cut-off <1).

### Publication Abstract
AA amyloidosis is a systemic disease characterized by deposition of misfolded serum amyloid A protein (SAA) into cross-&#x3b2; amyloid in multiple organs in humans and animals. AA amyloidosis occurs at high SAA serum levels during chronic inflammation. Prion-like transmission was reported as possible cause of extreme AA amyloidosis prevalence in captive animals, e.g. 70% in cheetah and 57-73% in domestic short hair (DSH) cats kept in zoos and shelters, respectively. Herein, we present the 3.3&#x2009;&#xc5; cryo-EM structure of AA amyloid extracted post-mortem from the kidney of a DSH cat with renal failure, deceased in a shelter with extreme disease prevalence. The structure reveals a cross-&#x3b2; architecture assembled from two 76-residue long proto-filaments. Despite &gt;70% sequence homology to mouse and human SAA, the cat SAA variant adopts a distinct amyloid fold. Inclusion of an eight-residue insert unique to feline SAA contributes to increased amyloid stability. The presented feline AA amyloid structure is fully compatible with the 99% identical amino acid sequence of amyloid fragments of captive cheetah.

### Keywords
Serum amyloid a, Cat, Amyloidosis

### Affiliations
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy

### Submitter
Giulia Mazzini

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Palladini
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy


