### Accession
PXD043678

### Title
A magnetic bead-based workflow for sensitive and streamlined cell surface proteomics

### Description
Cell-surface proteins represent an important class of molecules for therapeutic targeting and defining cellular phenotypes. However, their enrichment and detection via mass spectrometry-based proteomics remains challenging due to low abundance, posttranslational modifications, hydrophobic regions, and processing requirements. To improve the identification of cell-surface proteins via their corresponding N-linked glycopeptides (N-glycopeptides), we optimized a Cell-Surface Capture (CSC) workflow which incorporates magnetic bead-based processing. Using this approach, we evaluated labeling conditions (biotin tags and catalysts), enrichment specificity (streptavidin beads), missed cleavages (lysis buffers), non-enzymatic deamidation (digestion and de-glycosylation buffers), and data acquisition methods. Our findings support the use of alkoxyamine-PEG4-biotin plus 5-methoxy-anthranilic acid and streptavidin magnetic beads for maximal N-glycopeptide detection. Furthermore, single-pot solid-phased-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) circumvented the need to isolate cell membranes by affording the use of strong detergents and chaotropes for protein extraction. Notably, with semi-automated processing, sample handling was simplified and between ~600-900 N-glycoproteins were identified from only 25-200µg of HeLa protein. Overall, the improved efficiency of the magnetic-based CSC workflow allowed us to identify both previously reported and novel N-glycosites with less material and high reproducibility, and should help advance the field of surfaceomics by providing insight in cellular phenotypes not previously documented.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface glycoproteins on HeLa cell cultures were labeled with one of three biotin tags (Biotin-Hydrazide, Biocytin-Hydrazide, and Alkoxyamine-PEG4-Biotin) at different concentrations (100, 500 and 1000µM) in the presence of one of two different catalysts (Aniline or 5-methoxy-anthranilic acid, 5MA). Whole cell lysates were processed using single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) and digested with LysC/trypsin overnight. In some cases, peptides were labeled with TMT/TMTpro. Biotinylated N-glycopeptides were enriched using magnetic streptavidin beads and N-linked glycopeptides were released via de-glycosylation with PNGase F. The resulting de-glycosylated peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips and then analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse or Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files (DDA, DIA or TMT) were searched in MaxQuant, Proteome Discoverer or Specrotronaut. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylated cysteine were included as fixed/static modifications while deamidation of asparagine set as a variable/dynamic modification. PSM level data were imported into R and the tidyverse package was used to filter sequences containing deamidated asparagine residues within N-linked glycosylation consensus motifs (NXS/T/C). In R, data were formatted and processed using MSstats and MSstatsTMT.

### Publication Abstract
Cell surface proteins represent an important class of molecules for therapeutic targeting and cellular phenotyping. However, their enrichment and detection via mass spectrometry-based proteomics remains challenging due to low abundance, post-translational modifications, hydrophobic regions, and processing requirements. To improve their identification, we optimized a Cell-Surface Capture (CSC) workflow that incorporates magnetic bead-based processing. Using this approach, we evaluated labeling conditions (biotin tags and catalysts), enrichment specificity (streptavidin beads), missed cleavages (lysis buffers), nonenzymatic deamidation (digestion and deglycosylation buffers), and data acquisition methods (DDA, DIA, and TMT). Our findings support the use of alkoxyamine-PEG4-biotin plus 5-methoxy-anthranilic acid, SDS/urea-based lysis buffers, single-pot solid-phased-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3), and streptavidin magnetic beads for maximal surfaceome coverage. Notably, with semiautomated processing, sample handling was simplified and between &#x223c;600 and 900 cell surface N-glycoproteins were identified from only 25-200 &#x3bc;g of HeLa protein. CSC also revealed significant differences between <i>in vitro</i> monolayer cultures and <i>in vivo</i> tumor xenografts of murine CT26 colon adenocarcinoma samples that may aid in target identification for drug development. Overall, the improved efficiency of the magnetic-based CSC workflow identified both previously reported and novel N-glycosites with less material and high reproducibility that should help advance the field of surfaceomics by providing insight in cellular phenotypes not previously documented.

### Keywords
Lc-ms; mass spectrometry; surfaceomics; cell surface capture; n-glycopeptide enrichment; plasma membrane n-glycoprotein

### Affiliations
Amgen
Covant Therapeutics

### Submitter
Dylan Dieters-Castator

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Rardin
Amgen


