### Accession
PXD020345

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the 120k extracellular vesicles from Opisthorchis viverrini

### Description
The proteomic content of the extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by the liver fluke Opisthorchis viverrini has been addressed in the past. Here we employ a more comprehensive purification method of the 120k subpopulation of EVs and analyze proteins present in different locations of these EVs (including external trypsin-liberated peptides, cargo proteins and membrane proteins) using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
EV-surface exposed peptides were released by trypsin hydrolysis following established methodology. Briefly, surface-exposed proteins were cleaved by trypsin (1 µg/µl) for 15 min at 37 °C. Treated EVs were then centrifuged at 120,000 g for 1 hour at 4 °C, and supernatant containing the surface peptides collected. The pellet was further processed to investigate proteins associated with the EV membrane and within the EV lumen. Briefly, EVs were resuspended in water, sonicated and released EV cargo content was recovered from the supernatant after centrifugation at 120,000 g for 1 hour at 4 °C. Subsequently, the pellet was solubilized in 1% Triton X-100/2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) at 37°C for 15 min to recover membrane-associated proteins. Cargo and membrane-associated proteins were electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and in-gel digestion was performed. All, samples were desalted using a Zip-Tip® column (Merck Millipore) pipette tip according to manufacturer’s protocol and dried in a vacuum concentrator before analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).   All samples (trypsin-liberated, cargo and membrane proteins) were injected into an Eksigent nanoLC 415 system using an Eksigent Trap-column (C18-CL, 3 μm, 120 Å, 350 μm x 0.5 mm) for the pre-concentration step followed by separation in a 15 cm long Eksigent column (C18-CL particle size 3 μm, 120 Å, 75 μm ID) using a linear gradient of 3-40% solvent B (100 acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid [aq]) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid [aq]) for 45 min followed by 40-80 % solvent B in 5 min. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used for all experiments. Eluates from the RP-HPLC column were directly introduced into the PicoView ESI ionisation source of a TripleTOF 6600 MS/MS System (AB Sciex) operated in positive ion electrospray mode. All analyses were performed using Information Dependant Acquisition. Analyst Software 1.7.1 (Applied Biosystems) was used for data analysis. Briefly, the acquisition protocol consisted of the use of an Enhanced Mass Spectrum scan with 15 sec exclusion time and 100 ppm mass tolerance. A cycle time of 1800 ms was used to acquire full scan TOF-MS data over the mass range 400–1250 m/z and product ion scans over the mass range of 100–1500 m/z for up to 30 of the most abundant ions with a relative intensity above 150 and a charge state of +2 − +5. Full product ion spectra for each of the selected precursors were then used for subsequent database searches.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), MS-GF+ version Release (v2018.04.09) and Tide. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.3.15. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the O. viverrini genome and the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP database) (10876 (target) sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 20.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.2 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da),  variable modifications: Deamidation of N (+0.984016 Da), Deamidation of Q (+0.984016 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da).    Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.40. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Inter-phylum transfer of molecular information is exquisitely exemplified in the uptake of parasite extracellular vesicles (EVs) by their target mammalian host tissues. The oriental liver fluke, <i>Opisthorchis viverrini</i> is the major cause of bile duct cancer in people in Southeast Asia. A major mechanism by which <i>O. viverrini</i> promotes cancer is through the secretion of excretory/secretory products which contain extracellular vesicles (<i>Ov</i>EVs). <i>Ov</i>EVs contain microRNAs that are predicted to impact various mammalian cell proliferation pathways, and are internalized by cholangiocytes that line the bile ducts. Upon uptake, <i>Ov</i>EVs drive relentless proliferation of cholangiocytes and promote a tumorigenic environment, but the underlying mechanisms of this process are unknown. Moreover, purification and characterization methods for helminth EVs in general are ill defined. We therefore compared different purification methods for <i>Ov</i>EVs and characterized the sub-vesicular compartment proteomes. Two CD63-like tetraspanins (<i>Ov</i>-TSP-2 and TSP-3) are abundant on the surface of <i>Ov</i>EVs, and could serve as biomarkers for these parasite vesicles. Anti-TSP-2 and -TSP-3 IgG, as well as different endocytosis pathway inhibitors significantly reduced <i>Ov</i>EV uptake and subsequent proliferation of cholangiocytes <i>in vitro</i>. Silencing of <i>Ov-tsp-2</i> and <i>tsp-</i>3 gene expression in adult flukes using RNA interference resulted in substantial reductions in <i>Ov</i>EV secretion, and those vesicles that were secreted were deficient in their respective TSP proteins. Our findings shed light on the importance of tetraspanins in fluke EV biogenesis and/or stability, and provide a conceivable mechanism for the efficacy of anti-tetraspanin subunit vaccines against a range of parasitic helminth infections.

### Keywords
120k extracellular vesicles, Liver fluke, Exosomes, Opisthorchis viverrini

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
James Cook University (Australia)

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
James Cook University (Australia)


