### Accession
PXD009255

### Title
samon_1803_DIA_HSPC -  Sensitive quantitative proteomics of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
- tryptic digests of CD34+ FAC-sorted cells dilution series acquired in DIA mode on Orbitrap Lumos - tryptic digests of HSC, MEP, GMP, CMP FAC-sorted cells acquired in DIA mode on Orbitrap Lumos

### Sample Protocol
- the tryptic digests of the CD34+ cells were generated from 200'000, 1000'000, 50'000, 25'000, 12'500,and 6'250 cells sorted by FACS; samples were processed in triplicates and acquired in DIA mode on Orbitrap Lumos - 25'000 HSC, MEP, GMP, CMP cells from 5 healthy human donors were each FAC-sorted, tryptically digested and acquired in DIA mode on Orbitrap Lumos

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut 11 using the attached library (ConsLib_HEKSC.sptxt; ConsLib_HEKSC.tsv) generated by combining the DDA search results from (i) high-pH fractionated tryptic digest of HEK and (ii) from the left-over of the donor samples (HSC, MEP, GMP and CMP FAC-sorted cells) measured in DDA mode on Orbitrap Lumos

### Publication Abstract
Physiological processes in multicellular organisms depend on the function and interactions of specialized cell types operating in context. Some of these cell types are rare and thus obtainable only in minute quantities. For example, tissue-specific stem and progenitor cells are numerically scarce, but functionally highly relevant, and fulfill critical roles in development, tissue maintenance, and disease. Whereas low numbers of cells are routinely analyzed by genomics and transcriptomics, corresponding proteomic analyses have so far not been possible due to methodological limitations. Here we describe a sensitive and robust quantitative technique based on data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. We quantified the proteome of sets of 25,000 human hematopoietic stem/multipotent progenitor cells (HSC/MPP) and three committed progenitor cell subpopulations of the myeloid differentiation pathway (common myeloid progenitors, megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors, and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors), isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting from five healthy donors. On average, 5,851 protein groups were identified per sample. A subset of 4,131 stringently filtered protein groups was quantitatively compared across the 20 samples, defining unique signatures for each subpopulation. A comparison of proteomic and transcriptomic profiles indicated HSC/MPP-specific divergent regulation of biochemical functions such as telomerase maintenance and quiescence-inducing enzymes, including isocitrate dehydrogenases. These are essential for maintaining stemness and were detected at proteome, but not transcriptome, level. The method is equally applicable to almost any rare cell type, including healthy and cancer stem cells or physiologically and pathologically infiltrating cell populations. It thus provides essential new information toward the detailed biochemical understanding of cell development and functionality in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human, Stem cells, Cmp, Hsc, Mep, Gmp, Orbitrap, Cd34, Dia, Progenitor cells, Lumos

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


