### Accession
PXD027356

### Title
Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange of the CERT1 protein

### Description
HDX-MS of CERT1 to determine secondary structure characteristics and compare the WT and G243R mutant

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions comparing WT and G243R mutant CERT1 were conducted in 50μl reaction volumes with a final concentration of 0.58μM. Exchange was initiated by addition of 48.2μl of D2O solution (20 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 100 mM NaCl, 94.3%D2O) giving a final concentration of 90.9% D2O. Deuterium exchange reactions were carried out for 3, 30, 300, 3000 seconds at 20 °C. Exchange was stopped by the addition of 20 μl of ice cold acidic quench buffer at a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid.  Samples were then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen until mass analysis.  Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over two (one at 10°C and the other at 2°C) immobilized pepsin columns (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: >5% change in exchange, >0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Neural differentiation, synaptic transmission, and action potential propagation depend on membrane sphingolipids, whose metabolism is tightly regulated. Mutations in the ceramide transporter CERT (CERT1), which is involved in sphingolipid biosynthesis, are associated with intellectual disability, but the pathogenic mechanism remains obscure. Here, we characterize 31 individuals with de novo missense variants in CERT1. Several variants fall into a previously uncharacterized dimeric helical domain that enables CERT homeostatic inactivation, without which sphingolipid production goes unchecked. The clinical severity reflects the degree to which CERT autoregulation is disrupted, and inhibiting CERT pharmacologically corrects morphological and motor abnormalities in a Drosophila model of the disease, which we call ceramide transporter (CerTra) syndrome. These findings uncover a central role for CERT autoregulation in the control of sphingolipid biosynthetic flux, provide unexpected insight into the structural organization of CERT, and suggest a possible therapeutic approach for patients with CerTra syndrome.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms hdx cert1 cert

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


