### Accession
PXD011361

### Title
Mass spectrometry data of the ERα-NTD samples exposed to 0-50ms x-ray beam

### Description
Here we present MS data of ERα-NTD protein samples exposed to 0-50 ms of X-ray beam at the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA). Irradiated protein samples were digested with two sets of proteases, Asp-N and Lys-C, and pepsin. LC-MS/MS data was utilized to identify 16 sites of modification listed in table S3.  LC-MS data were used to quantify the extent of oxidative modifications for these 16 residues. Quantification of oxidative modification for all sites has been done manually.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1 μg of ERα-NTD proteins were reduced and alkylated (DTT and IAM, respectively).Protein samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 0.1 μg of Lys-C, followed by Asp-N digestion (0.1 μg)for 5 hours at 37 °.The other set of ERα-NTD proteins was digested with 0.1 μg of pepsin for 2 hours at 37 °.The proteolytic peptides (150 ng) were loaded on a trap column (180 μm × 20 mm packed with C18 Symmetry, 5 μm, 100 Å; Waters, MA) to desalt and concentrate peptides using Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system. Peptide mixture was separated on a reverse phase column (75 μm x 250 mm column packed with C18 BEH130, 1.7 μm, 130 Å; Waters, MA) using a gradient of 2 to 35% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile) vs. mobile phase A (100% water/0.1 % formic acid) for 60 minutes at 40 °C at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer using nano-electrospray source (capillary voltage of 2.5 kV) at 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer RAW data files were converted to MGF format using Mascot Daemon. MGF files were searched using Mascot search algorithm and ERα-NTD protein database. Identification of all sites of modification were performed using Mascot Daemon software with mass accuracy values of 10 ppm and 0.8 Daltons for MS1 and tandem MS scans, respectively, and allowed  variable modifications including carbamidomethylation for cysteines and all known oxidative modifications previously documented for amino acid side-chains (G. Xu and Chance 2007). In addition, all MGF files were searched using the software MassMatrix (H. Xu and 623 Freitas 2007) to identify all sites of oxidative modification.

### Publication Abstract
The N-terminal transactivation domain (NTD) of estrogen receptor alpha, a well-known member of the family of intrinsically disordered proteins, mediates the receptor's transactivation function. However, an accurate molecular dissection of NTD's structure-function relationships remains elusive. Here, we show that the NTD adopts a mostly disordered, unexpectedly compact conformation that undergoes structural expansion on chemical denaturation. By&#xa0;combining small-angle X-ray scattering, hydroxyl radical protein footprinting, and computational modeling, we derive the ensemble-structures of the&#xa0;NTD and determine its ensemble-contact map revealing metastable long-range contacts, e.g., between residues I33 and S118. We show that mutation at S118, a known phosphorylation site, promotes conformational changes and increases coactivator binding. We further demonstrate&#xa0;via fluorine-19 (<sup>19</sup>F) nuclear magnetic resonance that mutations near I33 alter <sup>19</sup>F chemical shifts at S118, confirming the proposed I33-S118 contact in the ensemble of structural disorder. These findings extend our understanding of how specific contact metastability mediates critical functions of disordered proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Erα-ntd, Fp

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Janna Kiselar

### Lab Head
Dr Janna Kiselar
Center for Proteomics and Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH


