### Accession
PXD012836

### Title
Approaching absolute quantification from chemostats cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D, Kluyveromyces marxianus CBS 6556 and Yarrowia lipolytica W29

### Description
Protein extracts of three yeast strains (Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D, Kluyveromyces marxianus CBS6556 and Yarrowia lipolytica W29) cultivated in chemostats under different conditions. Representative samples containing aliquots of all conditions for each yeast strain were spiked with UPS2 standard (Sigma) to estimate absolute values in fmol.  The conditions for Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D are:  - Standard condition : 30°C, pH 5.5 - High temperature: 36°C, pH 5.5 - Low pH:  30°C, pH 3.5 - Osmotic stress : 30°C, pH 5.5, 1M KCl  The conditions for Kluyveromyces marxianus CBS6556 are:  - Standard condition : 30°C, pH 5.5 - High temperature:  40°C, pH 5.5 - Low pH: 30°C, pH 3.5 - Osmotic stress: 30°C, pH 5.5, 0.6 M KCl  The conditions for Yarrowia lipolytica W29 are:  - Standard condition:  28°C, pH 5.5 - High temperature: 32°C, pH 5.5 - Low pH: 28°C, pH 3.5  This study is part of the OMICS data generation WP of CHASSY project (European Union’s Horizon 2020 grant agreement No 720824).

### Sample Protocol
Short-migration stacking gels were loaded with 15 µg of total proteins extract suspended in lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM DTT, 0.1 M TRIS-HCl pH=8 and proteases inhibitor cocktail). Bands were cut and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol 10mM, alkylated with iodoacetamide at 50 mM (final concentration), digested 3 hours at 37 °C with LysC-Protease (ThermoFisher Scientific ref. 90051) and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega ref. V511). Digested peptides were concentrated under vacuum to dryness and resuspended in loading buffer (0.08% TFA and 2% ACN) for analysis in an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Data-dependent acquisition using High Collision Dissociation mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the search engine X!Tandempipeline 3.4.4. Data filtering was set to peptide E-value < 0.05, protein log(E-value) < –2 and to a minimum of two identified peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
In proteomics, it is essential to quantify proteins in absolute terms if we wish to compare results among studies and integrate high-throughput biological data into genome-scale metabolic models. While labeling target peptides with stable isotopes allow protein abundance to be accurately quantified, the utility of this technique is constrained by the low number of quantifiable proteins that it yields. Recently, label-free shotgun proteomics has become the "gold standard" for carrying out global assessments of biological samples containing thousands of proteins. However, this tool must be further improved if we wish to accurately quantify absolute levels of proteins. Here, we used different label-free quantification techniques to estimate absolute protein abundance in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. More specifically, we evaluated the performance of seven different quantification methods, based either on spectral counting (SC) or extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC), which were applied to samples from five different proteome backgrounds. We also compared the accuracy and reproducibility of two strategies for transforming relative abundance into absolute abundance: a UPS2-based strategy and the total protein approach (TPA). This study mentions technical challenges related to UPS2 use and proposes ways of addressing them, including utilizing a smaller, more highly optimized amount of UPS2. Overall, three SC-based methods (PAI, SAF, and NSAF) yielded the best results because they struck a good balance between experimental performance and protein quantification.

### Keywords
Ups2, Yeast, Systems biology, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Micalis Institute, INRA, PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
INRAE

### Submitter
Aaron Millan Oropeza

### Lab Head
Dr Véronique Monnet
Micalis Institute, INRA, PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.


