### Accession
PXD026292

### Title
FLAG-PHF3 interactome in HEK293 cells

### Description
FLAG-hPHF3 was transiently expressed in human HEK293 cells, followed by anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation, on-bead digest and NanoLC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from a 10cm dish were harvested 48 h after transfection and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, 1x protease inhibitors, 2 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM NaF, 50 units/mL benzonase and 1 mM DTT) for 1 h at 4°C. 10% of the cleared lysate was kept as input and the rest was incubated for 2 h on a rotating wheel at 4°C with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma). Beads were washed twice with TBS and cleared lysates were added for immunoprecipitation on a rotating wheel at 4°C ON. Beads were eluted three times with 20 µL 100 mM glycine and the combined eluates were adjusted to pH 8 using 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min before adding 25 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for another 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digest was stopped by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips. NanoLC-MS analysis was performed using the UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) followed by the analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). The elution gradient started with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increased to 35% B over the next 120 min followed by a 5-min gradient to 90% B, stayed there for 5 min and decreased in 5 min back to the gradient 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. For peptide identification, the .RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). The resultant MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot 2.2.07 (Matrix Science) against the Swissprot protein sequence database, using the taxonomy human. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.03 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR using Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer.

### Data Protocol
SAINT-MS1 was used as a statistical tool to determine the probability of protein-protein interactions. Prior to analysis with SAINT-MS1 the label-free quantification data were cleaned by removing bait and common laboratory contaminants. The control (empty vector) was used simultaneously to estimate the parameters of the false interaction probability distributions. SAINT-MS1 was run for each method and fraction separately with 5000 and 10000 burn-in and sampling iterations, respectively. Protein areas were normalized to obtain a median protein ratio of one between samples. Fold changes were calculated based on these normalized protein areas.

### Publication Abstract
The C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is a regulatory hub for transcription and RNA processing. Here, we identify PHD-finger protein 3 (PHF3) as a regulator of transcription and mRNA stability that docks onto Pol II CTD through its SPOC domain. We characterize SPOC as a CTD reader domain that preferentially binds two phosphorylated Serine-2 marks in adjacent CTD repeats. PHF3 drives liquid-liquid phase separation of phosphorylated Pol II, colocalizes with Pol II clusters and tracks with Pol II across the length of genes. PHF3 knock-out or SPOC deletion in human cells results in increased Pol II stalling, reduced elongation rate and an increase in mRNA stability, with marked derepression of neuronal genes. Key neuronal genes are aberrantly expressed in Phf3 knock-out mouse embryonic stem cells, resulting in impaired neuronal differentiation. Our data suggest that PHF3 acts as a prominent effector of neuronal gene regulation by bridging transcription with mRNA decay.

### Keywords
Human, On-bead digest, Nanolc-ms analysis, Anti-flag immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria
IMBA Vienna

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Dea Slade
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria


