### Accession
PXD009826

### Title
Identification of proteins associated with the human mitochondrial degradosome

### Description
The human mitochondrial degradosome is a complex of the ribonuclease PNPase (Q8TCS8, encoded by PNPT1 gene) and RNA helicase SUV3 (Q8IYB8, encoded by SUPV3L1 gene). The aim of the project was to identify proteins which co-purify with both subunits of the degradosome. To this end we used human 293 cells stably expressing hSuv3 or PNPase with a C-terminal TAP tag or TAP tag fused to a mitochondria targeting sequence (control bait) (cell lines are described in details in (PMID: 19864255). Mitochondria were isolated from the cells, lysed and the protein extracts were subjected to affinity chromatography. Co-purified proteins were identified by mass spectrometry and their amounts were quantified by a label-free approach (MaxQuant). These experiments are part of the project “Dedicated surveillance mechanism controls G-quadruplex forming non-coding RNAs in human mitochondria”.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent replicates were carried out for all purifications. Mitochondria isolation and single-step TAP-tag purification (without chromatography on calmodulin beads) were performed as described previously (PMID: 19864255). Eluted proteins were identified using MS/MS analysis. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw). Tryptic digestion of the protein pellet in NH 4 HCO 3 buffer (with no chaotropic agents), peptide reduction and alkylation were carried out according to Kim et al. ( 26 ). The protein pellet was resuspended in 1 ml 100 mM NH 4 HCO 3 (pH 8.0) by sonication (three cycles, 20 s on/30 s off, 250 W, 4°C). Tryptic digestion was performed for 16 h at 37°C using 0.5 μg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Peptide reduction was done by incubation of the peptide mixture with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 50°C), followed by alkylation using 30 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, 23°C) in the dark and additional digestion with 0.25 μg trypsin (3 h, 37°C). The resulting peptide mixture was lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Then, 0.5 pmol of isotopically labeled Quant peptide LAADITSLY[Lys( 13 C 6 ; 15 N 2 )] was added.  MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a 160-min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS-MS 2 mode, acquiring data in the m/z range of 300–2000.

### Data Protocol
). Samples were processed and subjected to label-free quantification using MaxQuant software. Protein abundance was defined as the mean signal intensity calculated by MaxQuant software for a protein divided by its molecular weight. Enrichment was defined as the ratio of mean protein intensity measured in 3 bait purifications relative to background level (i.e., mean protein intensity in 3 mtTAP purifications). Putative degradosome-associated proteins met the following criteria: 1) were present in all purifications of hSuv3-TAP and PNP-TAP, 2) were enriched by at least 3-fold for both baits, 3) were previously suggested to be mitochondrial proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The GC skew in vertebrate mitochondrial genomes results in synthesis of RNAs that are prone to form G-quadruplexes (G4s). Such RNAs, although mostly non-coding, are transcribed at high rates and are degraded by an unknown mechanism. Here we describe a dedicated mechanism of degradation of G4-containing RNAs, which is based on cooperation between mitochondrial degradosome and quasi-RNA recognition motif (qRRM) protein GRSF1. This cooperation prevents accumulation of G4-containing transcripts in human mitochondria. In vitro reconstitution experiments show that GRSF1 promotes G4 melting that facilitates degradosome-mediated decay. Among degradosome and GRSF1 regulated transcripts we identified one that undergoes post-transcriptional modification. We show that GRSF1 proteins form a distinct qRRM group found only in vertebrates. The appearance of GRSF1 coincided with changes in the mitochondrial genome, which allows the emergence of G4-containing RNAs. We propose that GRSF1 appearance is an evolutionary adaptation enabling control of G4 RNA.

### Keywords
Pnpt1, Mitochondrial degradosome, Pnpase, Suv3, Mitochondrial rna, Supv3l1

### Affiliations
1    Laboratory of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. 2    Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
Medical University of Bialystok

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Andrzej Dziembowski
1    Laboratory of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. 2    Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.


