### Accession
PXD003755

### Title
Thermal acclimation in Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
Thermal acclimation study on Drosophila melanogaster reared at 3 different temperatures (12, 25, and 31oC). The proteomic profiles of D. melanogaster under these different temperatures were analyzed and compared using label-free tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the three temperatures three biological replicates were analyzed. Each biological replicate contained 13 male flies at 2-3 days of age (60±12 h) . From each of these replicates proteins were extracted using an optimized protocol based upon the B-PER reagent. Proteins heated at 95°C for 10 min in SDS-PAGE sample buffer supplemented with dithiothreitol (DTT). After boiling, samples loaded onto a pre-cast 4 – 15% gradient SDS-gel (BioRad). Samples were separated for 30 min at 160 V. Proteins were then digested in-gel (Shevchenko et al., 2007). Briefly, each gel lane was excised and pieces were then washed, reduced and alkylated prior tobeing digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were extracted, dried down and finally resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile (v/v). Peptides were desalted using the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The tryptic digests were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% acetonitrile (v/v).  Samples were analyzed on a  automated LC-ESI-MS/MS with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system on-line coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex ion source in a 120 min linear gradient ranging from 12% to 40 % solvent B (100% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
the raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.1.2; Cox and Mann, 2008), using label-free quantification (LFQ) feature. All other settings were left as default. Data were matched against a database containing all proteins from D. melanogaster downloaded from UniProt (accessed 6 January 2015). The generated proteingroups.txt file was imported into Perseus (v1.5.0.31) (part of the MaxQuant package), LFQ values were log 2-transformed and filtered for contaminants and reverse hits before being subjected to statistical analysis. Differences in the expression levels of single proteins between the three temperature regimes were investigated using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a multiple testing correction using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05. The individual P-values between groups were calculated using a Student ’ s t-test and the statistically significant P-values (P ≤ 0.05) were corrected for multiple testing using the permutation-based FDR of 0.05. Hierarchical clustering in Perseus (v1.5.0.31) was performed with Pearson correlation distance with average linkage after Z-scoring of LFQ values.

### Publication Abstract
Physiological adaptation through acclimation is one way to cope with temperature changes. Biochemical studies on acclimation responses in ectotherms have so far mainly investigated consequences of short-term acclimation at the adult stage and focussed on adaptive responses. Here, we assessed the consequences of rearing Drosophila melanogasterat low (12&#xb0;C), benign (25&#xb0;C) and high (31&#xb0;C) temperatures. We assessed cold and heat tolerance and obtained detailed proteomic profiles of flies from the three temperatures. The proteomic profiles provided a holistic understanding of the underlying biology associated with both adaptive and non-adaptive temperature responses. Results show strong benefits and costs across tolerances: rearing at low temperature increased adult cold tolerance and decreased adult heat tolerance and vice versa with development at high temperatures. In the proteomic analysis, we were able to identify and quantify a large number of proteins compared with previous studies on ectotherms (1440 proteins across all replicates and rearing regimes), enabling us to extend the proteomic approach using enrichment analyses. This gave us detailed information on individual proteins, as well as pathways affected by rearing temperature, pinpointing potential mechanisms responsible for the strong costs and benefits of rearing temperature on functional phenotypes. Several well-known heat shock proteins, as well as proteins not previously associated with thermal stress, were among the differentially expressed proteins. Upregulation of proteasome proteins was found to be an important adaptive process at high-stress rearing temperatures, and occurs at the expense of downregulation of basal metabolic functions.

### Keywords
Termal acclimation, Drosophila, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free

### Affiliations
Aalborg University, Section for Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Henrik Kjeldal

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Aalborg University, Section for Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Denmark


