### Accession
PXD001414

### Title
Tomato nuclear proteome reveals the involvement of specific E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes in fruit ripening

### Description
Fruits are unique to flowering plants and play a central role in seed maturation and dispersal. Molecular dissection of fruit ripening has received considerable interest because of the biological and dietary significance of fruit. To better understand the regulatory mechanisms underlying fruit ripening, we report here the first comprehensive analysis of the nuclear proteome in tomato fruits. Nuclear proteins were isolated from tomatoes in different stages of ripening, and subjected to iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification) analysis. The proteins that changed abundance across ripening stages are involved in various cellular processes. We additionally evaluated the changes in the nuclear proteome in the ripening-deficient mutant ripening inhibitor (rin) carrying a mutation in the transcription factor RIN. A set of proteins were identified and particular attention was paid to SlUBC32 and PSMD2, the components of ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Through chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel mobility shift assay, we provide evidence that RIN directly bound to the promoters of SlUBC32 and PSMD2. Moreover, loss of RIN function affected protein ubiquitination in nuclei. SlUBC32 encodes an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme and genome-wide survey of the E2 gene family in tomatoes identified five more E2s as the direct targets of RIN. Two E2s were demonstrated to be involved in the regulation of fruit ripening based on virus-induced gene silencing assays. Our results uncover the novel function of protein ubiquitination, identifying specific E2s as regulator in fruit ripening. These findings contribute to the unraveling of the gene regulatory networks that control fruit ripening.

### Sample Protocol
The nuclei isolated from wild-type and rin mutant fruits at orange ripening stage were lysed by sonification on ice in IP buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 50 μM MG132, 1 mM PMSF, and the protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roch, http://www.roche.com/). The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant containing the ubiquitinated proteins were immunoprecipitated with 40 μL of Ub (P4D1)-agrose slurry (Santa Cruz, http://www.scbt.com/) overnight at 4°C. The agrose-beads were then collected in spin columns (Pierce Biotechnology) and washed with IP buffer twice. After elution from the beads with 0.1 M glycine-HCl (pH 2.2), the proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as describe above. The resulting peptides were collected, dried under vacuum, and redissolved with 0.1% formic acid for NanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired on a TripleTOF 5600 plus instrument (AB SCIEX) operating in SWATH mode. The same LC system and settings as for iTRAQ analysis described above were used. The MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 350–1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms. The product ion MS/MS were collected in the range of 100–1500 m/z with an accumulation time of 100 ms. Using an isolation width of 26 Da (containing 1 Da for the window overlap), a set of 32 overlapping windows was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350–1250 Da. The rolling collision energy and the high sensitivity mode were used. All of the data obtained were consolidated into a spectral library using ProteinPilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX) and the Solanum lycopersicum protein database ITAG2.4_proteins_full_desc.fasta. The library was imported into Peakview software (AB SCIEX), which correlated both peptide identification and LC retention times to extract specific MS/MS transition data for each peptide with a confidence above 95%. The top 5 abundant ion transitions from the top ranked peptides for each protein were applied to retrieve quantitative data (in counts/s) using a 0.05 Da extraction width over a ± 5 min LC time and visualized with MarkerView (AB SCIEX). For each individual sample, the same peptide transitions were summed into peptides, which were then summed into proteins. After normalizing using Total Area Sums, the extracted ions for selected proteins were analyzed using t-test within Markerview (AB SCIEX) with three technical replicates for each sample. A P-value less than 0.05 was considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleus, Ubiquitination, Proteomics, Fruit ripening, Mads-rin, Tomato

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Guozheng Qin

### Lab Head
Dr gzqin@ibcas.ac.cn  
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


