### Accession
PXD033058

### Title
Label-free proteomics test on TGF-β1-induced human mesothelial cell (Met5A) treated with or without Fushen Granule

### Description
Fushen Granule (FSG), a Chinese medicinal formular, was clinically used to improve the peritoneal dialysis (PD) efficiency in ESRD patients received PD treatment. However, its mechanisms of anti-fibrotic effect in peritoneal fibrosis (PF) has not been studied yet. In this work, we used TGF-β1-stimulated MeT5A cells to mimic the process of PF in vitro, and Label-free proteomics and bioinformatics analysis were used to explored the underlying targets and pathways of FSG on TGF-β1-treated MeT5A cells

### Sample Protocol
MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to processed the obtained MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo sapiens database concatenated with reverse decoy database. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. Label Free was selected for quantification.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was obtained from the UniProt-GOA database and the InterProScan soft. The DEPs were classified based on biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The signaling pathway enrichment analysis was presented using KEGG online service tools KAAS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human mesothelial cell, Fushen granule, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
First Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Kang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hongtao Yang
First Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


