### Accession
PXD007887

### Title
HAX1-interactome in cervical cancer cell line (HeLa)

### Description
HAX1 is a 32-kDa protein of unknown structure, involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell migration and calcium homeostasis. It was also shown to bind mRNA. Scarcity of structural elements and the presence of a disordered region, inferred from HAX1 sequence, suggests that HAX1 is intrinsically disordered, and may have many protein-protein interactions. So far about 40 different proteins were characterized as HAX1 protein partners. In the present work, applying immunoaffinity chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry, we identified new candidates for HAX1 binding partners in cervical carcinoma cells. More than a half of these newly identified proteins represent RNA-binding proteins. There is also a big group of proteins, mostly mitochondrial, involved in cellular metabolism. These results imply that HAX1 has more protein partners than hitherto described. Subsequent analysis of these interactions may shed some light into molecular mechanisms of HAX1 functions, especially its involvement in mRNA processing and its role in protection against oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis. Approximately 4 x 10^6 cells were used per one IP experiment. The experiment was performed in triplicate. Cells were washed with 10 ml of ice cold phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), detergent permeabilized with lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, Nonidet P-40 0.75%, protease inhibitors: cOmplete EDTA-free, Roche) and harvested using cell scraper. Cell lysate was centrifuged for 18000g, 15min, 4ºC. Supernatant was collected and subjected to immunoaffinity chromatography via magnetic bead extraction. 10µg of anti-HAX1 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or, for negative control, anti-IgG rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling) were coupled to dynabeads protein A (1.5mg, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4h, 4ºC. Immunoprecipitation was carried out overnight, at 4ºC,with constant agitation. Beads with antigen-antibody complexes were collected using magnetic separation method and washed 3 times in wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4). Proteins bound to beads were suspended in 50µl 100mM NH4HCO3. 0.5M TCEP (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added to the sample for a final concentration of 5mM and incubated at 60ºC for 1h. To block reduced cysteine residues, 200mM MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added at a final concentration of 10mM, and the sample was subjected to incubation at room temperature for 10 minutes. For digestion, trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 vol./vol. ratio and the sample was incubated at 37ºC overnight. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was used to inactivate trypsin. Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS for peptide identification.   MS settings. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a QExactive hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a nanoAcquity LC system (Waters). Data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch mode was used for acquisition, and peptide fragmentation was achieved by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD). Spectrometer parameters were as follows: polarity mode, positive; capillary voltage, 2kV. A sample was first applied to the nanoACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column (Waters) using water containing 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase. Next, the peptide mixture was transferred to the nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (Waters, 75μm inner diameter; 250mm long) and an ACN gradient (5–30% over 120min) was applied in the presence of 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250nL/min and eluted directly to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. Each LC run was preceded by a blank run in order to avoid sample carry-over between the analyses.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS raw data files were processed to peak lists with Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and submitted to the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). The databasewas composed of SwissProt (release 2017.04) Homo sapiensprotein records, SwissProt Oryctolagus cuniculus IgG entries, and contaminant proteins retrieved from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html). In total, the database included 20278 target sequences, and the same number of reversed decoy records. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme specificity: semitrypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages: 1; protein mass: unrestricted; parent ions mass error tolerance: ± 5 ppm after recalibration; fragment ions mass error tolerance: ± 0.01 Da after recalibration; fixed modifications: Methylthio C (45.98772 Da); variable modifications: Oxidation M (15.99492 Da). The statistical significance of identified peptides was determined using a target/decoy database search approach and a previously described procedure that provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (PSM) in the data set. Only PSMs with q-values ≤ 0.01 were regarded as confidently identified. Furthermore, all the peptide sequences matched to database entries representing contaminant proteins were rejected. Proteins represented by less than two peptides were excluded from further analysis. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from other proteins were filtered out from the results, and those matching the same set of peptides were grouped together into clusters (metaproteins). Mascot results processing was performed using MScan, a software tool available at http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan.

### Publication Abstract
HCLS1-associated protein X-1 (HAX1) is a multifunctional protein involved in many cellular processes, including apoptosis, cell migration and calcium homeostasis, but its mode of action still remains obscure. Multiple HAX1 protein partners have been identified, but they are involved in many distinct pathways, form different complexes and do not constitute a coherent group. By characterizing HAX1 protein interactome using targeted approach, we attempt to explain HAX1 multiple functions and its role in the cell. Presented analyses indicate that HAX1 interacts weakly with a wide spectrum of proteins and its interactome tends to be cell-specific, which conforms to a profile of intrinsically disordered protein (IDP). Moreover, we have identified a mitochondrial subset of HAX1 protein partners and preliminarily characterized its involvement in the cellular response to oxidative stress and aggregation.

### Keywords
Hax1, Hela, Interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Radioelectronics and Multimedia Technology
Warsaw University of Technology
Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology; Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Tymon Rubel

### Lab Head
Dr Ewa Grzybowska
Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology; Warsaw, Poland


