### Accession
PXD020613

### Title
Novel inhibitor(s) of NO-production for microglia and macrophages

### Description
We aimed to identify novel therapeutic compounds (small molecules) to target microglia and macrophage NO production. We set up a screen using a library of 30.000 drug-like compounds in collaboration with the FEM. Using a microglia cell line and primary microglia and macrophages, we identified one compound that inhibits NO production after LPS stimulation. We have used this compound successfully in several in vitro and in vivo experiments, including in an animal model for stroke. The compound was tagged with a biotinylated linker in order to isolate the compound using strepdavidine beads after incubation with cells or with lysate to identify proteins that the compound was bound to.

### Sample Protocol
BV-2 cells were seeded and incubated with the compound for 30 Minutes. One part was stimulated with LPS for 24hours. Cells were harvested and lysed and processed for massspectroscopy. Samples were measured by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) connected to an EASY-nLC system (Thermo). A volume of 2 microliters sample was injected and a 45 min gradient (5 to 55% acetonitrile) was applied. The peptides were separated on an in-house prepared nano-LC column (0.074 mm x 250 mm, 3 µm Reprosil C18, Dr Maisch GmbH) using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS acquisition was operated at an MS1 resolution of 60,000 and a scan range from 350 to 1800 m/z. For data-dependent MS2 acquisition a cycle time of 1 s was used and precursors were selected for fragmentation in data-dependent mode using an MS2 resolution of 15,000, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z. MIPS filter was set to peptides, intensity threshold to 5e4, charge states were filtered from 2-6, dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec and normalized collision energy was specified to 28.

### Data Protocol
For analysis the MaxQuant software package version 1.6.3.4 (Cox et al., 2008) was used. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine, acetylated N-termini and deamidation on asparagine as well as glutamine as variable modifications. An FDR of 0.01 was applied for peptides and proteins and database search was performed using a mouse Uniprot database (July 2018). MS intensities were normalized by the iBAQ algorithm while using the match-between-runs feature within each sample group. Further data analysis was done using R. After removal of reverse hits, potential contaminants as well as proteins that have been only identified by a modification from the protein list, a filter was applied, requiring at least four valid values in one of the groups to be compared. The resulting list was used for imputation using a column-wise Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.2 and a downshift of 1.8. Log2-transformed iBAQ-values among the replicates of the groups to be related were used for comparison applying a moderated t-test. Proteins with a Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted p-value smaller than 0.1 (i.e. 10% FDR) were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Exploris 480, Compound ms, Small molecule, No-synthesis

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
Charite Ophthalmology / MDC Cellular Neuroscience

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Wolf , Helmut Kettenmann (Charite Ophthalmology/MDC Cellular Neuroscience).
Charite Ophthalmology / MDC Cellular Neuroscience


