### Accession
PXD018007

### Title
tRNA binding to KEOPS human protein complex

### Description
N6-theronylcarbomyl adenosine (t6A) is a universal tRNA posttranscriptional modification that promotes translation fidelity and is therefore required for the fitness of virtually all living cells. Kae1, the t6A modifying enzyme in eukaryotes and archea, resides within the KEOPS complex with three auxiliary subunits of unknown function namely Cgi121, Bud32 and Pcc1. Through biochemical and X-ray crystallographic analyses we show that Cgi121 functions to recruit substrate tRNA to KEOPS via its universal 3’-CCA tail. Incorporation of the Cgi121-tRNA structure into a composite model of KEOPS reveals an extended tRNA contact surface that surprisingly spans all four subunits. Comprehensive mutational and functional analyses validate the relevance of the extended tRNA-binding surface in vivo and in vivo. Together this work provides insight into the t6A catalytic cycle and its regulation through the cooperative action of all four KEOPS subunit through direct contacts with tRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide Map Proteins were digested under quench conditions, pH 2.5 4°C, with recombinant Nepenthesin II for 3 minutes. Digest was loaded 200um x 2.5cm trap column packed with 3.6µm Jupiter C18 beads. Peptides were separated on a self packed ~7cm x  150µm C18 column (New Objective Picofrit, Phenomenex Jupiter C18 3.6um beads) with a 10 minute 10-40% acetonitrile gradient (1000 nL/min).  Separation was done at 2°C (with the trap in an offline cooler and the column in our Nano-HX cooler). Data-dependent acquisition was performed on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600 triggering on the top 10 peaks. A recursive analysis was completed for the four proteins in the KEOPS complex  HX-MS KEOPS complex (+/- tRNA) was labelled with 45% D2O (buffered with 20mM Hepes pH 7, 100mM NaCl and 2mM DTT) at room temperature for 300 seconds. After labelling the sample was quenched (2.5pH, 7°C) and digested with recombinant Nepenthesin II for 2 minutes at 7°C and MS1 data collected on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600. Four replicates were run for each state.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Map Runs were searched using HXpipe against a limited database of protein sequences (KEOPS proteins plus contaminants), parameterized with non-specific digestion, peptide tolerance ±15ppm, MS/MS tolerance ±0.06 Da.  All other settings used at default values.    Differential HX Deuterium uptake values were determined using HX-DEAL in Mass Spec Studio (www.msstudio.ca). Statistical differences in deuterium uptake were determined with the HX statistical analysis package in Mass Spec Studio.

### Publication Abstract
The KEOPS complex, which is conserved across archaea and eukaryotes, is composed of four core subunits; Pcc1, Kae1, Bud32 and Cgi121. KEOPS is crucial for the fitness of all organisms examined. In humans, pathogenic mutations in KEOPS genes lead to Galloway-Mowat syndrome, an autosomal-recessive disease causing childhood lethality. Kae1 catalyzes the universal and essential tRNA modification N<sup>6</sup>-threonylcarbamoyl adenosine, but the precise roles of all other KEOPS subunits remain an enigma. Here we show using structure-guided studies that Cgi121 recruits tRNA to KEOPS by binding to its 3'&#xa0;CCA tail. A composite model of KEOPS bound to tRNA reveals that all KEOPS subunits form an extended tRNA-binding surface that we have validated in vitro and in vivo to mediate the interaction with the tRNA substrate and its modification. These findings provide a framework for understanding the inner workings of KEOPS and delineate why all KEOPS subunits are essential.

### Keywords
Trna, Keops, Hx-ms

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary Canada
Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Dave Schriemer

### Lab Head
Dr David Christopher Schriemer
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary Canada


