### Accession
PXD024766

### Title
Site-specific Identification and Quantification of Protein Glutathionylation under Ischemic Stress

### Description
Ischemia or ischemic reperfusion is well-known for its contribution to heart diseases. During ischemia and reperfusion, a flux of nutrients and oxygen to cardiomyocytes is altered, which causes a burst of ROS from mitochondria and other enzymes. Elevated levels of ROS can cause oxidative modifications of cardiac proteins, such as protein glutathionylation. Despite previous extensive studies, proteomic identification of glutathionylated proteins in cardiomyocytes under altered levels of nutrients and oxygen has been relatively limited. We have applied our clickable glutathione approach to HL-1 cardiomyocyte cell line under metabolic alterations of glucose, oxygen, and fatty acids to detect and identify proteins undergoing glutathionylation.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy and light azido alanine labeled cells were subjected to cardiac alterations of glucose, fatty acid and oxygen were lysed, combined and carried out the click reaction with biotin-DADPS-alkyne. Proteins were incubated with streptavidin-agarose beads. Protein on beads were digested by incubating with Trypsin/Lys-C. Peptides on beads were eluted by incubating with 10% formic acid.  Eluates were combined, lyophilized, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were seperated by UHPLC reverse phase chromatography with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system and introduced into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. MS1 scan range was set to 375-1600 m/z at 240,000 resolution. For MS2 scans, peptides with +2 and +3 charges are fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) at 32% collision energy and peptides with charges +3 to +7 are fragment by electron transfer dissociation (ETD) with calibrated charge dependent parameters. The cycle time was set to 2.5 seconds over 90 min gradient and turn on the Dynamic Exclusion. Raw files were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) against Uniprot mouse database and a contaminant database. n-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. For modifications use S-Glutathionylation of cysteine with light azido-glutathione (addition of 444) or heavy azido-glutathione (addition of 448). Peptide spectral matches were accepted at a 1% false discovery rate as determined by reverse database search. Peptides were quantified using Skyline software (version 20.2). Spectral libraries were built by importing all msms.txt files to Skyline from MaxQuant. FASTA database (Uniprot mouse) and raw files were imported to Skyline for peak picking. Peptide list was refined to remove peptides without glutathionylation. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm and retention time window to ±2.0 min to find corresponding peptide peaks in all runs without MS/MS identification during MS1 filtering. For accurate peak picking individual peptide peaks, inspected manually for top three isotope peaks in the chromatographic traces. Peptides with isotope dot product (idotp) score lower than 0.8 were removed. Manual integration was applied to have idotp values higher than 0.8 when required. Ratios of heavy over light labeled peptide areas were calculated automatically by the software. From three replicate values peptides identified more than two times with idotp score higher than 0.8 were assigned with median RH/L values.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemia reperfusion injury contributes to adverse cardiovascular diseases in part by producing a burst of reactive oxygen species that induce oxidations of many muscular proteins. Glutathionylation is one of the major protein cysteine oxidations that often serve as molecular mechanisms behind the pathophysiology associated with ischemic stress. Despite the biological significance of glutathionylation in ischemia reperfusion, identification of specific glutathionylated cysteines under ischemic stress has been limited. In this report, we have analyzed glutathionylation under oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) or repletion of nutrients after OGD (OGD/R) by using a clickable glutathione approach that specifically detects glutathionylated proteins. Our data find that palmitate availability induces a global level of glutathionylation and decreases cell viability during OGD/R. We have then applied a clickable glutathione-based proteomic quantification strategy, which enabled the identification and quantification of 249 glutathionylated cysteines in response to palmitate during OGD/R in the HL-1 cardiomyocyte cell line. The subsequent bioinformatic analysis found 18 glutathionylated cysteines whose genetic variants are associated with muscular disorders. Overall, our data report glutathionylated cysteines under ischemic stress that may contribute to adverse outcomes or muscular disorders.

### Keywords
Gutathionylation, Cardiomyocytes, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America (Lab head)
wayne state university

### Submitter
Maheeshi Yapa Abeywardana

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Hoon Ahn
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America (Lab head)


