### Accession
PXD042261

### Title
Interaction of Cystatin6 with Legumain-beta in Arabidopsis seeds

### Description
Co-IPs to confirm the domain-specific interaction of the Arabidopsis protease inhibitor Cystatin 6 with the cystein protease legumain-beta (aka vacuolar processing enzyme (VPE) beta)-

### Sample Protocol
AtCYT6 CoIPs For co-immunoprecipitation assays we purchased rabbit sera (BioGenes, Berlin, Germany) of animals treated with injections of AtCYT6-NTD or AtCYT6-CTD separately. The antibodies raised against each AtCYT6 domain were purified from the sera using CNBr-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) with immobilized recombinant AtCYT6-NTD and AtCYT6-CTD according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The integrity of the purified antibodies was tested in western blot assays against AtCYT6-NTD and AtCYT6-CTD, and each pool of purified polyclonal antibodies displayed high sensitivity and specificity to its respective antigen after this step, so we moved on to the co-immunoprecipitation assay with plant material. To that end, we used rec-Protein G-Sepharose 4B Conjugate beads (Invitrogen, Camarillo, USA) cross-linked to the polyclonal antibodies with dimethylpimelidate-dihydrochlorid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to prevent leakage of antibodies to the supernatant in further steps. The empty beads, i.e. Sepharose beads conjugated with protein G that were not cross-linked to antibodies, constituted an important control and are referred as bait 1. The beads that were cross-linked to antibodies are bait 2. For the co-immunoprecipitation using antibodies loaded with their recombinant antigen as baits, antibodies freshly cross-linked to the beads were further incubated with recombinantly expressed antigens, i.e. AtCYT6-NTD or AtCYT6-CTD, in buffer composed of 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5 and 100 mM NaCl for 1 h at 4 ºC. The unbound antigens were washed away with multiple centrifugations (at 4,000 g at 4 ºC) with elimination of the supernatant and resuspension in buffer HEPES 50 mM and NaCl 100 mM pH 7.5 until the UV signal at 280 nm was stable and null. This corresponds to the bait 3.  The preparation of the plant material followed with the maceration of 100 mg of A. thaliana seeds in liquid nitrogen until a fine powder was obtained. Immediately after grinding, 0.6 mL of incubation buffer (citric acid 100 mM and NaCl 250 mM pH 5.5 with inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) dilution according to the instructions of the manufacturer)) was added and thoroughly mixed for 10 minutes at 4 ºC. The suspension was centrifuged three times at 13,000 g for 15 minutes at 4 ºC with change of tubes in between. The resulting supernatant was split in three tubes with the same volume of material, and to each tube either bait 1, 2 or 3 was added and incubated at 4 ºC with gentle and constant rotation for 1 hour. After that, the beads were washed thoroughly with incubation buffer in multiple cycles of centrifugation and discard of supernatant until the UV signal at 280 nm of the supernatant was stable and null. The co-precipitated proteins were eluted with 1x Laemmli/SDS sample buffer without DTT at 37 °C for 15 min in a shaker with 750 rpm. Then, we performed an in-gel digestion with trypsin. The eluted samples from co-immunoprecipitation assays with bait 1, 2 and 3 were loaded onto an acrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE and allowed to run 1 - 2 cm into the separation gel. All the area supposedly containing proteins was cut out, reduced to pieces of approximately 1 mm x 1 mm and collected in low binding tubes. The gel pieces of each tube were washed with buffer A (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and then with buffer B (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50 % acetonitrile). The proteins trapped within the gel pieces were reduced with reduction buffer (buffer A with 20 mM DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C, alkylated with alkylation buffer (buffer A with 10 mM iodoacetamide) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and then washed with buffer A and B. The drying of the gel pieces started with shrinking by addition of 100% acetonitrile and finished with complete drying in a SpeedVac at 50 °C until the gel pieces were fully dried. For trypsin digestion, the gel pieces were hydrated again with a solution of 12.5 ng/μL trypsin in digestion buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 % acetonitrile and 5 mM CaCl2) and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The supernatants containing the peptides were transferred to new tubes and 100 % acetonitrile was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. The acetonitrile supernatant was combined with the supernatant previously collected and the resulting sample was dried in a SpeedVac at 50 °C until a minimum volume was reached. The volume of the samples was adjusted to 25-50 μL and pH adjusted to < 3 with 2.5 % formic acid before desalting the samples with C18 double-layer stage tips (Empore Octadecyl C18, Supelco, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis  Samples were analyzed on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC, Thermo) equipped with with a µPAC reverse phase trap and analytical (50 cm) columns (Thermo) operated at a column temperature of 40 °C. Peptides were eluted with a binary gradient from 5–32.5% B for 80 min (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) and a total runtime of 2 h per sample. Spectra were acquired in data-dependent data acquisition mode using a high-resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker, Bremen, Germany) as described described by Soh et al Anal Chem 2021.  Mass spectrometry data analysis Tandem mass spectra were analyzed with the MaxQuant software package, v.2.0.3.0, with the Uniprot Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (release 2019_03) with appended list of common contaminants included in MaxQuant. Searches considered tryptic digest with up to 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Standard settings for Bruker QTOF data were used with standard settings for protein identification including PSM and protein FDR<0.01. LFQ was enabled with minimal LFQ count was set to 1 for label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atcys6, Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Protease, Interaction, Atlegbeta, Inhibitor, Atvpebeta

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Forschungszentrum Jülich ZEA-3 Analytics

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Jülich ZEA-3 Analytics


