### Accession
PXD031445

### Title
An Investigation of the Altered Textural Property in Woody Breast Myopathy Using an Integrative Omics Approach

### Description
The functionality/integrity of sarcoplasmic reticulum was compared between normal vs. myopathic woody breast tissues in Gallus gallus. Shotgun MS profiling of protein expression revealed an upregulation of calcium transport proteins and a downregulation of proteins responsible for calcium release.  Findings supported a wider omics model for the underlying causes and effects of woody breast myopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Prepare sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane fraction by centrifugation on sucrose pad, dissolve in 8M urea, TCEP, IAA, dilute to 2 M, trypsin/LysC, C18 SPE.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.6.10.4 using LFQ algorithm;  27,542 Gallus gallus sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 01/19/20; oxidation of Met, N-terminal acetylation, and cyclization of Gln to pyro-glutamate.

### Publication Abstract
Woody breast (WB) is a myopathy observed in broiler <i>Pectoralis major</i> (PM) characterized by its tough and rubbery texture with greater level of calcium content. The objective of this study was to investigate the functionality/integrity of WB sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), which may contribute to the elevated calcium content observed in WB and other factors that may influence WB texture. Fourteen Ross line broiler PM [7 severe WB and 7 normal (N)] were selected, packaged, and frozen at -20&#xb0;C at 8&#x2009;h postmortem from a commercial processing plant. Samples were used to measure pH, sarcomere length, proteolysis, calpain activity, collagenase activity, collagen content, collagen crosslinks density, and connective tissue peak transitional temperature. Exudate was also collected from each sample to evaluate free calcium concentration. The SR fraction of the samples was separated and utilized for proteomic and lipidomic analysis. The WB PM had a higher pH, shorter sarcomeres, lower % of intact troponin-T, more autolyzed &#x3bc;/m calpain, more activated collagenase, greater collagen content, greater mature collagen crosslinks density, and higher connective tissue peak transitional temperature than the N PM (<i>p&#x2009;&#x2264;</i> 0.05). Exudate from WB PM had higher levels of free calcium than those from N PM (<i>p&#x2009;&lt;</i> 0.05). Proteomics data revealed an upregulation of calcium transport proteins and a downregulation of proteins responsible for calcium release (<i>p&#x2009;&lt;</i> 0.05) in WB SR. Interestingly, there was an upregulation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and cholinesterase exhibited a 7.6-fold increase in WB SR (<i>p&#x2009;&lt;</i> 0.01). Lipidomics data revealed WB SR had less relative % of phosphatidylcholine (PC) and more lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC; <i>p&#x2009;&lt;</i> 0.05). The results indicated that upregulation of calcium transport proteins and downregulation of calcium-release proteins in WB SR may be the muscle's attempt to regulate this proposed excessive signaling of calcium release due to multiple factors, such as upregulation of PLA2 resulting in PC hydrolysis and presence of cholinesterase inhibitors in the system prolonging action potential. In addition, the textural abnormality of WB may be the combined effects of shorter sarcomere length and more collagen with greater crosslink density being deposited in the broiler PM.

### Keywords
Calcium signalling, Woody breast myopathy in gallus gallus, Maxquant, Sarcoplasmic reticulum, Dda shotgun profiling on fusion ms

### Affiliations
Oklahoma State University
Dept. Animal Sciences and Industry Kansas State University

### Submitter
Steven Hartson

### Lab Head
Dr Michael D. Chao
Dept. Animal Sciences and Industry Kansas State University


