### Accession
PXD023859

### Title
Sex differences in the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens proteome at baseline and following nicotine exposure

### Description
Sex differences in behaviors relevant to nicotine addiction have been observed in rodent models and human subjects. Behavioral, imaging and epidemiological studies also suggest underlying sex differences in mesolimbic dopamine signaling pathways. In this study we evaluated the proteome in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and nucleus accumbens (NAc) shell in male and female mice. Experimental groups included two mouse strains (C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6J) at baseline, a sub-chronic, rewarding regimen of nicotine in C3H/HeJ mice, and chronic nicotine administration and withdrawal in C57BL/6J mice. Isobaric labeling with a TMT 10-plex system, sample fractionation, and tandem mass spectrometry were used to quantify changes in protein abundance. Similar or greater numbers of differentially regulated proteins were found between sexes at baseline in C3H/HeJ or C57BL/6J mice than within sexes following their respective regimen of nicotine administration. Despite differences by sex, strain, and nicotine exposure parameters, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32, Ppp1r1b) were repeatedly identified as significantly altered proteins, especially in the VTA. Further, network analyses showed sex- and nicotine-dependent regulation of a number of signaling pathways, including dopaminergic signaling. Sub-chronic nicotine exposure in female mice increased proteins related to dopaminergic signaling in the NAc shell but decreased them in the VTA, whereas the opposite pattern was observed in male mice. In contrast, dopaminergic signaling pathways were similarly upregulated in both male and female VTA after chronic nicotine and withdrawal. Overall, this study identifies significant sex differences in the proteome of the mesolimbic system, at baseline and after nicotine reward or withdrawal, which may help explain differential trajectories and susceptibility to nicotine addiction in males and females.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 Proteomics sample preparation by protein extraction, digestion, labeling, and pooling  Mouse tissue punches were lysed in fresh lysis buffer (RIPA buffer, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, containing 1X PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor [Roche] and 1X cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]) and processed as previously described (Tan et al. 2017). A BCA protein concentration assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) was performed and confirmed by running a short SDS gel with BSA standards stained with Coomassie blue. Protein (50 g) for each sample then underwent acetone precipitation, reduction, alkylation, and trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) digestion overnight at 37ºC, then quenching with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. RP C18 cartridges (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) were used to desalt peptides, after which samples were dried with speed-vac. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific; see also Figure 1). A label efficiency test was performed on 1/20th of each sample prior to equally mixing the 10 channels (8 samples and 2 pooled controls consisting of equal ratios of each of the 8 samples used in each run), then samples were dried prior to fractionation and analysis.   2.6 High-pH reversed-phase fractionation and SPS-MS3 TMT data acquisition  Fractionation and TMT data acqusition were performed as previously described (Mervosh et al. 2018). Briefly, high-pH reversed-phase C18 peptide fractionation was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC H-class system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) equipped with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 m, 2.1 mm x 50 mm). Elution was performed as previously described (Mervosh et al. 2018), with a flowrate of 0.3 mL/min and gradient of  2% of mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10) to 37% mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium acetate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) in 19.8 min. In total 60 fractions were collected, pooled into 5 fractions, dried, and reconstituted in loading buffer (0.2% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water).   RP-LC-MS/MS/MS was performed at the Yale/Keck MS & Proteomics Resource with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) as described (Mervosh et al. 2018). SPS-MS3 scanning was performed as described previously (Mervosh et al. 2018), except that the maximum injection time was set to 60 msec, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for a duration of 30 sec for the full scan. CID-MS fragmentation isolation mode was set to quadrupole and isolation width was set to 1.6 m/z. MS3 scans were produced with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) for the top 10 fragment ions for each peptide MS2 and were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. The maximum injection time was set to 120 msec and automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 1 × 105.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (MaxQuant, RRID:SCR_014485) version 1.6.1.0 using the default settings unless otherwise specified, similar to a process described previously (Sowers et al. 2019). The peptide spectrum match and a protein false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% with one unique peptide were required for protein identification. MS/MS spectra were matched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (UniProtKB, RRID:SCR_004426) with canonical and isoform sequences.  These search results were exported as text files, along with their TMT reporter ion intensities. Three normalization steps were implemented as described (Plubell et al. 2017; Robinson and Oshlack 2010) using in-house R scripts in RStudio (RStudio, RRID:SCR_000432) version 1.3.1093. Each experiment (i.e. sub-chronic and chronic nicotine administrations) consisted of two TMT 10-plex runs with two biological replicates of each experimental group (sex × treatment) and two pooled channels of equal ratios of the 8 experimental channels within the TMT run. First, data were normalized within each TMT 10-plex experiment to account for small variations in sampling loading and labeling efficiency. To accomplish this first normalization, a global scaling factor was applied to the total ion reporter intensity of each channel such that each channel was adjusted to the average total intensity across all ten channels. A second normalization step called “trimmed means of M values” (TMM), originally developed for RNA-seq data (Robinson and Oshlack 2010), was used to align the centers of intensity distributions across samples within each TMT experiment. This provided robust normalization that accounts for differences in overall library size across samples, which can skew detection of differentially expressed proteins (Robinson and Oshlack 2010; Branson and Freitas 2016). Third, the data were normalized across TMT experiments (batch correction) using “internal reference scaling” (IRS; Plubell et al. 2017; Mansuri et al. 2020) for chronic VTA or Limma for sub-chronic VTA, sub-chronic NAc, and chronic NAc due to higher variability of data in the latter datasets. IRS uses reporter ion intensities from the two pooled sample reference channels within each TMT experiment to create scaling factors for each protein in the 8 experimental channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nicotine exposure, Nac, Vta, Mouse, Sex

### Affiliations
Associate Research scientist
Charles B. G. Murphy Professor of Psychiatry Department of Psychiatry New haven Ct USA

### Submitter
Mohammad Shahid Mansuri

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Nairn
Charles B. G. Murphy Professor of Psychiatry Department of Psychiatry New haven Ct USA


