### Accession
PXD031147

### Title
Comparing two acetification profiles from natural raw materials: a quantitative approach in Komagataeibacter europaeus

### Description
The present work aims to compare two acetification profiles coming from the same starter culture but using different raw materials. For this purpose, the composition and natural behavior of the microbiota present throughout both processes were compared employing a metaproteomic analysis and, especially, focusing on the protein profile of K. europaeus from anexhaustive quantitative approach. A comparison of vinegar profiles using two natural raw materials (fine wine and craft beer) under a strategy that employs a submerged culture and a semi-continuous operating mode could improve the current knowledge about the influence of the raw materials on the organoleptic properties and quality of industrially elaborated vinegars.

### Sample Protocol
Two different alcoholic substrates were used as fermentation media, a dry fine wine from the Montilla-Moriles region (Bodegas Alvear S.A., Montilla, Córdoba, Spain) and a craft beer obtained from a medium containing, roughly, half and half between maple syrup and muscovado sugar (Mahou-San Miguel, Córdoba, Spain). The starter culture consisted of a mixed broth coming from a fully active acetification process making alcohol vinegar, concretely, harvested from the end of the ethanol exhausting phase. Acetification cycles were carried out in a fully automated 8 L Frings bioreactor (Heinrich Frings GmbH & Co., KG, Bonn, Germany) working in a semi-continuous operating mode. Each cycle is started by a loading phase that replenishes the reactor with a fresh medium to the working volume (8 L) without exceeding a preset ethanol concentration of 5% (v/v). Then, an exhausting stage occurs depleting ethanol in the culture broth to a preset concentration of 1.0-1.5% (v/v). Finally, 50% ofthe volume is fast unloaded and the remaining content is used as inoculum of the next cycle.  Sampling was performed at two relevant times of the acetification cycle: at the end of theloading phase (EL), when final working volume or preset ethanol concentration of 5% (v/v)are reached, whichever occurs first; and just before the unloading phase, at the end of theethanol exhaustion (UL).   Vinegar samples were harvested by directly unloading a volume of 300 mL from the pilot acetator, dividing it into six fractions of 50 mL each, and putting them in centrifuge tubes on ice. Cells were separated by centrifugation and then, twice cleaned up using cold sterile distilled water; the resulting pellets were stored at −80 °C. Then, cell extracts werebroken by several cycles using glass beads and sonication after adding extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets). The protein fraction was precipitated, vacuum dried, solubilized, and its concentration was quantified by Bradford (1976) assays. A volume of each protein sample containing 50 µg was injected into LC-MS/MS analysis at Research Support Central Service (SCAI), University of Córdoba, Spain. All proteomic procedures were performed following the methodology previously developed by our group (Román-Camacho et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST engine against Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). Peptides obtained from tryptic digestion were searched setting the following parameters: up to one missed cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable one. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm while ion products were searched at 0.1 Da tolerances. Peptide spectral matches validation (PSM) was performed at a 1% FDR using a percolator based on q-values. Peptide quantification was carried out by calculating precursor ion areas by Precursor Ion AreaDetector and normalizing by Total Peptide Amount mode of Proteome Discoverer. The parsimony law was applied to obtain protein groups and filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Craft beer, Submerged culture, Proteomics, Komagataeibacter europaeus, Fine wine, Vinegar

### Affiliations
University of Córdoba
Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Edaphology and Microbiology, Microbiology area, Severo Ochoa building (C6), Agrifood Campus of International Excellence ceiA3, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain

### Submitter
Juan J.  Román-Camacho

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Carlos Mauricio
Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Edaphology and Microbiology, Microbiology area, Severo Ochoa building (C6), Agrifood Campus of International Excellence ceiA3, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain


