### Accession
PXD037107

### Title
Nucleocytoplasmic mRNA redistribution accompanies RNA binding protein mislocalisation in ALS motor neurons and is restored by VCP inhibition

### Description
Although the pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the nucleocytoplasmic mislocalisation of RNA binding proteins (RBPs), such as TDP-43 and FUS, the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of mRNA remains uncharacterised. Here, we used subcellular fractionation with RNA sequencing and proteomics to assess nucleocytoplasmic mRNA and protein localisation in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons (iPSNs) from ALS patients with TARDBP mutations, VCP mutations, and controls with VCP mutations knocked-in with CRISPR/Cas9. In each mutant group, we found substantial nucleocytoplasmic mRNA redistribution, particularly in transcripts involved in protein binding. Redistributed transcripts in ALS iPSNs were enriched in protein-coding biotypes, exhibited longer lengths, and had enhanced interactions with RBPs, including TDP-43 and FUS. Using mass spectrometry in TARDBP mutant, VCP mutant, and VCP mutant knock-in iPSNs, we reveal widespread protein mislocalisation, especially in RBPs. We find that mislocalised proteins exhibit substantially greater binding to redistributed transcripts than non-redistributed mRNAs, suggesting that RBP mislocalisation may be directly coupled to mRNA redistribution. Remarkably, treatment with the VCP D2 ATPase domain inhibitor ML240 restored both nucleocytoplasmic mRNA redistribution and protein mislocalisation not only in VCP mutants but also in TARDBP mutant iPSNs. Functional assays in VCP mutant iPSNs further confirmed that ML240 restores lysosomal localisation from the perinuclear region towards the neurites and reduces oxidative stress. Our findings demonstrate that ALS motor neurons exhibit concomitant nucleocytoplasmic mRNA redistribution and RBP

### Sample Protocol
Samples from the nucleus and cytoplasm were prepared for mass spectrometry using an SP3 protocol 87. Briefly, samples were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM, and the samples incubated at RT for 20 min. The samples were then alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at RT for a further 30 min in the dark.  Sera_Mag beads were used to remove contaminating reagents, such as detergent and salts. A 1:1 mixture of two different magnetic beads (carboxylated or HILIC paramagnetic beads), was added to the protein samples. To induce protein binding, ethanol was added to a specific final concentration (100% v/v). The mixture was incubated in thermomixer at 24°C for 5 min at 1000 rpm. Following this, the bead mixture was washed four times with 80% ethanol before resuspending the beads in 50 μL of 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate containing 0.8 ug of trypsin.  The bead mixture was then sonicated briefly in a bath sonicator to fully disaggregate the beads and the digestion performed for 18 hours at 37 °C in a thermomixer.  Following digestion, the beads were centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 24°C for 1 minute. The supernatants were removed and collected into clean tubes. Recovered peptides were acidified by the addition of formic acid to 1% v/v final concentration. The resulting peptides were analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min.  A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 µm, 75 µm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 500 mm nanoViper column (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted with a 90 min gradient of acetonitrile (2%v/v to 80%v/v). The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionisation source, to a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA).  Data dependent analysis was carried out, using a resolution of 120,000 for the full MS spectrum, followed by MS/MS spectra acquisition in the linear ion trap using “TopS” mode.  MS spectra were collected over a m/z range of 300–1800.  MS/MS scans were collected using a threshold energy of 32% for collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
​​For analysis of spectral intensities and generation of volcano plots, LC-MS/MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1) and the peptide lists generated searched against the reviewed UniProt human proteome using the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant 88. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was selected (cleavage at the C-terminal side of lysine and arginine amino acid residues, unless proline is present on the carboxyl side of the cleavage site) and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.2 Da. For label-free protein quantitation (MaxLFQ) we required a minimum ratio count of 1, with two minimum and two average comparisons, which enabled normalization of the data set 89. A false discovery rate (FDR), determined by searching a reverse sequence database, of 0.01 was used at both the protein and peptide level. Data from the Maxquant analysis was analysed statistically using DEP package (v1.11.0) 53. Protein identifications were filtered, removing hits to the reverse decoy database as well as proteins only identified by modified peptides. We required that each protein be detected in at least two out of the three replicates. Protein LFQ intensities were normalised and missing values imputed by values simulating noise around the detection limit using the default parameters. Differential protein enrichment analysis was performed using protein-wise linear models combined with Bayes statistics that utilises LIMMA. A protein was considered significantly differentially expressed when FDR < 0.05. The same single-factor (~fraction) and multi-factor (~condition+fraction+condition:fraction) designs were used as with the transcriptome analysis. All boxplots show the median, hinges represent the 25th and 75th percentiles, and whiskers correspond to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Schematics were created with BioRender.com.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by nucleocytoplasmic mislocalization of the RNA-binding protein (RBP) TDP-43. However, emerging evidence suggests more widespread mRNA and protein mislocalization. Here, we employed nucleocytoplasmic fractionation, RNA sequencing, and mass spectrometry to investigate the localization of mRNA and protein in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons (iPSMNs) from ALS patients with TARDBP and VCP mutations. ALS mutant iPSMNs exhibited extensive nucleocytoplasmic mRNA redistribution, RBP mislocalization, and splicing alterations. Mislocalized proteins exhibited a greater affinity for redistributed transcripts, suggesting a link between RBP mislocalization and mRNA redistribution. Notably, treatment with ML240, a VCP ATPase inhibitor, partially restored mRNA and protein localization in ALS mutant iPSMNs. ML240 induced changes in the VCP interactome and lysosomal localization and reduced oxidative stress and DNA damage. These findings emphasize the link between RBP mislocalization and mRNA redistribution in ALS motor neurons and highlight the therapeutic potential of VCP inhibition.

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, Lc-ms/ms, Als, Motor neuron

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College Londodn, UK National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, UCL NHS Foundation Trust, Londodn, UK

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Rickie Patani
The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College Londodn, UK National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, UCL NHS Foundation Trust, Londodn, UK


