### Accession
PXD042481

### Title
Folding correctors can retore CFTR post-translational folding landscape by allosteric domain-domain coupling

### Description
Numerous missense mutations cause misfolding and premature degradation of ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-transporters-transporters, accounting for several human conformational diseases with poorly under-stood molecular mechanisms. Recent breakthroughs in small molecule combination therapy led transformative improvement of patients’ outlook in cystic fibrosis (CF), caused by several mutations, including the most prevalent deletion of the F508 (delF508) in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride channel, a member of the large ABC-transporter superfamily. By relying on hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), molecular dynamic simulations and biochemical techniques, we demonstrate that the recently approved pharmacophores (VX-445 [elexacaftor] and/or VX-809 [lumacaftor]) mechanism of action relies on a complex network of dynamic inter-domain allosteric interactions to restore the post-translational coupled domain folding and the final fold stability of mutant CFTRs.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant NBD1 variants of human CFTR, MRP1, and ACC6 were expressed in BL21-CodonPlus-RIL E. coli strain (Stratagene) and purified as described previously (Rabeh et al. Cell. 2012 148(1-2):150-63). The expression and purification of full-length CFTR was performed as described in Wang et al. 2022 (bioRxiv 2022.10.10.510913; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.10.510913).   Isolated NBD1 variants: HDX was initiated by mixing NBD1 stock solution (stored on ice to prevent from unfolding and aggregation) into D2O-based buffer pre-incubated at 37 °C with a 1:9 dilution ratio. The mixtures were incubated for specific time periods (15s to 1h, depends on NBD1s) at 37°C and quenched by adding the 2-5 µL aliquot of the HDX mixture into 10-12 µL of chilled quenching buffer (300 mM glycine-HCl including 8 M urea, pH 2.4). Quenched solutions were flash frozen in methanol containing dry ice and stored at -80 °C. Prior to UHPLC-MS analysis, the frozen sample solutions were thawed, and immediately loaded onto the injection valve. Deuterated NBD1 was digested by on-line immobilized pepsin column at flow rate of 30 µl/min for 1.5 min, and the resulting peptides were trapped on C18 column (Optimized Technologies). Following desalting for 1.5 min at 200 µl/min flow rate, peptides were loaded to a C18 analytical column (1 mm i.d. × 50 mm, Thermo Fisher) connected to an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC system.  Peptides were separated using a 5-40% liner gradient of ACN containing 0.1% formic acid for 6 min at 65 µl/min. To minimize back-exchange, all columns, solvent delivery lines, sample loop and other accessories were placed in an ice bath. The C18 column was directly connected to the electrospray ionization source of LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher). Mass spectra of peptides were acquired in positive-ion mode for m/z 200-2000. Identification of peptides was carried out by using tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis using collision-induced dissociation.  Full-length CFTR: To optimize full-length CFTR peptide sequence coverage, following modifications were employed:  i) in-line tandem digestion with immobilized nepenthesin-II (Nep-II) and pepsin and ii) column cooler (CERA) to set the on-line protease digestion condition at 18°C. HDX was initiated by mixing CFTR stock solution (stored on ice) into D2O-based buffer pre-incubated at 37 °C with a 3:7 dilution ratio. The mixtures were incubated for 10, 240, and 1200 s at 37 °C, and HDX reaction was quenched by adding the 12 µl aliquot of the mixture into 3 l of chilled quenching buffer (1 M glycine-HCl including 0.02% DDM, pH 2.4), resulting in 15 l final volume. Quenched samples were stored at -80 C until subsequent analysis. The on-line tandem Nep-II and pepsin digestions were carried out at 100 l/min flow rate for 2 min, and desalting was performed at 200 µl/min flow for 1 min. Digestion mixtures were separated by an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC system using a 5-40 % liner gradient of ACN containing 0.1% FA for 11 min at 65 µl/min. MS measurements and peptide identification were performed as above.  P67L-CFTR-6SS in the absence and presence of folding VX-445 or VX-809: Prior to the HDX experiments, P67L-CFTR-6SS was pre-incubated at 25°C for 5 min in the absence and presence of 30 µM VX-809 or VX-445 correctors. 0.1% of DMSO was included in all conditions. HDX was initiated by mixing pre-incubated P67-CFTR-6SS into D2O-based buffer pre-incubated at 37 °C at 1:9 dilution. The corrector concentration was kept at 30 µM during HDX incubation for 10, 240 and 600 s at 37°C. The HDX reaction was quenched with 10 l aliquot of the mixture into 5 l of chilled quenching buffer (1 M glycine-HCl including 0.02% DDM, pH 2.4). Quenched samples were stored at -80C. The on-line pepsin digestion was carried at 60 l/min flow rate for 1.5 min at 18°C, and desalting was performed at 200 l/min flow for 1.5 min. Digestion mixtures were separated by an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC system using a 5-40 % liner gradient of ACN containing 0.1% FA for 11 min at 65 l/min. MS measurements were performed using Orbitrap Eclipse tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Mass spectra of peptides were acquired in positive-ion mode for m/z 200-2000.

### Data Protocol
All undeuterated and deuterated samples were processed by HDExaminer 3.3 (Sierra analytics) for time-course deuterium uptake determination. Peptide identification was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher). Time-course deuterium uptake plots were generated using Prism 9 (Graphpad).

### Publication Abstract
The folding/misfolding and pharmacological rescue of multidomain ATP-binding cassette (ABC) C-subfamily transporters, essential for organismal health, remain incompletely understood. The ABCC transporters core consists of two nucleotide binding domains (NBD1,2) and transmembrane domains (TMD1,2). Using molecular dynamic simulations, biochemical and hydrogen deuterium exchange approaches, we show that the mutational uncoupling or stabilization of NBD1-TMD1/2 interfaces can compromise or facilitate the CFTR(ABCC7)-, MRP1(ABCC1)-, and ABCC6-transporters posttranslational coupled domain-folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. Allosteric or orthosteric binding of VX-809 and/or VX-445 folding correctors to TMD1/2 can rescue kinetically trapped CFTR posttranslational folding intermediates of cystic fibrosis (CF) mutants of NBD1 or TMD1 by global rewiring inter-domain allosteric-networks. We propose that dynamic allosteric domain-domain communications not only regulate ABCC-transporters function but are indispensable to tune the folding landscape of their posttranslational intermediates. These allosteric networks can be compromised by CF-mutations, and reinstated by correctors, offering a framework for mechanistic understanding of ABCC-transporters (mis)folding.

### Keywords
Post-translational protein folding, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange and mass spectrometry (hdx-ms), Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (cftr), Folding corrector drugs, Cystic fibrosis mutation, Allostery, Protein dynamics, Biogenesis, Coupled domain folding, Abc-transporter

### Affiliations
McGill University
McGill University, department of physiology, Canada

### Submitter
Naoto Soya

### Lab Head
Dr Gergely L. Lukacs
McGill University, department of physiology, Canada


