### Accession
PXD020750

### Title
An integrated genomic, proteomic and immunopeptidomic approach to discover treatment-induced neoantigens

### Description
All nucleated mammalian cells express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins that present peptides on cell surfaces for immune surveillance. These MHC-presented peptides (pMHC) can convey non-self antigens derived from pathogens or mutations to amount T-cell responses. Alterations in tumor-specific antigens – particularly mutation-bearing peptides (neoantigens) presented by MHC — can serve as potent substrates for anti-tumor immune responses. Here we employed an integrated genomic and proteomic antigen discovery strategy aimed at measuring interferon gamma (IFN-γ) induced alterations to antigen presentation, using a lymphoma cell line. IFN-γ treatment resulted in a set of differentially expressed proteins (2 % of all quantified proteins) including components of antigen presentation machinery or interferon signaling pathways. In addition, several proteasome subunits were found to be modulated, consistent with previous reports of immunoproteasome induction by IFN-γ exposure. This finding suggests that a modest proteomic response to IFN-γ could create larger alteration to cells antigen repertoires. Accordingly, by surveying immunopeptides, distinct peptide repertoires were exclusively observed in the IFN-γ induced samples. Furthermore, an additional set of presented peptides distinguished control and the IFN-γ samples by their altered relative abundances including neoantigens. Accordingly, we developed a classification system to distinguish peptides which are differentially presented due to altered expression from novel peptides resulting from changes in antigen processing. Taken together, these data demonstrate that IFN-γ can re-shape antigen repertoires by identity and by abundance. Extending this approach to models with greater clinical relevance should help develop strategies by which immunopeptide repertoires are intentionally reshaped to improve endogenous or vaccine-induced anti-tumor immune responses and potentially anti-viral immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-class I and class II peptidomes were extracted from the GRANTA-519 cell line. In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). For all MHC-1 captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the pan HLA-A-, B-, and C- antibody W6/32 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. For MHC class II captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the HLA-DR specific antibody L243 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted. The isolated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).   For standard proteome analysis the cells were lysed in 8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris pH 8 supplemented with protease inhibitors. Samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide and then quenched with DTT. Proteins were further isolated by methanol-chloroform precipitation, and the protein pellet was washed with acetone before being re-suspended in 8M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8. Total protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) before being diluted to 1 M urea using 50 mM Tris pH 8 prior to digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 1:25 enzyme: substrate (16 hours at 37 °C). The reaction was quenched with formic acid and the peptides desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge. The TMT labeling reagents were obtained from Thermo Fischer Scientific and each TMT reagent was reconstituted in 40 μl of acetonitrile and incubated with corresponding peptide sample for 1 hr. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v) hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were acidified with 25% formic acid to pH 2, desalted and resuspended in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. Peptides were then fractionated by high-pH reverse phase fractionation. In total 84 fractions were collected, concatenated and combined into a total of 12 fractions and then desalted, dried down and stored at -80°C until final LC-MS/MS measurement. The peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For immunopeptidome data all tandem mass spectra were queried against the GRANTA-519 proteome databases using both SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and PEAKS DB search engines (PEAKS Studio 8) (Zhang et al., 2012). Spectra were also interpreted by de novo sequencing (PEAKS Studio 8) to improve high-confidence peptide identification. For all searches with SEQUEST the msConvert program (v3.0.45) was used to generate peak lists from the original data, and spectra were then assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST (v28.12) algorithm. For all searches with PEAKS the RAW data files were imported into PEAKS and subjected to default data refinement (deisotoping, charge deconvolution, peak centroiding). For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For SEQUEST and PEAKS DB, enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N,Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).   For the proteome profiling experiment the raw data analysis was performed using ProteomeDiscover v2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using SEQUEST-HT and the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.6 Da. Strict trypsin specificity was required allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as a variable modification. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was required at both the peptide level and protein level for the proteome data with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
All nucleated mammalian cells express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins that present peptides on cell surfaces for immune surveillance. These MHC-presented peptides (pMHC) are necessary for directing T-cell responses against cells harboring non-self antigens derived from pathogens or from somatic mutations. Alterations in tumor-specific antigen repertoires - particularly novel MHC presentation of mutation-bearing peptides (neoantigens) - can be potent targets of anti-tumor immune responses. Here we employed an integrated genomic and proteomic antigen discovery strategy aimed at measuring how interferon gamma (IFN-&#x3b3;) alters antigen presentation, using a human lymphoma cell line, GRANTA-519. IFN-&#x3b3; treatment resulted in 126 differentially expressed proteins (2% of all quantified proteins), which included components of antigen presentation machinery and interferon signaling pathways, and MHC molecules themselves. In addition, several proteasome subunits were found to be modulated, consistent with previous reports of immunoproteasome induction by IFN-&#x3b3; exposure. This finding suggests that a modest proteomic response to IFN-&#x3b3; could create larger alteration to cells' antigen/epitope repertoires. Accordingly, MHC immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptide repertoires revealed exclusive signatures of IFN-&#x3b3; induction, with 951 unique peptides reproducibly presented by MHC-I and 582 presented by MHC-II. Furthermore, an additional set of pMHCs including several candidate neoantigens, distinguished control and the IFN-&#x3b3; samples by their altered relative abundances. Accordingly, we developed a classification system to distinguish peptides which are differentially presented due to altered expression from novel peptides resulting from changes in antigen processing. Taken together, these data demonstrate that IFN-&#x3b3; can re-shape antigen repertoires by identity and by abundance. Extending this approach to models with greater clinical relevance could help develop strategies by which immunopeptide repertoires are intentionally reshaped to improve endogenous or vaccine-induced anti-tumor immune responses and potentially anti-viral immune responses.

### Keywords
Human, Antigen presentation, Mhc, Orbitrap, Interferon gamma

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Stanford, CA, USA

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Stanford, CA, USA


