### Accession
PXD013227

### Title
Deciphering mechanism of actions of novel compounds by bioactive thermal proteome profiling

### Description
Exploring the therapeutic effects of bioactive compounds has been traditionally approaching by phenotypic screenings followed by functional validation by in vitro assays. The thermal proteome profiling (TPP) has been successfully applied to study drug targets and off-target. We applied a modified protocol based on TPP to elucidate the mechanism of actions (MOA)s of novel bioactives compounds from marine biodiscovery. We have modified the method to gain the specificity for its application to compounds with limited chemical or structural characterization. Method implementation includes increasing the centrifugation force to precipitate the microsomal fraction previous to the thermal shift assay. The range of temperatures has been reduced to optimize the analysis without compromising resolution. Finally, the mass spectrometry analysis was based on label-free quantitative proteomics. Comparison of the targets among methodologies confirmed that the precipitation of the microsomal membranes before TPP is an essential step to discriminate between true targets from proteins precipitates after subcellular fractionation by centrifugation force. As a probe of concept, a novel marine bioactive compound has been analyzed on the hepatic cell line HepG2. We found that 2 targets proteins, aldehyde dehydrogenase and isocitrate dehydoregenase, can be related with beneficial properties towards obesity and obesity-related comorbidities. Identification of targets is key to decipher the MOAs of bioactive compound, predict the mode of action as well as possible harmful effects.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were grown in with EMEM medium supplemented with 8% fetal bovine serum (ATTC), 1.675 mM L-glutamine, 85 U/ml penicillin, 85 μg/ml streptomycin of 80% confluence. Cells were harvested and centrifuged at 340 g for 2 min at 4 °C and resuspended in 50 ml PBS. After a second wash step, the cells were resuspended in 10 ml ice-cold PBS and centrifuged again at 340 g for 2 min at 4 °C. Washed pellets were either used directly or snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until lysis. The cyanobacterial strains Cyanobium sp. LEGE07175 was isolated from the Portuguese coast at CIIMAR (Matosinhos, Portugal). Cells were resuspended in ice-cold PBS. The cells were homogenized in a Labsonic P disintegrator with an ultrasonic probe of 3 mm at 25% intensity and 0.5 cycles, with manual switches of 10 son/5 s off maintained the sample in an ice bath. The sample was centrifugated at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C [12]. The supernatant from this ultracentrifugation rendered cellular soluble proteins. The experiments from the bTPP method differed in the ultracentrifugation step and the procedure to obtain the cellular soluble proteins. For bTT method, the homogenated sample was centrifugated at 100,000 g for 60 min at 4 °C. The soluble proteins were distributed to into 2 equivalent sample preparation for the thermal shift assay. One of the protein samples was incubated with the bioactive compound and the second sample with the vehicle used to solubilize the compound (DMSO). The samples were incubated at the compound IC50 for 10 min at 23 °C and heating in parallel at 7 temperatures (: 37°C, 42°C, 47°C, 52°C, 57°C, 62°C and 67°C) followed by another incubation for 3 min at room temperature. We utilized 100 µg of protein per incubation and temperature. Subsequently, the protein sample was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was analysis by label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (nLC-MS/MS). All the experiments have been performed with biological duplicates for the data analysis as described in TPP [14]. Protein samples were prepared according to Wiśniewski et al. (2012) [21]. Briefly, proteins in the supernatant were denatured by using 2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6. Then, the mixture was incubated at 95 °C for 3 min. The crude extract was clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 min.  After solubilisation protein samples (30 µl) were alkylated and digested with Endopeptidase trypsin (Trypsin sequencing grade, Roche # 03708985001) solution in the ratio 1:100 was prepared with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (40 μl), dispensed and mixed at 600 rpm in the thermomixer for 1 min.  These units were then incubated in a wet chamber at 37 °C for about 18 h to achieve effective trypsination. Peptide recovery was completed by rinsing the filters with 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl and collected by centrifugation.  The samples were acidified with 10% formic acid (56302 Fluka, Sigma) to achieve pH between 3-2. Desalting was done using reverse phase C18 top tips (TT2C18.96, Glygen) and vacuum dried (Savant SPD 1010) to be stored at -80 °C till further analysis. The desalted peptides were reconstituted with 0.1 % formic acid in ultra-pure milli-Q water and the concentration was measured using a Nanodrop (ND 2000, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were analyzed using a reverse phase nano-LC (liquid chromatography) coupled to a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Each of the samples were separated using an Agilent 1200 Easy nLC (Agilent Technologies) system with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon). The peptides were trapped on a pre-column (NS-MP-10-C18-Biosphere, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å, 100 µm × 20 cm) and separated on an analytical column (NS-AC-10-C18-Biosphere, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å, 75 µm × 10.2 cm). A linear gradient of 2 to 40 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) against buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in water) was carried out with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min, for 90 min gradient. Full scan MS spectra was acquired in the positive mode electrospray ionization with ion spray voltage of 2.4 KV, RF lens voltage of 69 and a capillary temperature of 235 °C. This was acquired over an m/z of 380-2000 Da at a resolution of 30000 and top 20 intense ions were selected for MS/MS under an isolation width of 1 m/z units. Collision energy of 35 was used to fragment the ions in the collision induced dissociation mode. The selected masses were included in a dynamic exclusion list for 30 sec with a repeat duration of 30 sec and an abundance threshold of more than 500 counts was considered. Biological and technical replicates were considered to confirm the identifications and only those hits were accounted which appeared in all the technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra (. raw files) were searched by Sequest HT against the human database from Uniprot (73,928 entries). A maximum of 2 tryptic cleavages were allowed, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 and validation based on q-value were used as identified. The minimum peptide length considered was 6 and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.1. Proteins were quantified using the average of top three peptide MS1-areas, yielding raw protein abundances. Common contaminants like human keratin and bovine trypsin were also included in the database during the searches for minimizing false identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The acceleration of the process of understanding the pharmacological application of new marine bioactive compounds requires identifying the compound protein targets leading the molecular mechanisms in a living cell. The thermal proteome profiling (TPP) methodology does not fulfill the requirements for its application to any bioactive compound lacking chemical and functional characterization. Here, we present a modified method that we called bTPP for bioactive thermal proteome profiling that guarantees target specificity from a soluble subproteome. We showed that the precipitation of the microsomal fraction before the thermal shift assay is crucial to accurately calculate the melting points of the protein targets. As a probe of concept, the protein targets of 13<sup>2</sup>-hydroxy-pheophytin, a compound previously isolated from a marine cyanobacteria for its lipid reducing activity, were analyzed on the hepatic cell line HepG2. Our improved method identified 9 protein targets out of 2500 proteins, including 3 targets (isocitrate dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, phosphoserine aminotransferase) that could be related to obesity and diabetes, as they are involved in the regulation of insulin sensitivity and energy metabolism. This study demonstrated that the bTPP method can accelerate the field of biodiscovery, revealing protein targets involved in mechanisms of action (MOA) connected with future applications of bioactive compounds.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling; mechanism of actions; bioactive compound; label-free quantitative proteomics; marine biodiscovery

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Department of Physiology, Ikerbasque, Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Spain

### Submitter
Ana Maria Carrasco del Amor

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Department of Physiology, Ikerbasque, Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Spain


