### Accession
PXD009945

### Title
High definition analysis of protein stability during cytomegalovirus infection informs on cellular restriction

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an important pathogen and a paradigm of viral immune evasion. Here, we describe a multiplexed approach to discover proteins with novel innate immune functions on the basis of their active proteasomal or lysosomal degradation during the early phase of HCMV infection. Using three orthogonal proteomic/transcriptomic screens to quantify protein degradation, we identified 35 proteins with high confidence that were enriched in known antiviral restriction factors. A final screen facilitated global analysis of the mechanism of viral immune-modulation by predicting which viral genes target >250 human proteins. Helicase-like Transcription Factor (HLTF), a DNA helicase important in error-free post-replication DNA repair, was rapidly degraded during infection and potently inhibited early viral gene expression. HCMV UL145, a protein of previously unknown function, recruits the Cullin 4 E3 ligase complex to degrade HLTF. Our approach and data will enable further identifications of innate pathways targeted by HCMV and other viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS, and 250 l lysis buffer added (6M Guanidine/50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Cell lifters (Corning) were used to scrape cells in lysis buffer, which was removed to an eppendorf tube, vortexed extensively then sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 21,000 g for 10 min twice. Although this method prohibited cell counting immediately prior to lysis, it avoided the need for cellular detachment. Half of each sample was kept for subsequent analysis by immunoblot where required. For the other half, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 mins. Cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 mins. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M Guanidine followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 0.5 M Guanidine. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% formic acid, then centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min to remove undigested protein. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness. In preparation for TMT labeling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by microBCA (Pierce), and 25 ug of peptide labeled with TMT reagent. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 43 μl anhydrous acetonitrile and 3 μl added to peptide at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Sample labelling was as indicated in Table S7A. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). TMT-labeled samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). An unfractionated singleshot was initially analysed to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel, to avoid the need for excessive electronic normalization. As all normalisation factors were >0.5 and <2, data for each singleshot experiment was analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. Normalisation is discussed in ‘Data processing protocol’, and high pH reversed-phase (HpRP) fractionation is discussed below. TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to high pH reversed-phase (HpRP) fractionation using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm internal diameter (ID) x 25 cm long, 1.7 µm particle Kinetix Evo C18 column (Phenomenex). Mobile phase consisted of A: 3% acetonitrile (MeCN), B: MeCN and C: 200 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Isocratic conditions were 90% A / 10% C, and C was maintained at 10% throughout the gradient elution. Separations were conducted at 45°C. Samples were loaded at 200 µl/minute for 5 minutes. The flow rate was then increased to 400 µl/minute over 5 minutes, after which the gradient elution proceed as follows: 0-19% B over 10 minutes, 19-34% B over 14.25 minutes, 34-50% B over 8.75 minutes, followed by a 10 minutes wash at 90% B. UV absorbance was monitored at 280 nm and 15 s fractions were collected into 96 well microplates using the integrated fraction collector. Fractions were recombined orthogonally in a checkerboard fashion, combining alternate wells from each column of the plate into a single fraction, and commencing combination of adjacent fractions in alternating rows. Wells prior to the start or after the stop of elution of peptide-rich fractions, as identified from the UV trace, were excluded. This yielded two sets of 12 combined fractions, A and B, which were Peptide containing fractions were then orthogonally recombined into 24 fractions and dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µl MS solvent (4% MeCN / 5% formic acid) prior to LC-MS3. An unfractionated singleshot with 12 12 set ‘A’ fractions combined fractions were used for MS analysis of all experiments. For the 18 h pSILAC (pSILAC_18) experiment, an additional 6 set ‘B’ fractions were used, as 6/12 original fractions were suboptimally analysed on the Orbitrap Lumos. For the 12 h inhibitor experiment (Deg_12), a single fraction failed to run optimally and a further set ‘B’ fraction was re-analysed. Both original and re-analysedset ‘A’ and set ‘B’ runs were included in the final analysis in each case.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. A combined database was constructed from (a) the human Uniprot database (26th January, 2017), (b) the HCMV strain Merlin Uniprot database, (c) all additional novel human cytomegalovirus ORFs described by Stern-Ginossar et al (Stern-Ginossar et al., 2012), (d) a six-frame translation of HCMV strain Merlin filtered to include all potential ORFs of ≥8 amino acids (delimited by stop-stop rather than requiring ATG-stop) and (e) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. For SILAC analysis, the following variable modifications were used: heavy lysine (8.01420 Da), heavy arginine (10.00827 Da), medium lysine (4.02511 Da), medium arginine (6.02013 Da). To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011a; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (Huttlin et al., 2010). Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described previously (McAlister et al., 2012; McAlister et al., 2014). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (Makarov and Denisov, 2009). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~500 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., 2012). An isolation specificity filter was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (Ting et al., 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 100 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. For further analysis and display in figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalized signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein. For pulsed SILAC experiments, after protein assembly, medium-labelled peptides (measuring protein degradation), and heavy-labelled peptides (measuring protein synthesis) were extracted then re-assembled into medium- and heavy-labelled proteins using an in-house script written in Python (version 2.7). Protein normalisation across reporter ion channels again assumed equal protein loading (i.e. for each TMT channel, the summed protein S:N including all medium- and heavy-labelled proteins was the same). For each protein, for display in figures, values were further normalised to the time 0 sample. For SILAC immunoprecipitations, normalisation assumed equal protein loading across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Quantitative proteomics, Tandem mass tag, Lysosome, Innate immunity, Pulsed silac, Immune evasion, Restriction factor, Host-pathogen interaction, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


