### Accession
PXD045798

### Title
Secreted and surface proteome and transcriptome of Opisthorchis felineus

### Description
Opisthorchis felineus is one of the three most medically important species belonging to the family of fish-borne zoonotic trematodes known as Opisthorchiidae. O. felineus is endemic to the river plains of Western Siberia and Eastern Europe and it is estimated that more than 1.6 million people could be infected with this parasite. To aid in the development of better control and diagnosis strategies for opisthorchiasis, we set out to deduce the secreted proteome of O. felineus. Adult flukes were collected from experimentally infected hamsters and cultured in vitro in serum-free media. We extracted proteins from different compartments of the O. felineus secretome, including (i) soluble excretory/secretory (ES) products; (ii) secreted microvesicles (MVs); and (iii) tegument. The tegument was further separated into three fractions of varying solubility via sequential extraction.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome extracts were decomplexified using an in-gel digestion protocol with each replicate yielding 4 gel slices. Up to 20 µg of protein for each of the three replicates from each O. felineus sample was resuspended in a glycerol-based loading buffer and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Resuspended protein and a vehicle control was loaded into 4-20% TruPAGE Precast polyacrylamide gels (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and run at 100 V in a Tris-Glycine 1% SDS running buffer until the dye front had travelled approximately 2 cm. Gels were stained with 0.02% Coomassie for 10 minutes and destained with destaining buffer (10% acetic acid, 50% methanol, and 40% H2O) twice for 45 minutes each. Gel lanes containing the proteins for each O. felineus fraction were sliced into four bands of approximately 2 mm x 10 mm in size. A single control band was collected from the same area from the lane with the vehicle control. Each gel slice replicate was prepared, processed and acquired on the mass spectrometer as a separate sample. Gel slices were further destained in 200 µl of 50% v/v acetonitrile, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C for 45 minutes twice with fresh buffer added each time. Gel slices were dried thoroughly in a vacuum centrifuge before being incubated in 100 µl of 20 mM dithiothreitol, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 65°C for 1 hour. Gel slices were then incubated in 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 40 minutes. Gel slices were washed in 200 µl of 25 mM ammonimum bicarbonate at 37°C for 15 minutes and dried again in a vacuum centrifuge. MS Grade Trypsin Protease (Pierce Thermofisher, USA) stocks were resuspended in 50 mM acetic acid to a concentration of 1 mg/ml. Slices from each gel band were incubated with 0.5 µg of trypsin stock diluted in 100 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for approximately 18 hours. Tryptic peptides were extracted from gel slices 3 times with 50 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic (TFA) solution incubating at 37°C for 15 minutes each time. Tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge before further downstream processing. All samples were analyzed with a Ekspert (Eksigent, USA) liquid chromatography system running on water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (Solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 100% HPLC grade acetonitrile (Solvent B) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex, USA) mass spectrometer running the Analyst TF 1.8.1 software (Sciex, USA) at UQCCR (Brisbane, Australia). Each previously processed gel slice replicate was acquired on the mass spectrometer as a separate sample. Digested peptides from all replicates of the tegument fractions and two replicates each from the MV fractions were first loaded on a ChromXP 3C18-CL, 0.1 x 10 mm, 5 um, 120A trap column (Eksigent, USA) under 10 uL/minute of Solvent A for 10 minutes and separated on a ChromXP C18, 0.075  150 mm, 3 um, 120A column (Eksigent, USA) with linear gradient of 3-32% solvent B over 45 minutes at microflow rates of 5 ul/minute. Mass spectrometer experimental parameters were: curtain gas= 30, ion source gas 1= 25, ion source gas 2=20, ionspray voltage floating = 5500 and turboheater temperature = 250. Ions were collected and analyzed with 250 ms TOF MS followed by 23 experiments of 100 ms product ion data dependent acquisition scans on product ions with an intensity greater than 100 and charge state between 2-4. The mass windows were 350-1800 and 100-2000 for the TOF MS and product ion scans, respectively. Digested peptides from all replicates of the ES fractions and one replicate each from the MV fractions were first loaded on ChromXP 3C18-CL, 0.1 x 10 mm, 5 um, 120A trap column (Eksigent, USA) under 3 uL/minute of Solvent A for 15 mins and separated on a Eksigent ChromXP 3C18CL, 0.3 x 150 mm, 3 um, 120A (Eksigent, USA) column with linear gradient of 4.8-40% solvent B over 85 minutes at nanoflow rates of 0.25 uL/minute. Mass spectrometer experimental parameters were: curtain gas = 25, ion source gas 1 = 20, ionspray voltage floating = 2600 and turboheater temperature = 150. Ions were collected and analyzed with 200 ms TOF MS followed by 45 experiments of 50 ms product ion Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) scans on product ions with an intensity greater than 75 and charge state between 2-5. The mass windows were 300-1800 and 100-2000 for the TOF MS and product ion scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectrometry data files for each gel replicate were pooled according to its parent proteome and searched against the RNAseq-based O. felineus protein library appended with 115 sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) using the ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (Sciex, USA). Searches were performed with the Paragon method using the following settings: sample type = Identification, Cys alkylation = iodoacetamide with other Cys mods possible, digestion = Trypsin, instrument = TripleTOF 5600, ID focus = biological modifications, search effort = thorough ID, detected protein threshold ≥1.3 (95.0%) and run false discovery rate analysis = yes. Search results were further filtered to exclude proteins with less than 2 peptides detected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Opisthorchis felineus, Tegument, Proteomics, Microvesicles (mvs), Secretome

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Sotillo
Instituto de Salud Carlos III


