### Accession
PXD013263

### Title
Role of Has1 RNA helicase in ribosome biogenesis in yeast S. cerevisiae

### Description
The RNA helicase Has1 is involved in the biogenesis of both small and large ribosomal subunit. How it performs these separate roles is not fully understood. We analysed a detailed composition of RNA-protein complexes purified via Has1.

### Sample Protocol
Strains expressing Has1 fused to the FTP tandem affinity tag (FLAG-TEV protease site-protein A) were grown in heavy or light media (SILAC). An exponentialy growing cultures were harvested, lysed and Has1 was affinity purified using both tandem affinity tags. The purified complexes were run shortly into a SDS PAGE gel and slices of the gel were submitted for mass spec analysis(in gel digestion) using Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The obtained Raw data was processed using MaxQuant software. The parameters can be found in the provided files.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA helicase Has1 is involved in the biogenesis of both small and large ribosomal subunits. How it performs these separate roles is not fully understood. Here we provide evidence that at least two molecules of Has1 are temporarily present at the same time in 90S pre-ribosomes. We identified multiple Has1 binding sites in the 18S, 5.8S and 25S rRNAs. We show that while the Has1 catalytic activity is not required for binding to 5.8S/25S region in pre-rRNA, it is essential for binding to 18S sites. After the cleavage of pre-rRNA at the A2 site, Has1 remains associated not only with pre-60S but, unexpectedly, also with pre-40S ribosomes. The recruitment to 90S/pre-40S and pre-60S ribosomes is mutually independent. Our data provides insight into how Has1 performs its separate functions in the synthesis of both ribosomal subunits.

### Keywords
Yeast, Ribosome biogenesis, Rna processing, Rna helicase

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg Biochemistry Center Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg Germany
University of Heidelberg, Biochemistry Centre (BZH)
Im Neuenheimer Feld 328
69120 Heidelberg
Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kos

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Koš
University of Heidelberg Biochemistry Center Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg Germany


