### Accession
PXD020964

### Title
IL6-regulated CDk8-mediated phosphoproteome of human primary Th1 cells

### Description
Cytokines are highly pleiotropic ligands that critically contribute to a balanced immune response. We have an incomplete understanding of how cytokines elicit their functional pleiotropy, which has limited their therapeutic efficacy. Here, using Interleukin-6 (IL-6) as a model system, we have performed detailed phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic studies in human CD4 +  T helper (Th)-1 cells to address the molecular bases defining cytokine functional pleiotropy. We have identified cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)8 as a new negative regulator of transcriptional activities of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3.  We found that CDK8 is a major regulator of the IL-6 phosphoproteome and interacts with STAT3 in the nucleus upon IL-6 stimulation. Inhibition of CDK8 activity, using specific small molecules inhibitors, reduced the IL-6-induced phosphoproteome by 23% in Th-1 cells, including STAT3 S727 phosphorylation.  STAT3 binding to target DNA sites in the genome was increased upon CDK8 inhibition, which resulted in a concomitant increase in STAT3 mediated transcriptional activity. Importantly, inhibition of CDK8 activity under Th-17 polarizing conditions resulted in an enhancement of Th-17 differentiation. Our results support a model where CDK8 regulates STAT3 transcriptional processivity via modulation of its gene loci resident time, critically contributing to diversification of IL-6 responses.

### Sample Protocol
Resting CD4+ T cells were labeled with anti-CD4-FiTC antibody and isolated from human PBMCs by magnetic activated cell sorting using anti-FiTC microbeads following manufacturer instructions. Subsequently, resting CD4+ T cells were activated under Th-1 polarizing conditions. Then, cells were split into three different conditions light SILAC media (40 mg/mL L-Lysine K0 and 84mg/mL LArginine R0), medium SILAC media (49 mg/mL L-Lysine U-13C6 K6 and 103 mg/mL L-Arginine U-13C6 R6) and heavy SILAC media (49.7 mg/mL L-Lysine U-13C6,U-15N2 K8 and 105.8 mg/mL L-Arginine U-13C6,U-15N2 R10) prepared in RPMI SILAC media (Thermo Scientific, #88365) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, 5 mL L-Glutamine, 5 mL Pen/Strep, 5 ml MEM vitamin solution, 5 mL Selenium-Transferrin-Insulin and expanded in the presence of 20 ng/mL IL2 and 10 ng/ml anti-IL4 for another 10 days in order to achieve complete labelling. After expansion, cells were starved without IL2 for 24 hours before stimulation with 10 nM HyIL-6 in the presence or absence of 2 μM MSC2530818 for 15 minutes. Cells were then washed three times in ice-cold PBS, mix in a 1:1:1 ratio, resuspended in SDS-containing lysis buffer (1% SDS in 100mM Triethylammonium Bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes to ensure cell lysis. Then, cell lysates were centrifuged at 20000 g for 10 minutes at +4.C and supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined by using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, #23227), and 10 mg of protein per experiment were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at 55.C and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at RT. Protein was then precipitated using six volumes of chilled (-20.C) acetone overnight. After precipitation, protein pellet was resuspended in 1mL of 100mM TEAB and digested with Trypsin (1:100 w/w) and digested overnight at 37.C.  Then, samples were cleared by centrifugation at 20000 g for 30 min at +4.C, and peptide concentration was quantified with Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. Digested samples were fractionated to reduce sample complexity and increase the efficiency of phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, peptides (approx. 3.5 mg per sample) were resuspended in 200uL Buffer A (10mM ammonium formate), separated on a XBridge Peptide BEH column (Waters, C18, 3.5μM, 4.6 x 250 mm) after initially trapped on a XBridge trap cartridge (Waters, C18, 3.5μM, 4.6 x 20 mm) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a gradient (102 min, 0.8 ml/min) of Buffer A (10mM ammonium formate) and Buffer B (10mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile): 8% Buffer B for 6 min, 8-45% Buffer B for 54 min, 45-100% Buffer B for 5 min, 100% Buffer B for for 16 min and 100-2% Buffer B for 21 min. 80 Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC autosampler (Thermo Scientific) of 1 minute (0.8 ml) duration from 1-80 min over the chromatogram. These fractions were then concatenated to 20 fractions to provide a similar quantity of peptide per fraction based on the online (U3000 Variable Wavelength Detector) UV values of the eluted peptides at 220 nm. These concatenated fractions were taken to dryness (EZ-2 Plus centrifugal evaporator, Genevac) prior to suspending for nLC-MS analysis.  Phosphopeptide enrichment in the peptide fractions generated as described above was carried out using MagResyn Ti-IMAC following manufacturer instructions.  Phosphopeptide samples were analyzed using a nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer. Samples (10μl) were loaded onto a C18 trap column and washed for 5 minutes with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were resolved using a gradient  (170 min, 0.3μl/min) of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.08% formic acid): 5% buffer B for 5 min, 5-35% buffer B for 125 min, 35-98% buffer B for 2 min, 98% buffer B for 20 min, 98-2% buffer B for 1 min and 2% buffer B for 17 min. Peptides, initially trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 colum (100μm x 2 cm), were separated on an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm x 50 cm),  and finally transferred to a Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50.C and a source voltage of 2.0kV. For the identification of peptides, a top 15 method (1 MS plus 15 MS2, 150 min acquisition) consisting of full scans and mass range (m/z) between 350 to 1600 (m/z) for MS search and 200 to 2000 (m/z) for MS2 search was used. For the MS scan the Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data dependent acquisition mode, resolution of 70,000 with a lock mass set at 445.120024 and max fill time of 20 ms. For the MS2 scan Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer was operated in a centroid mode, resolution of 15,000 with isolation window = 1.4 (m/z), normalized collision energy = 27, max fill time of 100 ms and dynamic exclusion of 45.0 sec.

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer .RAW files were analyzed, and peptides and proteins quantified using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008), using the built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). All settings were set as default, except for the minimal peptide length of 5, and Andromeda search engine was configured for the UniProt Homo sapiens protein database (release date: 2018_09). Peptide and protein ratios only quantified in at least two out of the three replicates were considered, and the p-values were determined by Student´s t test and corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
Cytokines are highly pleiotropic ligands that regulate the immune response. Here, using interleukin-6 (IL-6) as a model system, we perform detailed phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic studies in human CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper 1 (Th-1) cells to address the molecular bases defining cytokine functional pleiotropy. We identify CDK8 as a negative regulator of STAT3 transcriptional activities, which interacts with STAT3 upon IL-6 stimulation. Inhibition of CDK8 activity, using specific small molecule inhibitors, reduces the IL-6-induced phosphoproteome by 23% in Th-1 cells, including STAT3 S727 phosphorylation. STAT3 binding to target DNA sites in the genome is increased upon CDK8 inhibition, which results in a concomitant increase in STAT3-mediated transcriptional activity. Importantly, inhibition of CDK8 activity under Th-17 polarizing conditions results in an enhancement of Th-17 differentiation. Our results support a model where CDK8 regulates STAT3 transcriptional processivity by modulation of its gene loci resident time, critically contributing to diversification of IL-6 responses.

### Keywords
Human th1 cells, Il6, Msc2530818, Cdk8 inhibitor

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee
Cell Signaling and Immunology

### Submitter
Jonathan Martinez Fabregas

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Moraga Gonzalez
Cell Signaling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee


