### Accession
PXD012571

### Title
Oxyntomodulin Identified as a Marker of Type 2 Diabetes and Gastric Bypass Surgery by Mass-spectrometry Based Profiling of Human Plasma

### Description
We developed a mass-spectrometry based platform for identification of peptides in humans and by applying this platform we characterized a peptide hormone oxyntomodulin secreted from the intestine in response to glucose. Our data suggest that oxyntomodulin is down-regulated in subjects with type 2 diabetes and up-regulated after bariatric surgery. In summary, the collected data indicate that oxyntomodulin may co-orchestrate appetite and glucose regulatory effects together with incretin hormones.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets (HPLC fraction after evaporation) were resuspended in digestion buffer with the proteases: LysC: 6/2 M urea/thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5; Trypsin: 1.5/0.5 M urea/thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5; and chymotrypsin: 0.3/0.2 M urea/thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5). Digestion of ~ 0.2 μg protein was carried out with 1 μg of the respective enzyme. In order to further increase the sequence coverage, partially cleaved peptides were generated by digesting for 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, 120 and 720 min. Samples from all time points of a respective protease were pooled and desalted on stage tip

### Data Protocol
We processed the raw data with MaxQuant software (v 1.5.3.2) searching MS/MS spectra against the human UniProtKB FASTA database (59,345 forward entries; version of June 2012). Enzyme specificity was set to semispecific. Peptides had to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids to be considered for identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, acetylation (N-terminus), deamidation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide level. The cut-off score (delta score) for accepting individual MS/MS was 17. For bioinformatic analysis as well as visualization we used the open PERSEUS environment, which is part of MaxQuant. For several calculations and plots we also used the R framework. Identified peptides were mapped to GCG. In order to display quantitative evidence for overlapping peptides, intensities of identified peptides were summed and plotted per amino acid residue.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gastric bypass surgery, Glicentin, Oxyntomodulin, Proglucagon

### Affiliations
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


