### Accession
PXD006781

### Title
Distinct transcriptomic, proteomic and epigenetic stress-responses in dorsal and ventral hippocampus

### Description
The hippocampus - one of the most studied brain regions – is a key target of the stress response and vulnerable to the detrimental effects of stress. Although its intrinsic organization is highly conserved throughout its long dorsal-ventral axis, the dorsal hippocampus is linked to spatial navigation and memory formation, whereas the ventral hippocampus is linked to emotional regulation. Here, we provide the first combined transcriptomic and proteomic profiling that reveals striking differences between dorsal and ventral hippocampus. Using various acute stress challenges we demonstrate that both regions display very distinct molecular responses, and that the ventral hippocampus is particularly responsive to the effects of stress. We demonstrate that separately analyzing dorsal and ventral hippocampus greatly increases the ability to detect region-specific stress effects, and we identify an epigenetic network, which is specifically sensitive to acute stress in the ventral hippocampus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion for SWATH-MS. Processing order of all samples was randomized. Proteins were extracted from different areas of the dorsal and ventral hippocampus using 200ul TEAB buffer (100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail P8340 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA), 1:500 PMSF (50mM in EtOH)). The samples were mechanically lysed by 15 strokes with a 26G needle and sonicated for 5 minutes. Samples were spun down at 16000g for 30 minutes at 4°C and supernatants were collected. Proteins were quantified using a Qubit protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein extracts were further processed with a filter assisted sample preparation protocol (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). 20ug of protein were added to 30ul SDS denaturation buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT). For denaturation, samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with 200ul UA buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) and then loaded to regenerated cellulose centrifugal filter units (Microcon 30, Merck Millipore, Billercia MA, USA). Samples were spun at 14000g at 35°C for 20 min. Filter units were washed once with 200ul of UA buffer followed by centrifugation 14000g at 35°C for 15 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 100ul freshly prepared IAA solution (0.05M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) for 1 min at room temperature in a thermomixer at 600rpm followed by centrifugation at 14000g at 35°C for 10 min. Filter units were washed 3 times with 100ul of UA buffer then twice with a 0.5M NaCl solution in water (each washing was followed by centrifugation at 35°C and 14000g for 10 min). Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with a 1:50 ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.4ug, V511A, Promega, Fitchburg WI) in 130ul TEAB (0.05M Triethylammoniumbicarbonate in water). After protein digestion over night at room temperature, peptide solutions were spun down at 14000g at 35°C for 15 min and acidified with 3ul of 20% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). Peptides clean-up. Peptides were cleaned-up using StageTip C18 silica columns (SP301, Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA). Columns were conditioned with 200 ul methanol followed by 200 ul of 60% ACN (acetonitrile) / 0.1% TFA. Columns were equilibrated with 2 x 150 ul of 3% ACN / 0,1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the columns and washed with 2 x 150 ul 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA and eluted with 150 ul 60% ACN / 0.1% TFA. Samples were lyophilized in a speedvac then re-solubilized in 19ul 3% ACN / 0.1% FA (formic acid) prior to LC-MS measurement. 1ul of synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample for retention time calibration. SWATH-MS measurements. Samples were measured on a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) in SWATH mode using a previously described method (Gillet et al. 2012). The sample order was re-randomized before MS measurement. Peptides were separated with an Eksigent NanoLC (AB Sciex, Washington, USA). 1ul of each sample was loaded onto a 1.8 um, 100 Å C18 column (heated to 50°C, 150mm length, 75 μm ID, 375 μm OD). Peptides were separated using a 130 min long linear solvent gradient of 3-40% ACN, 0.1% FA. Fixed 20Da precursor isolation windows were used within a precursor range of 400-1100 m/z. Fragment ions were acquired in a range of 140 – (2 x the upper range of the precursor window) m/z. Shotgun measurements. To generate an extensive tissue-specific spectral library, multiple shotgun MS-measurements were conducted. Two dorsal and two ventral samples from the sample pool were chosen randomly and measured in shotgun mode. Measurements were performed on a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were separated with an Eksigent NanoLC (AB Sciex, Washington, USA). 1ul of each sample were loaded onto a 1.8 um, 100 Å C18 column (heated to 50°C, 150mm length, 75 μm ID, 375 μm OD). Peptides were separated using a 130 min long linear solvent gradient of 3-40% ACN. Full scans were acquired between 350-1500 m/z, while fragment spectra were acquired in the range 130 - (precursor + 2000) m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS ion searches of shotgun measurements. Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd, London, GB, http://www.matrixscience.com) was used for MS/MS spectra interpretation. For each shotgun run a Mascot search file was generated and searched against a decoy databank containing  M. musculus protein sequences (Uniprot taxon identifier 10090), which were in silico digested with trypsin allowing a maximum of one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of  cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to +/- 10 ppm whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to +/-0.05 Da. Generation of a spectral library and Spectronaut assay list. DAT files from MS/MS ion searches were exported with Mascot and loaded into Skyline (MacCoss Lab) to generate a spectral library with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The library was generated with single entries for every precursor, choosing the spectra with the best Mascot scores if multiple spectra were available. The whole mouse proteome from Uniprot (Taxonom identifier 10090) was loaded into Skyline and an in silico digestion using trypsin with a KR|P cutting profile without allowing for any missed cleavage was performed. Peptides with a minimum length of 8 and a maximum length of 25 were included and 25 N-terminal amino acids were excluded. Only peptides with spectral library entries were considered. Peptides containing any methionine were excluded. Carbamidomethyl was assumed as a fixed modification for cysteine. Precursor charges of 2+, 3+ or 4+ and ion charges of 1+ or 2+ for all ion types (x,y,z,a,b,c) were included. For each precursor, the 4 most intense fragment ions within an m/z range were selected and exported as assay list compatible with Spectronaut (version 6, Biognosys AG, Switzerland).  SWATH-MS transition identification and quantification. For peak identification and quantification, automated peak picking was used. The previously prepared assay list was used to define transitions, relative intensities and iRT values. Spectronaut (version 10, Biognosys AG, Switzerland) was used for automated peak picking. A static window with an iRT-width of 6 min and a linear iRT calibration was used. For transition identification, a dynamic score refinement was used and the base entity was processed within the experiment. Decoys were generated using a scrambled, label-free decoy method. A normal distribution estimator was used for q-values and a 1% FDR was ensured by q-value filtering. For transition quantification an interference correction was used and the total peak area was used as normalization base across all runs with a localized normalization approach. For protein quantification the average of the top three peptides was taken and exported as individual protein quantity values for each sample. Proteins quantified with one single peptide were excluded. Data analysis of proteomics data. R Studio was used to perform statistical analyses. Conditions (swim vs. control) and regions (dorsal vs. ventral) were assigned to the corresponding samples. A regular two way ANOVA (model: protein intensity ~ region * condition) was performed for individual proteins. Post hoc two-way comparisons were performed with t-tests for all four possible two-group comparisons (ventral: swim vs. control, dorsal: swim vs. control, swim: dorsal vs. ventral, control: dorsal vs. ventral) for individual proteins. For multiple testing corrections, a Benjamini Hochberg method was used. For pathway analyses the KEGG pathway database was used. A list containing the target Uniprot accessions was compared to the background identifiers. The background comprised of all genes that were quantifiable both on the transcriptional level as well as on the proteomic level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse hippocampus ventral dorsal proteome swath-ms stress

### Affiliations
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology D-HEST
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Lukas von Ziegler

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Bohacek
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology D-HEST


