### Accession
PXD003586

### Title
Pasteurella multocida Hfq mutant

### Description
Quantitative proteomics comparison wt and Hfq mutant Pasteurella multocida strains.

### Sample Protocol
P. multocida strain were grown to either early-exponential (OD600 = 0.2) or mid-exponential (OD600 = 0.6) growth phase, then centrifuged at 9,400 x g for 10 min. The pelleted cells were washed twice in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). Proteins (150 µg/sample) were purified and trypsin digested using the Filter-aided Sample Preparation (FASP) while using triethyl ammonium bicarbonate instead of ammonium bicarbonate. The resulting peptides were isotopically labelled by dimethylation using heavy (C13D2) and light (C12H2) formaldehyde. Mixed heavy and light labeled samples were desalted using a13 ml MILI-SPE Extraction disk cartridge (C18-SD). Desalted samples were concentrated under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Peptides were resolved and analysed by nano-LC tandem mass spectrometry using a Dionex ultra high performance liquid chromatography system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified with MaxQuant (version 15.3.30) and Perseus software. Searches were prefromed against  Pasteurella multocida sequences downloaded from Uniprot (01/2016).

### Publication Abstract
The Gram-negative bacterium Pasteurella multocida is the causative agent of a number of economically important animal diseases, including avian fowl cholera. Numerous P. multocida virulence factors have been identified, including capsule, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and filamentous hemagglutinin, but little is known about how the expression of these virulence factors is regulated. Hfq is an RNA-binding protein that facilitates riboregulation via interaction with small noncoding RNA (sRNA) molecules and their mRNA targets. Here, we show that a P. multocida hfq mutant produces significantly less hyaluronic acid capsule during all growth phases and displays reduced in vivo fitness. Transcriptional and proteomic analyses of the hfq mutant during mid-exponential-phase growth revealed altered transcript levels for 128 genes and altered protein levels for 78 proteins. Further proteomic analyses of the hfq mutant during the early exponential growth phase identified 106 proteins that were produced at altered levels. Both the transcript and protein levels for genes/proteins involved in capsule biosynthesis were reduced in the hfq mutant, as were the levels of the filamentous hemagglutinin protein PfhB2 and its secretion partner LspB2. In contrast, there were increased expression levels of three LPS biosynthesis genes, encoding proteins involved in phosphocholine and phosphoethanolamine addition to LPS, suggesting that these genes are negatively regulated by Hfq-dependent mechanisms. Taken together, these data provide the first evidence that Hfq plays a crucial role in regulating the global expression of P. multocida genes, including the regulation of key P. multocida virulence factors, capsule, LPS, and filamentous hemagglutinin.

### Keywords
Hfq, Lc-ms/ms, Dimethylation, Pasteurella multocida

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr John Boyce
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


