### Accession
PXD041442

### Title
Proteomics analysis between T cell lysate and T cell microvilli-derived particles

### Description
Although T cell activation is closely linked to internalization of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR), relatively few studies have examined the release of TCRs via shedding of T cell microvilli following physical interaction with cognate antigen-presenting cells. In this study, we investigated the physiological implications of the release of TCRs and other external membrane components. We term this event “trogocytic molting”, as it occurs through a combined process of trogocytosis and enzymatic vesiculation of microvillar membrane structures. Surprisingly, in contrast to TCR internalization, this event leads to rapid upregulation of surface TCRs and remarkable metabolic reprogramming of cholesterol and fatty acids synthesis to meet the demands of clonal expansion, which drives multiple rounds of division and cell survival. To elucidate a potential mechanism for how trogocytic molting of microvilli enhances T-cell proliferation, purified TISs obtained from activated naive CD3+ T cells were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to identify TISs-enriched functional proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The purification protocol of TISs is described as follows: A total of 20 million cells were resuspended in serum-free RPMI 1640 medium and incubated on anti-CD3/CD28 antibody-coated plates for 2 h at 37°C. Cultured media were aspirated, cells were harvested with 5 ml of PBS by gentle pipetting. Cells were then removed by centrifugations at 2000 × g for 10 min and supernatants were saved. TISs on culture dishes were dissociated by gentle pipetting and scrapping in the presence of cold PBS containing 10 mM EDTA. All supernatants were mixed and subjected to two successive centrifugations at 2000 × g for 10 min and 2500 × g for 10 min to completely eliminate cells and debris. TISs in PBS were reloaded onto a sucrose gradient of 12 different sucrose concentrations from top to bottom (10%–90% sucrose) and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 16 h. Fractions were then carefully collected at 2 mL each from the bottom of the tube. All fractionated samples were diluted with PBS and subjected to centrifugation at 100,000 × g for 90 min to pellet the vesicles. 4–6 consecutive fractions of the 12 fractions were used for LC-MS/MS analyses. The same amount of proteins from the total lysate or TISs was subjected to SDS-PAGE on a 12% polyacrylamide el. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 and fractionated according to molecular weight. Tryptic in-gel digestion was conducted according to a previously described procedure 43. The digested peptides were extracted with an extraction solution consisting of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile, and 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were dissolved in 0.5% TFA. Tryptic peptide samples (5 μL) were separated using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Dionex). Peptides were eluted from the column and directed on a 15 cm × 75 μm i.d. Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 reversed-phase column (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of 0%–65% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 180 min.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS spectra obtained using the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer were acquired in the data-dependent top10 mode, with automatic switching between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 150–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) after the accumulation of ions to a 1 × 10^6 target value based on predictive automatic gain control from the previous full scan. The MS/MS spectra were searched with MASCOT v2.4 (Matrix Science, Inc., Boston, MA, USA) using the UniProt human database for protein identification. The MS/MS search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionines, two missed trypsin cleavages, mass tolerance for a parent ion and fragment ion within 10 ppm, and a p value of <0.01 of the significant thresholds. The exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) was generated using MASCOT, and mol% was calculated according to the emPAI values. The MS/MS analysis was performed at least three times for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, T cell microvilli, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Immune Synapse and Cell Therapy laboratory, Gwangju institute of science and technology (GIST), South Korea
GIST (Gwangju institute in science and technology)

### Submitter
Wonchang Soh

### Lab Head
Dr Chang-Duk Jun
Immune Synapse and Cell Therapy laboratory, Gwangju institute of science and technology (GIST), South Korea


