### Accession
PXD043238

### Title
A SWI/SNF-dependent transcriptional repression mediated by POU2AF2/C11orf53 at enhancer.

### Description
Recent studies have identified a previously uncharacterized protein C11orf53 (now named POU2AF2/OCA-T1), functions as a new co-activator of POU2F3, the master transcription factor which is critical for both normal and neoplastic tuft cell identity and viability. Here, we demonstrated that POU2AF2 functions as an “Yin-Yang” factor which mediates both transcriptional activation and repression at distal enhance elements. The proteomics study aims to identify potential interactors with POU2AF2 in different cell lines which may enable us to further understand the function of POU2AF2 in human cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed following the standard protocol. Briefly, the protein pellet was denatured in 50 µL of 8 M Urea/0.4 M Ammonium Bicarbonate followed by reduction in 2 µL of 100 mM DTT. The digests were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides were then desalted on C18 Sep-Paks (Waters). The pooled extracts were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 30 uL of 5% ACN/0.1% FA for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) system and a linear ion trap-Orbitrap hybrid Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the MS raw files using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK. version 2.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt human database. All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized Met, deamidated Asn and Gln, acetylated N-term as variable modifications. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. A 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at the peptide level. Only proteins with a minimum of two peptides above the cutoff were considered for further study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small cell lung cancer, Pou2af2, Swi/snf, Co-activator

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

### Submitter
Lu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Wang
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.


