### Accession
PXD001680

### Title
A common cell state in Triple Negative Breast Cancers can be targeted through inhibition of Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (SYK)

### Description
Breast tumors are highly heterogeneous and for many molecular subtypes no targeted therapies are available. These include breast cancers that display hallmarks of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process related to metastasis and enriched in triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs). To determine whether this EMT cellular state could be therapeutically exploited, we performed a large-scale chemical genetic screen. We identified a group of structurally related compounds, including the clinically advanced drug PKC412 (midostaurin), that targeted post-EMT breast cancer cells. PKC412 induced apoptosis specifically in basal-like TNBC cells and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Structure activity relationship (SAR) studies, chemical proteomics, and computational modeling identified the kinase SYK as a critical PKC412 target. Specific SYK inhibitors and PKC412 displayed a similar profile across a large panel of breast cancer cell lines, indicating a shared mode of action. Phosphoproteomics analysis revealed that SYK activates STAT3, and chemical or genetic inhibition of STAT3 resulted in cell death in basal-like breast cancer cells. This non-oncogene addiction of basal-like breast cancer cells to SYK suggests that chemical SYK inhibition may be beneficial for a specific subset of triple negative breast cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell extract was prepared by lysing 1 × PBS washed cells in 5 mL 8M urea lysis buffer containing PhosSTOP phosphatase and Complete protease inhibitor cocktails. 5 × 15 cm culture dishes were used per condition. Cell extraction and DNA shearing was assisted by sonication and cell debris pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C.  The supernatant was removed and protein concentration determined using the 660 nm protein assay. A total of 6 mg protein per condition was reduced with DTT (10 mM), alkylated with iodacetamide (55 mM) and digested with modified porcine trypsin (1:100) at 37°C for approximately 24 h. Quenched peptide digest was extracted by solid phase extraction using Sep-Pak classic C18 cartridges. The eluate was lyophilised and peptides resuspended in 100mM Tris HCl, pH7.4 containing 0.3% NP-40 and phosphotyrosine-containing peptides enriched by immuno-precipitation using equal amounts of the anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies PT66, P-Tyr-100 and 4G10 conjugated to G Sepharose beads. The immunoprecipitation was performed for 12 h, the beads washed and the peptides eluted with 5% formic acid. After lyophilisation to remove formic acid, peptides were labelled with TMT 6-plex reagents as follows: DMSO control (TMT labels 126 & 129); inhibitor R406 (TMT labels 127 & 130) and inhibitor BAY61-3606 (TMT labels 128 & 131). The subsequently pooled sample was additionally enriched for phosphotyrosine-containing peptides using a modified IMAC procedure. The final sample was analysed as a single injection on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system via a nano-electrospray ion source using liquid junction.

### Data Protocol
The analyses was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top 10 hybrid method with a collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS2 event followed by a high-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) MS2 event for each selected precursor ion. Acquired RAW data was analysed by the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 platform integrating MASCOT, phosphoRS and target decoy PSM validator software modules. Database search was performed against the human SwissProt database (sp_human_v2013.1) with the following parameters: fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y); two miscleavage sites; search tolerance of 10 ppm on precursor and 0.6 or 0.1 Da on fragment ions for CID and HCD, respectively. Actual strict false discovery rate was calculated to be below 1%. Relative quantitation was calculated by taking the ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities. Identification and quantitation was assessed manually for selected phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Some mutations in cancer cells can be exploited for therapeutic intervention. However, for many cancer subtypes, including triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), no frequently recurring aberrations could be identified to make such an approach clinically feasible. Characterized by a highly heterogeneous mutational landscape with few common features, many TNBCs cluster together based on their 'basal-like' transcriptional profiles. We therefore hypothesized that targeting TNBC cells on a systems level by exploiting the transcriptional cell state might be a viable strategy to find novel therapies for this highly aggressive disease. We performed a large-scale chemical genetic screen and identified a group of compounds related to the drug PKC412 (midostaurin). PKC412 induced apoptosis in a subset of TNBC cells enriched for the basal-like subtype and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. We employed a multi-omics approach and computational modeling to address the mechanism of action and identified spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) as a novel and unexpected target in TNBC. Quantitative phosphoproteomics revealed that SYK inhibition abrogates signaling to STAT3, explaining the selectivity for basal-like breast cancer cells. This non-oncogene addiction suggests that chemical SYK inhibition may be beneficial for a specific subset of TNBC patients and demonstrates that targeting cell states could be a viable strategy to discover novel treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Phosphotyrosine proteomics, Syk inhibition, Human breast cancer

### Affiliations
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Keiryn L. Bennett
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria


