### Accession
PXD019085

### Title
Soluble proteom of Nematocysts from Nematostella

### Description
Nematostella is a sea anemone. Its venom ispacked into nematocysyts. In this work we studied proteom of the nematocyst soluble content from planula larva to identify new toxins.

### Sample Protocol
Nematocysts were purified from 4 dpf planulae using a Percoll gradient based on a protocol kindly provided by Monterey Bay Labs Ltd (Caesaria, Israel). Briefly, the planulae were frozen and homogenized in 0.01% Triton X100 in 12.5 ppt ASW. Cell debris was removed by two centrifugation steps (2500 × g and 2000 × g). The pellet was re-suspended in 12.5‰ ASW and laid on top of 80% Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) in 12.5‰ ASW. Centrifugation at 1500 × g for 10 min resulted in nematocyst pellet which was re-suspended in 6‰ ASW followed by exchange to 1‰ ASW. The purified nematocysts were disrupted by ultrasonication, centrifuged (24000 × g, 10 min) and the supernatant was sent to LC-MS/MS analysis to at the Proteomics Center of the Alexander Silberman Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Tryptic digestion (0.3 µg trypsin/sample) was performed overnight at 37°C, followed by addition of 0.05% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega Corp., USA) and further incubation for 1 hr at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were desalted on self-made C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (Ultimate 3000 Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Nematostella protein models (David Fredman; Michaela Schwaiger; Fabian Rentzsch; Ulrich Technau [2013]: Nematostella vectensis transcriptome and gene models v2.0. figshare. Data set; https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.807696.v1) with manually added ShK-like1 sequence and MaxQuant software as described earlier [Columbus-Shenkar, Y.Y., et al., Elife 2018]. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nematocyst, Stinging cells, Venom, Sea anemone, Nematostella

### Affiliations
Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology
Department of ecology, evolution and behavior, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

### Submitter
Maria Sachkova

### Lab Head
Dr Yehu Moran
Department of ecology, evolution and behavior, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


