### Accession
PXD000363

### Title
PG-regulated Synechocystis sp. PCC6803

### Description
Cells from the Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 strain were used to identify phosphatidylglycerol-regulated proteins by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics combining SDS-PAGE prefractionation and data-dependent LC–MS/MS. Acquired data was searched against a composite protein sequence database of cyanobacteria using the Mascot search algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted after rigorous validation criteria of Peptide Prophet, Protein Prophet and requiring at least two unique proteolytic peptides for each protein. Extracted peptide intensity features were used for the label-free comparison of differential protein expression in the mutant cyanobacteria cells.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We present a proteomics dataset combining SDS-PAGE prefractionation and data-dependent LC-MS/MS that enables the identification of phosphatidylglycerol-regulated proteins in the pgsA(-) mutant of Synechocystis sp. PCC6803, a cyanobacterium strain that grows with this indispensable phospholipid added exogenously. We searched the acquired raw data against a composite protein sequence database of Synechocystis using MASCOT, and employed Progenesis LC-MS software for label-free quantification based on extracted peptide intensities to detect changes in protein abundances upon phospholipid withdrawal. Protein identifications were validated using rigorous criteria, and our analysis of the dataset revealed 80 phosphatidylglycerol-regulated proteins involved in various cellular processes including photosynthesis, respiration, metabolism, transport, transcription, and translation. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000363 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000363).

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis sp. pcc6803, Phosphatidylglycerol, Quantitative label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head


