### Accession
PXD012055

### Title
Identification of proteins differentially regulated upon perturbed mitochondrial gene expression

### Description
The aim of this project was to search for the new factors engaged in mitochondrial nucleic acids metabolism under stress conditions. To this end we treated human 293 cells with mitochondrial replication/transcription inhibitor ethidium bromide and we compared proteomes of untreated vs treated cells. We were looking for the proteins whose level would be differentially regulated in response to disturbed mitochondrial gene expression. In our studies we utilized a stable 293 cell line that inducible expresses a fusion of EGFP with mitochondria targeting sequence. This approach enabled us to control mitochondrial import by analysis of the abundance of mitochondrial EGFP marker. We isolated highly purified mitochondria from the cells, lysed them and subjected protein extracts to labelling with iTRAQ reagents. We performed quantitative analysis of stress- induced changes of human mitochondrial proteome with the use of MaxQuant software.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were plated 72 hours before harvesting in DMEM medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma) and 50 µg/µl uridine (Sigma). Cells were treated for 72 hours with Ethidium Bromide at 100 ng/ml following isolation of highly purified mitochondria as described in “mitochondria isolation” paragraph. Lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES, 2% SDS, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) was added to the isolated mitochondria. Samples were heated at 96°C for 3 min, cooled down, sonicated (20 cycles: 30s on/30s off) and heated again for 3 minutes at 96°C. Protein concentration was determined using DirectDetect Spectrometer (MerckMillipore). Appropriate volumes containing accordingly 75 µg of protein were moved to 1.5 ml tubes and precipitated using chloroform/methanol protocol. Samples were then labeled using standard iTRAQ 8-plex (SCIEX) protocol according to manufacturer recommendations. Labeled peptide mixture was speed-vaced to dry and then dissolved in a 400 µl of a buffer containing 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0,1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 100 µl of solution were separated on Superdex Peptide 10/300 GL column, 30 min long isocratic gradient of 30% ACN 0,1% TFA, flow 0,6 ml/min, fractions were collected at 800 µl each. Three consecutive fractions were pooled into one and speed-vaced to dry. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data was acquired in the m/z range of 100-2000. Peptides were separated by a 300 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 45% solution B (ACN and 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. Obtained data was analyzed with the Max-Quant platform. The human reference proteome database from UniProt was used. Modification were set: oxidation(M), methylthio(C). Results were analyzed using Scaffold 4 platform (Proteome Software). Two independent replicates were carried for untreated and treated cells. Mitochondria isolation was performed as described previously (PMID: 19864255) with additional step of mitochondria purification by ultracentrifugation in 1/1.5M sucrose gradient. Obtained mitochondrial protein lysates were subjected to labelling with iTRAQ reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions (Sciex). Proteins were identified using MS/MS analysis. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw). Protein abundance was derived from the ratio of iTRAQ reporter intensity calculated with the use of MaxQuant software. Fold change of proteins in untreated vs treated cells was calculated as a difference of average log ratios obtained for replicates. As a threshold for significantly up- or down- regulated proteins we applied FDR &lt; 0.05 and fold change s0 &gt; 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of mitochondrial gene expression is crucial for cellular homeostasis. Stress conditions may lead to a temporary reduction of mitochondrial genome copy number, raising the risk of insufficient expression of mitochondrial encoded genes. Little is known how compensatory mechanisms operate to maintain proper mitochondrial transcripts levels upon disturbed transcription and which proteins are involved in them. Here we performed a quantitative proteomic screen to search for proteins that sustain expression of mtDNA under stress conditions. Analysis of stress-induced changes of the human mitochondrial proteome led to the identification of several proteins with poorly defined functions among which we focused on C6orf203, which we named MTRES1 (Mitochondrial Transcription Rescue Factor 1). We found that the level of MTRES1 is elevated in cells under stress and we show that this upregulation of MTRES1 prevents mitochondrial transcript loss under perturbed mitochondrial gene expression. This protective effect depends on the RNA binding activity of MTRES1. Functional analysis revealed that MTRES1 associates with mitochondrial RNA polymerase POLRMT and acts by increasing mitochondrial transcription, without changing the stability of mitochondrial RNAs. We propose that MTRES1 is an example of a protein that protects the cell from mitochondrial RNA loss during stress.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Laboratory of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Roman J. Szczesny
Laboratory of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences


