### Accession
PXD009234

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic analysis identifies SRMS-regulated signaling intermediates

### Description
The non-receptor tyrosine kinase, SRMS (Src-related kinase lacking C-terminal regulatory tyrosine and N-terminal myristoylation sites) is a member of the BRK family kinases (BFKs) which represents an evolutionarily conserved relative of the Src family kinases (SFKs). Tyrosine kinases are known to regulate a number of cellular processes and pathways via phosphorylating substrate proteins directly and/or by partaking in signaling cross-talks leading to the indirect modulation of various signaling intermediates. In a previous study, we profiled the tyrosine-phosphoproteome of SRMS and identified multiple candidate substrates of the kinase. In order to uncover the broader SRMS-regulated phosphoproteome and identify the SRMS-regulated indirect signaling intermediates, we performed global phosphoproteomics analysis on cells expressing wild-type SRMS. Our analyses identified 60 hyperphosphorylated (phosphoserine/phosphothreonine) proteins mapped from 140 hyperphosphorylated peptides. Bioinfomatics analyses identified a number of significantly enriched biological and cellular processes among which DNA repair pathways were found to be upregulated while apoptotic pathways were found to be downregulated. Analyses of motifs derived from the upregulated phosphosites identified Casein kinase 2 alpha (CK2) as one of the major potential kinases contributing to the SRMS-dependent indirect regulation of signaling intermediates. Overall, our phosphoproteomics analyses identified serine/threonine phosphorylation dynamics as important secondary events of the SRMS-regulated phosphoproteome with implications in the regulation of cellular and biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Mammalian cells were trypsinized, washed with 1X PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (PierceTM, USA). For complete lysis, the cells were sonicated using three bursts of 10% amplitude followed by two bursts of 15% amplitude for 10 seconds each. The lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 r.c.f for 10 mins and the clarified lysates collected. Total proteins were purified by chloroform:methanol:water precipitation and the precipitated proteins resuspended in 8M urea pH 8.0 containing 400 mM ABC. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion at 37 °C with Lys-C (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) for 6 hours and trypsin (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) overnight. The digestion reactions were quenched with 0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (The Nest Group, USA). The desalted samples were dried in a speedvac and dissolved in a buffer comprising 3.5% formic acid and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment using TopTip MicroSpin columns (Cat. #TT1TIO, Glygen Corp., USA). Briefly, the samples were first acidified with 0.5% TFA and 50% acetonitrile and loaded onto the TopTip columns. The flowthrough from each sample was collected, dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis. The columns were then washed first with 100% acetonitrile, then with 0.2 M Sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 0.5% TFA, and finally with 50% acetonitrile. The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with 28% Ammonium hydroxide, dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentrations in the phosphopeptide-enriched and flowthrough samples were estimated from A280 absorbance using the NanoDrop 2000 instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The peptide concentrations were adjusted to 0.05 μg/μL with 0.1% TFA. A 1:10 dilution of Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (Cat. #88321, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) was further added to each sample prior to LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation of the raw LC-MS/MS data was performed using the Progenesis QI software (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics). All MS/MS spectra were searched against the SWISSProt database (taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens, database version dated November 2015) using the Mascot search engine (Version 2.0).  Data from the TiO2-enriched and flow through fractions were analyzed separately, and the resulting quantitative analyses were combined for the respective experimental conditions. Chromatographic/spectral alignment, mass spectral peak-picking, data filtering and statistical analyses for the protein and peptide quantitation was performed on Progenesis QI. Raw mass spectral features were aligned based on their retention time using a randomly selected reference run. All other runs were automatically aligned to the reference run to minimize retention time variability between the runs. Only spectra with ion signals quantified at or above three times the standard deviation of the noise, were selected for subsequent analyses. A normalization factor for each run was calculated to account for the variability in sample loading and ionization. This normalization factor was determined by calculating the quantitative ratio of the reference run to the run being normalized, with the assumption that most proteins/peptides are not changing in the experiment. The experimental set-up grouped replicates of each condition for comparative analyses. The algorithm then calculated and tabulated raw and normalized abundances and ANOVA p-values (calculated as the mean difference and variance associated with the replicate data in both experimental conditions) for each quantified peptide in the dataset. The MS/MS spectra was exported as a .mgf file (Mascot generic files) for database searching.  The Mascot search algorithm was used for database searching. Carbamidomethylation (Cysteine), phosphorylation (Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine), deamidation (Asparagine, Glutamine), acetylation (Lysine) and oxidation (Methionine) were specified as variable modifications. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da.  Stringent conditions were set in Mascot to filter out low scoring peptides by imposing a confidence probability score (p) of <0.05. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy. Only phosphopeptides mapping to proteins with at least 2 tryptic peptides were considered for analyses. The Mascot search results was exported as .xml files and then imported into the processed dataset in Progenesis QI software where the Mascot-generated peptide identifications were assigned to the corresponding quantified features.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Srms, Phosphoproteomics, Src, Ptk5, Ptk6, Brk, Mass spectrometry, Ptk70, Frk, Non-receptor tyrosine kinase

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan
University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Raghuveera Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Kiven Erique Lukong
Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan


