### Accession
PXD003319

### Title
Quantitative proteomics uncovers novel factors involved in developmental differentiation of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Developmental differentiation is a universal biological process that allows cells to adapt to different environments to perform specific functions. African trypanosomes progress through a tightly regulated life cycle in order to survive in different host environments when they shuttle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. Transcriptomics has been useful to gain insight into RNA changes during stage transitions; however, RNA levels are only a moderate proxy for protein abundance in trypanosomes. We quantified 4270 protein groups during stage differentiation from the mammalian-infective to the insect form and provide classification for their expression profiles during development. Our label-free quantitative proteomics study revealed previously unknown components of the differentiation machinery that are involved in essential biological processes such as signaling, posttranslational protein modifications, trafficking and nuclear transport. Furthermore, guided by our proteomic survey, we identified the cause for the previously observed differentiation impairment in the histone methyltransferase DOT1B knock-out strain as it is required for accurate karyokinesis in the first cell division during differentiation. This epigenetic regulator is likely involved in essential chromatin restructuring during developmental differentiation, which might also be important for differentiation in higher eukaryotic cells. Our proteome dataset will serve as a resource for detailed investigations of cell differentiation to shed more light on the molecular mechanisms of this process in trypanosomes and other eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of cells (2x107) were harvested for each time point by centrifugation (1400g, 10 min), resuspended in NuPAGE Novex buffer (Thermo) and boiled for 10 min at 95°C. Samples are separated by SDS-PAGE. In-gel digestion and MS analysis was done as described by Kappei et al. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive or Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation on the capillary was achieved by an immobilized C18-reversed phase (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) The tip of the capillary was directed to the electrospray ion source. A 240 min gradient from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 200 nl/min was used. The Q Exactive type mass spectrometer measured a data-dependent Top10 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw measurement files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 standard settings and searched against the Trypanosoma brucei TREU927 protein database (version 8.1, 11567 entries) available at tritrypDB (http://tritrypdb.org). The Andromeda search engine, which is part of the MaxQuant software suite, was used for peptide identification. Enzyme search specificity was set to Trypsin/P (Promega) with two miscleavages allowed per peptide. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate was fixed at 1 percent on peptide and protein level. In the label-free quantification settings a minimum ratio count of 2 was set. Re-quantify was on and 0.7 minutes time window was allowed to match between runs. In the MaxQuant protein groups output table, peptides mapped to known contaminants, reverse hits and protein groups only identified by site were removed before further analysis. Furthermore, only protein groups identified with at least 2, one of them unique, peptides were used for downstream analysis. The identified proteins were further filtered for two measured LFQ intensities in at least one time point.

### Publication Abstract
Developmental differentiation is a universal biological process that allows cells to adapt to different environments to perform specific functions. African trypanosomes progress through a tightly regulated life cycle in order to survive in different host environments when they shuttle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. Transcriptomics has been useful to gain insight into RNA changes during stage transitions; however, RNA levels are only a moderate proxy for protein abundance in trypanosomes. We quantified 4270 protein groups during stage differentiation from the mammalian-infective to the insect form and provide classification for their expression profiles during development. Our label-free quantitative proteomics study revealed previously unknown components of the differentiation machinery that are involved in essential biological processes such as signaling, posttranslational protein modifications, trafficking and nuclear transport. Furthermore, guided by our proteomic survey, we identified the cause of the previously observed differentiation impairment in the histone methyltransferase DOT1B knock-out strain as it is required for accurate karyokinesis in the first cell division during differentiation. This epigenetic regulator is likely involved in essential chromatin restructuring during developmental differentiation, which might also be important for differentiation in higher eukaryotic cells. Our proteome dataset will serve as a resource for detailed investigations of cell differentiation to shed more light on the molecular mechanisms of this process in trypanosomes and other eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Trypanosomes; differentiation

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Quantitative Proteomics Ackermannweg 4 55122 Mainz Germany

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Quantitative Proteomics Ackermannweg 4 55122 Mainz Germany


