### Accession
PXD013123

### Title
Proteome of resistant and susceptible Passiflora species in the interaction with CABMV reveals distinct responses to pathogenesis

### Description
To better understand plant-pathogen interactions and the activation of defense mechanisms, this study proposes to identify the differentially abundant proteins in an interspecific hybrid of passion fruit and its parents, Passiflora edulis and P. setacea, inoculated with CABMV compared to their non-inoculated counterparts. Leaves from the three populations were inoculated and collected 72 h after inoculation. The experiment was set up as a completely randomized design with three replicates. Of the over 500 identified proteins, 100, 290, and 96 were differentially abundant for the hybrid, P. edulis, and P. setacea, respectively, in response to CABMV. In the interspecific hybrid, 41% of the proteins were down-regulated and 59% were up-regulated, compared to control. In the P. setacea parent, 39% of the protein being down-regulated. The P. edulis parent, in turn, showed a distinct profile, in which 82% of the protein were down-regulated and only 18% were up-regulated compared to control. It is suggested that CABMV suppresses accumulation of proteins in susceptible species that may have a key function in plant defense response, such as those linked to proteasome regulation and heat shock proteins. At the same time, it should regulate the accumulation of proteins that may impair viral signaling within the host such as glutathione peroxidase. Despite responding to the infection, P. edulis was not capable of stopping the disease establishment. Results suggest that the disease manifests due to a failure in the signaling system of susceptible species, whose activated response pathways are not sufficient to control it.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves of P. edulis, P. setacea and the interspecific hybrid at time 0, i.e., before inoculation, and after 72 hours after inoculation (HAI) were used. The protein extraction was performed according to Damerval et al. (1986) methods with modifications. Mock and CABMV inoculated leaf materials (2 g) were finely ground to a powder with a mortar and pestle under liquid nitrogen and 1.0 mL of 10% (m/v) TCA (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) and 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (GE Healthcare) in acetone were added for homogenization. After centrifugation at 16,000 g, 30 min, 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded and the precipitate thrice washed with cold 20 mM DDT in acetone and centrifuged as above. The precipitate obtained was solubilized with 1.0 mL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% triton X-100, 1% DTT, 1 mM PMSF (a serine protease inhibitor) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and centrifuged at 16,000 g, 4 °C, 20 min. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determinate with a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Before in-solution digestion, the protein samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform (Nanjo et al. 2012) and then resuspended in 7M urea and 2M thiourea. For protein digestion 100 µg of total protein from each sample were added on Microcon 30 kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5; Sigma-Aldrich) as the buffer and centrifuged at 10,000 g , 25 ºC, 15 min, according to Wisniewski et al. (2009), with modifications. Protein extracts were reduced with cold 50 mM DTT and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, briefly vortexed and incubated in a Thermomixer® at 60 ºC for 20 min, followed by alkylation with cold 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare Piscataway, NJ, USA) at room temperature for 20 min in the dark, under agitation at 650 rpm. Digestion was performed by adding 25 µL of trypsin solution (40 ng µL-1; V5111; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to each sample, followed by incubation overnight at 37 °C. For RapiGest® precipitation, 5.0 µL of 15 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich) was added, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min. The samples were subsequently transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters) for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
We used a nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. During the separation phase, the samples (1 µg of digested protein) were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 µm C18 trap column (180 µm x 20 mm) at 5 µL min-1 for 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8-µm analytical reverse-phase column (75 µm x 150 mm) at 400 nL min-1 at 45 ºC. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used: mobile phase A consisted of water (Tedia, Fairfield, USA) and 0.1 % formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1 % formic acid. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 5% B for 3 min, ramping from 5 % B to 40 % B until 91.12 min; ramping from 40 % B to 99 % B until 95.12 min, holding constant at 99 % until 99.12 min; decreasing to 5 %B until 101.12 min; and holding constant at 5 % B until the end of the run at 117.00 min. The mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), with a resolution of 35,000 FWHM with ion mobility and in the data-independent acquisition mode. The velocity of ion mobility wave ranged from 800 m s-1 to 500 m.s-1; transfer collision energy was ramped from 25 to 55 V in high-energy mode; the cone and capillary voltages were 30 and 3,000 V, respectively; and the source temperature was 100 °C. The nanoflow gas was set to 0.50 Bar, and the purge gas flow set to 150 L h-1. The TOF parameters included a scan time of 0.6 s in the continuum mode and a mass range of 50 to 2,000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol µL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. We used the MassLynx v4.0 software to the mass spectrum acquisition. Spectral processing and database searching was performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS; version 3.0.2) (Waters) and software ISOQuant workflow (Distler et al. 2014). The PLGS was processed using a low-energy threshold of 150 (counts), an elevated energy threshold of 50, and an intensity threshold of 750. In addition, the analysis was performed using the following parameters: one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to three, minimum fragment ion per protein equal to seven, minimum peptide per protein equal to two, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to a maximum of 1 %. The proteomics data were processed against the Populus trichocarpa (ID: UP000006729) database from UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org), due to its phylogenetic proximity. The comparative label-free quantification analysis was performed using ISOQuant software using previously described settings and algorithms (Distler et al. 2014). Briefly, the analysis included retention time alignment, exact mass retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility spectrometry clustering as well as data normalization and protein homology filtering. ISOQuant annotates the resulting feature clusters by evaluating consensus peptide identifications and identification probabilities. Protein identification parameters in ISOQuant were set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, at least six peptide score, and at least two peptides per protein. Label-free quantification was estimated using the TOP3 quantification approach (Silva et al. 2006), followed by the multidimensional normalization process implemented within ISOQuant (Distler et al. 2014). After ISOQuant data analyses, only the proteins that were present or absent (for unique proteins) in all three biological replicates were considered for differential abundance analysis. Data were analyzed using Student’s t-test (two-tailed). Proteins with P-values of P < 0.05 were considered upregulated if the log2 of fold change (FC) was greater than 1.5 and downregulated if the log2 of FC was less than -1.5. Finally, proteins were blasted against the Nonredundant (nr) Plants/Viridiplantae_Protein_Sequences database using the Blast2GO software (www.blast2go.com) (Conesa et al. 2005) for protein description and biological process term annotation. The analysis of the results was carried out using a Python script and R software to identify and classify protein IDs and to generate graphs using the VennDiagram package (Chen and Boutros 2011) and Spotfire® software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Passiflora setacea, Fruit woodiness virus, Gel-free proteomics, Cowpea aphid-borne mosaic virus, Passiflora edulis

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia,  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brasil.
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro

### Submitter
Beatriz Murizini Carvalho

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia,  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brasil.


