### Accession
PXD036548

### Title
VAL1 acts as an assembly platform co-ordinating co-transcriptional repression and chromatin 2 regulation at Arabidopsis FLC

### Description
• Polycomb (PcG) regulation is crucial for development across eukaryotes, but how PcG targets are specified is still incompletely understood. The slow timescale of cold-induced Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 silencing during vernalization at Arabidopsis thaliana FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) provides an excellent system to elucidate the sequence of events. Association of the DNA binding protein VAL1 to an FLC intronic RY motif within the PcG nucleation region is an important step. VAL1 is associated in vivo with APOPTOSIS AND SPLICING ASSOCIATED PROTEIN (ASAP) complex and Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1). Here, we show that ASAP and PRC1 functions are necessary for co-transcriptional repression and chromatin regulation during FLC silencing. ASAP mutants affect FLC transcription in warm conditions, but the rate of FLC silencing in the cold is unaffected. PRC1-mediated H2Aub accumulation increases at the nucleation region upon exposure to cold, but unlike the PRC2-delivered H3K27me3 does not spread across the locus. H2Aub is thus involved in the transition to epigenetic silencing at FLC facilitating H3K27me3 accumulation, which in turn is necessary for long-term epigenetic memory. Overall, our work highlights the importance of the DNA sequence-specific binding protein VAL1 as an assembly platform coordinating the co-transcriptional repression and chromatin regulation necessary for the epigenetic silencing of FLC.

### Sample Protocol
4 g of Arabidopsis seedlings were crosslinked and ground to fine powder in liquid N2, following ChIP protocol. Immunoprecipitation of protein complexes was done as described using Protein A beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #10008D) coupled with HA antibody (CST, #3724). IP product was resuspended in 2X NuPAGE sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #NP0007) and denatured at 70°C for 15 min with 100 mM DTT. The final samples were run on NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, # NP0321) and subjected to in-gel digestion. Protein bands corresponding to heavy and light chains of antibody were excised from NuPAGE gels.  The rest of gels were combined and prepared according to standard procedures. Briefly, the slices were washed with 50 mM TEAB buffer pH8 (Sigma), incubated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 65 °C followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (both in 50 mM TEAB) for alkylation of cysteine residues. After washing and dehydration with acetonitrile, the gels were soaked with 50 mM TEAB containing 10 ng/µl Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega #V5111) and incubated at 50 °C for 8 h. The peptides were elute with an equal volume of 5% formic acid followed by different steps of acetonitrile concentration (up to 50%). The combined supernatants were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #SPD120) for mass spectrometry, and the peptides dissolved in 0.1%TFA/3% acetonitrile.  Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The samples were loaded and trapped using a pre-column with 0.05% TFA at 20 µl min-1 for 3 min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 100 Å, 1.8 µm; Waters, Wilmslow, UK) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.05% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.05% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl min-1: 0-3 min 3% B (trap only); 3-4 min linear increase B to 6%; 4-71 min increase B to 50%; 71-76 min increase B to 65%; followed by a ramp to 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B in 23 min. Data were acquired with the following mass spectrometer settings in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 300-1800, AGC 4e5, fill time 50 ms;  MS2/IT: data dependent analysis was performed using parallel CID and HCD fragmentation with the following parameters: top20 or top25 in IT rapid mode, centroid mode, quadrupole isolation window 1.6 Da, charge states 2-7, threshold 1.5e4, CE = 30, AGC target 1e4, max. inject time 35 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 15 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±5 ppm or 2 counts, 30 s, 7 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Spectra were recalibrated and filtered for top20 peaks per 100 Da. Identification was performed using the Chimerys search node with the inferys_2.1_fragmentation prediction model. Parameters were enzyme trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M) as variable and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, 0.6 Da fragment tolerance.  Evaluation was performed using Percolator. For peak detection and quantification, the Minora Feature Detector was used with a min. trace length of 7 and S/N 3. After normalisation to total peptide amount the quantification was based on the intensities of the top3 unique peptides per protein. Missing values were imputed by low abundance resampling. For hypothesis testing a background-based t-test was applied. Maximum fold change was set to 100. Results were exported to Microsoft Excel and filtered to remove contaminants and proteins with less than 5 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb (PcG) silencing is crucial for development, but how targets are specified remains incompletely understood. The cold-induced Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) silencing of Arabidopsis thaliana FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) provides an excellent system to elucidate PcG regulation. Association of the DNA binding protein VAL1 to FLC&#xa0;PcG nucleation regionis an important step. VAL1&#xa0;co-immunoprecipitates APOPTOSIS AND SPLICING ASSOCIATED PROTEIN (ASAP) complex and PRC1. Here, we show that ASAP and PRC1 are necessary for co-transcriptional repression and chromatin regulation at FLC. ASAP mutants affect FLC transcription in warm conditions, but the rate of FLC silencing in the cold is unaffected. PRC1-mediated H2Aub accumulation increases&#xa0;at the&#xa0;FLC nucleation region during cold, but unlike the PRC2-delivered H3K27me3, does not spread across the locus. H2Aub thus involved in&#xa0;the transition to epigenetic silencing&#xa0;at FLC,&#xa0;facilitating H3K27me3 accumulation and long-term epigenetic memory. Overall, our work highlights the importance of VAL1 as an assembly platform co-ordinating activities necessary for epigenetic silencing at FLC.

### Keywords
Chromatin regulation, Gene silencing, Vernalisation, Arabidopsis, Prc1, Epigenetics, Polycomb, Transcription factor, Asap, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Group Leader Department Cell and Developmental Biology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Dean
Group Leader Department Cell and Developmental Biology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK


