### Accession
PXD037033

### Title
What do the transcriptome and proteome of menstrual blood derived mesenchymal stem cells tell us about endometriosis?

### Description
Given the importance of menstrual blood in the pathogenesis of endometriosis and the multifunctional roles of menstrual mesenchymal stem cells (MenSCs) in regenerative medicine, this issue has gained prominence in the scientific community. Moreover, recent reviews highlight how robust the integrated assessment of omics data is for endometriosis. To our knowledge, no study has applied the multi-omics approaches to endometriosis MenSCs. It is a case-control study at a university-affiliated hospital. MenSCs transcriptome and proteome data were obtained by RNA-seq and UHPLC- MS/MS detection. Among the differentially expressed proteins and genes, we emphasize ATF3, ID1, ID3, FOSB, SNAI1, NR4A1, EGR1, LAMC3, and ZFP36 genes and MT2A, TYMP, COL1A1, COL6A2, and NID2 proteins that were already reported in the endometriosis. Our functional enrichment analysis reveals integrated modulating signaling pathways such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (↑) and PI3K signaling via AKT to mTORC1 (↓in proteome), mTORC1 signaling, TGF beta signaling, TNFA signaling via NFkB, and response to hypoxia via HIF1A targets (↑in transcriptome). Our findings highlight primary changes in the endometriosis MenSCs, suggesting that  the chronic inflammatory endometrial microenvironment can modulate these cells, providing opportunities for endometriosis etiopathogenesis. Moreover, they identify challenges for future research leveraging knowledge for regenerative and precision medicine in endometriosis.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted and solubilized using cell lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 10 mM Tris (pH = 8.0), and protease inhibitor (#P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Then, 3 sonication cycles at 45 W for 5 minutes each were performed. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000g for 30 minutes at 4°C and total proteins were quantified in triplicates by the Bradford method [88] using the Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay  Kit (#15000201, Bio-Rad, USA). Approximately 100 μg of total proteins were reduced by incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes with 10 μg/μL dithiothreitol (DTT) (#D9779, Sigma- Aldrich, USA). Subsequently, they were alkylated at 25°C and in light deprivation for 30 minutes by the addition of 10 μg/μL iodoacetamide (IAA) (#I1149, Sigma- Aldrich, USA). Then the samples were diluted 8x with 10 mM Tris solution (pH = 8.0). Protein digestion. Total proteins were incubated with trypsin (#V5111, Promega, USA) diluted in 20 mM Tris (pH = 8.0) in a 1:50 ratio (enzyme/proteins, m/m) for 18 h at 37°C under agitation. The peptides obtained from the digested samples were purified on reversed-phase OASIS-HLB columns (#186000383, Waters, USA). After the OASIS-HLB columns, the peptides were dried in the SpeedVac apparatus (Thermo Scientific, Marietta, OH), resuspended in the appropriate buffer, and quantified by the Qubit Protein Assay Kit (#Q33211, ThermoFisher, USA). The Proteomic were performed at the Translational Medicine Drug Research and Development Center of the Federal University of Ceará. UHPLC-MS/MS detection. The peptides were fractionated in UHPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 (ThermoFisher, USA) and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus HMR mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA), in full MS/ddMS2 (Top5) positive mode. One μg of peptides per sample was injected into the mass spectrometer for 210 min using 18 0.1% formic acid (solvent A or equilibrium) and 0.1% acetonitrile/formic acid in an 80:20 ratio (solvent B or elution). The elution followed an optimized linear solvent B gradient from 4 to 85%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and statistics. Raw files from MS analysis were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.6.17.0, which obtained a list of identified proteins and the relative label-free quantification (LFQ). The search  parameters used were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine residues as a variable modification, trypsin enzyme with a tolerance of two misscleavages; mass error tolerance for precursor peptide of 20 ppm in the first search and 6 ppm in the main search; mass tolerance for fragments (MS/MS) of 0.5 Da, false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. The LFQ was normalized manually based on total ion intensity for each LC- MS/MS run and considered at least 1 peptide identified by MS/MS for paired comparisons. The statistical analyzes were performed with normalized intensity values (LFQ intensity) using the Limma package in the R environment, taking into account only proteins identified with 2 or more peptides and reviewed by the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/). For constructing the contrast matrix, we considered the outcomes of interest (endometriosis and healthy control). It was investigated whether weighting the proportion of mesenchymal cells typically labeled with CD90 and CD73 influenced the results, but this was not observed. Finally, we used a linear model through the lmFit function and considered the fit patterns. We also evaluated the interference of two fitting methods: &#39;least square&#39; and &#39;robust regression&#39; without significant differences, so we kept the default fit. After the linear fit, we used the eBayes function that applies an empirical Bayesian method to moderate the t-statistic. We set the cut-offs at &lt; 5% for p-value and at 2.0 for fold-change (FC) to consider differential expression proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Given the importance of menstrual blood in the pathogenesis of endometriosis and the multifunctional roles of menstrual mesenchymal stem cells (MenSCs) in regenerative medicine, this issue has gained prominence in the scientific community. Moreover, recent reviews highlight how robust the integrated assessment of omics data are for endometriosis. To our knowledge, no study has applied the multi-omics approaches to endometriosis MenSCs. This is a case-control study at a university-affiliated hospital. MenSCs transcriptome and proteome data were obtained by RNA-seq and UHPLC-MS/MS detection. Among the differentially expressed proteins and genes, we emphasize <i>ATF3, ID1, ID3, FOSB, SNAI1, NR4A1, EGR1, LAMC3,</i> and <i>ZFP36</i> genes and MT2A, TYMP, COL1A1, COL6A2, and NID2 proteins that were already reported in the endometriosis. Our functional enrichment analysis reveals integrated modulating signaling pathways such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (&#x2191;) and PI3K signaling via AKT to mTORC1 (&#x2193; in proteome), mTORC1 signaling, TGF beta signaling, TNFA signaling via NFkB, IL6 STAT3 signaling, and response to hypoxia via HIF1A targets (&#x2191; in transcriptome). Our findings highlight primary changes in the endometriosis MenSCs, suggesting that the chronic inflammatory endometrial microenvironment can modulate these cells, providing opportunities for endometriosis etiopathogenesis. Moreover, they identify challenges for future research leveraging knowledge for regenerative and precision medicine in endometriosis.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal cells, Endometriosis

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics - Ribeirao Preto Medical School - University of Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Vitor Faca

### Lab Head
Dr Juliana Meola
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics - Ribeirao Preto Medical School - University of Sao Paulo


