### Accession
PXD036896

### Title
MRPS36 provides a missing link in the eukaryotic 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex for recruitment of E3 to the E2 core - Phospoproteomics data

### Description
The tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, or Krebs cycle, is the central pathway of energy production in eukaryotic cells and plays a key part in aerobic respiration throughout all kingdoms of life. The enzymes involved in this cycle generate the reducing equivalents NADH and FADH2 by a series of enzymatic reactions, which are utilized by the electron transport chain to produce ATP. One of the key enzymes in this cycle is 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDHC), which generates NADH by oxidative decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA. Notably, this enzyme consists of multiple subunits as a megadalton protein complex. Thus far, it was thought that OGDHC consists of solely three catalytically active subunits (E1, E2, E3). However in fungi and animals, the small protein MRPS36 has been proposed as a putative additional component. Based on extensive XL-MS data obtained from measurements in both, mice and bovine heart mitochondria, and from phylogenetic analyses, we provide structural evidence that MRPS36 is an exclusive and crucial member of eukaryotic OGDHC. Comparative genomics analysis and computational structure predictions reveal that in eukaryotic OGDHC, E2o does not contain a peripheral subunit-binding (PSBD) domain. Instead, our data provide compelling evidence that in eukaryotes, MRPS36 evolved as E3 adaptor protein, functionally replacing the PSBD domain. Based on our data we provide a refined structural model of the complete eukaryotic OGDHC assembly containing all its 58 subunits (~ 3.4 MDa). The model provides new insights into the protein-protein interactions within the OGDH complex and highlights putative mechanistic implications.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and purification of bovine heart mitochondria (BHM) Mitochondrial membranes from bovine heart were isolated and preserved as described in (11). In order to increase the purity of the preparation and for Tris-buffer removal, frozen crude mitochondria (4 x 15 ml aliquots; 60 mg protein/ml) were thawed on ice, diluted (1:4) with ice-cold SEH buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 adjusted with NaOH) and centrifuged at 1,000 x g (10 min; 4°C). The supernatants were recovered and centrifuged at 40,000 x g (20 min; 4°C) and each resulting pellet was suspended in 2 ml SEH buffer. Afterwards, mitochondria were loaded onto a two-layer sucrose gradient (1 M sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 /1.5 M sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and centrifuged at 60,000 x g (20 min; 4°C). The pure mitochondrial fractions accumulated at the interphase were carefully recovered and pooled into one tube. After resuspension in 20 ml ice-cold SEH buffer, pure mitochondria were centrifuged at 10,000 x g (20 min; 4°C) and finally suspended in 5 ml ice-cold SEH buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFAST™). Protein concentration was determined by the DC protein assay (Bio-Rad) and aliquots of pure mitochondria were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Cross-linking of BHM sample with DSSO, PhoX and DMTMM Purified bovine heart mitochondrial membranes were buffer exchanged into cross-linking buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, protease inhibitor). After optimization of the cross-link reaction, ~2 mg of BHM were either incubated with DSSO (0.5 mM freshly re-suspended in anhydrous DMSO; Thermo Fisher Scientific), PhoX (1 mM freshly re-suspended in anhydrous DMSO; made in-house) or DMTMM (10 mM freshly re-suspended in cross-linking buffer; Sigma-Aldrich) in 2 ml of cross-linking buffer at room temperature (RT). The cross-link reaction was quenched after 30 min by the addition of 50 mM Tris (1 M Tris buffer, pH 8.5) for additional 30 min at RT. Sample preparation for XL-MS analysis of cross-linked BHM Cross-linked mitochondria were solubilized with Digitonin (9 g/g protein) for 30-60 min on ice. Proteins were denatured and purified as described previously (61). Briefly, denatured proteins were re-suspended and digested overnight (ON) at 37°C with Lys-C followed by Trypsin. The final peptide mixtures were desalted with solid-phase extraction C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples cross-linked with DSSO and DMTMM were fractionated with an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump system (Agilent) coupled to an strong cation exchange separation column (Luna SCX 5 μm – 100 Å particles, 50 x 2mm, Phenomenex), resulting in 24 fractions . For PhoX cross-linking we used a Fe3+-IMAC column (Propac IMAC-10 4 × 50 mm column, Thermo Fisher scientific) connected to an Agilent HPLC. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in buffer A (30% acetonitrile, 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid) and the pH was adjusted to a value of 2. PhoX cross-linked peptides were subsequently eluted with a gradient of elution buffer B (0.3% NH4OH) (62). The collected PhoX-enriched peptides were then dried down and further fractionated into 7 high-pH fractions as previously described (63).

### Data Protocol
Identification of MRPS36 phosphorylation sites in BHM 24 SCX fractions corresponding to BHM peptides cross-linked with DSSO (see 34 for details) were analyzed using a classical bottom-up workflow. Briefly, fractions were injected in an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system (Agilent) on a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm) coupled online to a Q Executive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We used the following LC-MS/MS parameters: after 5 minutes of loading with 100% buffer A (water with 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with a 80 minutes gradient from 4% to 39% of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid). For MS acquisition we used a MS1 Orbitrap scan at 120,000 resolution from 300 to 1600, AGC target of 3e6 ions and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The ions with a charge from +2 to +8 were fragmented (NCE of 27%) and analyzed with MS2 Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution, AGC target of 1e5 ions and maximum injection time of 75 ms. Respective spectra were afterwards analyses with MQ62 using following settings: Enzyme: (Trypsine), Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-term); Phospho (STY); Carbamidomethyl (C). Identified peptides as well as phosphorylation sites of MRPS36 were next visualized (SI Data) using alpamap63. A sequence motif analysis for residues around the reported phosphorylation site (S61) was performed for homologue sequences for MRPS36 from vertebrates (SI Data) MEME Suite50.

### Publication Abstract
The tricarboxylic acid cycle is the central pathway of energy production in eukaryotic cells and plays a key part in aerobic respiration throughout all kingdoms of life. One of the pivotal enzymes in this cycle is 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (OGDHC), which generates NADH by oxidative decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA. OGDHC is a megadalton protein complex originally thought to be assembled from three catalytically active subunits (E1o, E2o, E3). In fungi and animals, however, the protein MRPS36 has more recently been proposed as a putative additional component. Based on extensive cross-linking mass spectrometry data supported by phylogenetic analyses, we provide evidence that MRPS36 is an important member of the eukaryotic OGDHC, with no prokaryotic orthologues. Comparative sequence analysis and computational structure predictions reveal that, in contrast with bacteria and archaea, eukaryotic E2o does not contain the peripheral subunit-binding domain (PSBD), for which we propose that MRPS36 evolved as an E3 adaptor protein, functionally replacing the PSBD. We further provide a refined structural model of the complete eukaryotic OGDHC of approximately 3.45 MDa with novel mechanistic insights.

### Keywords
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (ogdhc); mrps36; tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle; krebs cycle; heart mitochondria; cross-linking mass spectrometry; complexome profiling; structural biology; comparative genomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


