### Accession
PXD022142

### Title
Female mating status influences protein composition of mature Drosophila oocytes

### Description
Oocyte composition can directly influence offspring fitness, particularly in oviparous species such as most insects, where it is the primary form of parental investment. Oocyte production is also energetically costly, dependent on female condition and responsive to external cues. We investigated whether mating influences mature oocyte composition in Drosophila melanogaster using a quantitative proteomic approach. Our analyses robustly identified 4,485 oocyte proteins and revealed that stage-14 oocytes from mated females differed significantly in protein composition relative to oocytes from unmated females. Proteins forming a highly interconnected network enriched for translational machinery and transmembrane proteins were increased in oocytes from mated females, including calcium binding and transport proteins. This mating-induced modulation of oocyte maturation was also significantly associated with proteome changes that are known to be triggered by egg activation. We propose that these compositional changes are likely to have fitness consequences and adaptive implications given the importance of oocyte composition, rather than active gene expression, to the maternal-to-zygotic transition and early embryogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Mature (stage 14) oocytes, including surrounding follicle cells of egg chamber,  were isolated from ovaries of 4 - 5 day old females that were either mated or unmated. Matings were conducted with heavy isotope labeled males to prevent influence of male-derived proteins on analysis. Following mating females were kept on standard media for approximately 12 hours to allow oviposition of accumulated, matured oocytes and then transferred to media not conducive to oviposition (molasses and agar without yeast) for approximately 12 hours to ensure the accumulation of oocytes that had matured in a post-mating female. Aproximately 100 oocytes were collected per sample, and three replicates were collected from both unmated and mated females. Each oocyte was rinced before being collected in a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube and Samples were washed 3x with PBS and solubilized in ~ 50 l detergent (1M HEPES with 2% SDS and 5% -mercaptoethanol) with alternating cycles of heating (95o C) and homogenization until completely solubilized. Prepared protein samples were stored at -80o C Protein isolation and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was conducted by Cambridge Proteomics following standard protocols, as previously described61. In brief, 30 g of each sample was reduced (TCEP), alkylated (iodacetamide), trypsin digested, and labeled with 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific). Replicate oocyte samples from unmated females were labeled with 127N, 128N, 129C and those from mated females were labeled 129N, 130N, 130C. Resulting peptides were combined in equal volumes, cleaned and desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters), and reconstituted in 0.1 mL 20mM ammonium formate with 4% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated with high pH reverse-phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC bridged ethyl hybrid C18 column; 1.7 um particle, 2.1 mm; Waters) over 60 min (linear gradient 5 – 60% acetonitrile with 20 mM ammonium nitrate; flow rate 0.25 mL/min). Fractions were collected in 1 min increments dried and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and combined into 15 fractions. Liquid chromatography with MS/MS was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatography nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides of each fraction were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm length, Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at 10ul/min. Eluted peptides were then separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray column (PepMap C18; 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter x 500 mm length, Thermo Scientific) for 90 min at 300nL/min in a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides from fractions were eluted from the column and sprayed (Easy-Spray Source; Thermo Fisher Scientific) into the mass spectrometer.  For each peptide ion, m/z values (MS1 scans) were measured at a resolution of 120,00 and range between 380 and 1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS (MS2) scans (Top Speed) of the most abundant precursor ions (excluding those that were singly charged, had unassigned charge states, or were outside of the 70 sec dynamic exclusion window) were isolated and fragmented by collision-induced disassociation (35% Normalized Collision Energy). From each MS2 scan the top 10 most abundant fragment ions were selected by Synchronous Precursor Selection for MS3 fragmentation by high energy collisional disassociation (65% normalized collision energy). For each fragment ion (mass range 100 – 500 Da) m/z values and relative abundances of reporter ions were measured in the Orbitrap analyzer (60,000 resolution).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot v 2.6 (Matrix Science), allowing for a MS tolerance of ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.8 Da, and up to two missed tryptic cleavages. Peptides and proteins were identified in reference to a database of the longest isoform of the D. melanogaster genome (r6.21)62 accounting for common contaminant proteins (cRAP v 1.0; thegpm.org). Standard protein modifications of carbamidomethylation (cysteine, fixed), oxidation (methionine, variable) and deamidation (glutamine and arginine, variable) were included. The isotopic labelling of male proteins ensured that they were not identified in this analysis. Protein abundance estimates for each sample was calculated as the sum of centroid TMT receptor ions (± 2 millimass unit window) corrected for isotopic label purity. Labeling efficiency of TMT reporter ions was 99.8%. In total, 761,774 MS/MS spectra were analyzed resulting in 87,683 peptide spectral matches and 5,407 proteins. Proteins were filtered to include only Drosophila proteins that were high confidence in all samples (FDR≤ 0.01) and identified by at least two unique peptides, for a total of 4,485 proteins. Protein intensities were log transformed and median difference normalized in MSnbase63. Differential abundance was calculated with empirical Bayes moderated t-tests using LIMMA64 and p-values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. All analyses, following protein identification, were conducted in R.

### Publication Abstract
Oocyte composition can directly influence offspring fitness, particularly in oviparous species such as most insects, where it is the primary form of parental investment. Oocyte production is also energetically costly, dependent on female condition and responsive to external cues. Here, we investigated whether mating influences mature oocyte composition in Drosophila melanogaster using a quantitative proteomic approach. Our analyses robustly identified 4,485 oocyte proteins and revealed that stage-14 oocytes from mated females differed significantly in protein composition relative to oocytes from unmated females. Proteins forming a highly interconnected network enriched for translational machinery and transmembrane proteins were increased in oocytes from mated females, including calcium binding and transport proteins. This mating-induced modulation of oocyte maturation was also significantly associated with proteome changes that are known to be triggered by egg activation. We propose that these compositional changes are likely to have fitness consequences and adaptive implications given the importance of oocyte&#xa0;protein composition, rather than active gene expression, to the maternal-to-zygotic transition and early embryogenesis.

### Keywords
Oogenesis, Maternal effects, Lc-msms, Drosophila, Tmt, Parental investment, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA

### Submitter
Caitlin McDonough-Goldstein

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA


