### Accession
PXD019574

### Title
Proteomic profiling maps the molecular pathways underlying the neuroprotective effects of the kinase inhibitor BX795 in a patient-derived model of Parkinson's disease

### Description
Disease-modifying therapies remain an important unmet need for neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD). The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular pathways affected by the multi-kinase inhibitor BX795, which is neuroprotective in an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based model of familial PD. To this end, we performed proteomics analysis in iPSC-derived neurons from patients bearing the G209A (p.A53T) α-synuclein (αSyn) mutation vis-à-vis control neurons, in the absence or presence of BX795. Comparison between p.A53T versus control neurons in the absence of BX795, revealed differential expression of 640 proteins from which only 67 were down-regulated whilst the rest 573 were up-regulated. This large increase in protein expression was linked by GO enrichment analysis mainly to the biological processes of transcription, translation, protein synthesis and modification. Upon treatment with BX795, the levels of a cohort of 118 proteins, lying mostly within these biological processes and representing approximately 20% of the total dysregulated proteins in p.A53T neurons, were restored. Enrichment analysis using the DAVID and Reactome softwares showed that these proteins are predominantly associated with mRNA metabolism, mRNA transport and translation, protein metabolism and degradation processes. This outcome was specific to p.A53T-neurons as BX795 had no significant effect on the proteome of control neurons.

### Sample Protocol
iPSC-derived neurons at 21 DIV were suspended, lysed and the proteins reduced in 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 7.8 through heating for 5 min. Next, the proteins were alkylated by 100 mM iodoacetamide treatment for 30 min in the dark. Samples were further processed according to the Single-Pot Solid-Phase enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method of Hughes et al. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1 in a ThermoMixer under continuous mixing at 1000 rpm. After digestion, the tubes were placed on a magnetic rack, and the supernatant containing the peptides was collected and dried down in a centrifugal evaporator (Savant SPD 1010, Thermo scientific). The peptide mixtures were reconstituted in a solution of 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide solution was incubated for 3 min in a sonication water bath. Peptide concentration was determined by nanodrop absorbance measurement at 280 nm. Ultra high pressure nanoLC. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μL/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 340 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35°C. LC-MS/MS. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. XCalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectral files (raw files) were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.9.0). Default parameters were used for protein identification and quantification. Trypsin specificity was set to allow two missed cleavages and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was set. The false discovery rate both for peptide and protein was set to 1%. For calculation of protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with both “second peptides” and “match between run” options enabled. The human FASTA files were from UniProt downloaded on 15 October 2019.

### Publication Abstract
Combining high throughput screening approaches with induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based disease modeling represents a promising unbiased strategy to identify therapies for neurodegenerative disorders. Here we applied high content imaging on iPSC-derived neurons from patients with familial Parkinson's disease bearing the G209A (p.A53T) &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;Syn) mutation and launched a screening campaign on a small kinase inhibitor library. We thus identified the multi-kinase inhibitor BX795 that at a single dose effectively restores disease-associated neurodegenerative phenotypes. Proteomics profiling mapped the molecular pathways underlying the protective effects of BX795, comprising a cohort of 118 protein-mediators of the core biological processes of RNA metabolism, protein synthesis, modification and clearance, and stress response, all linked to the mTORC1 signaling hub. In agreement, expression of human p.A53T-&#x3b1;Syn in neuronal cells affected key components of the mTORC1 pathway resulting in aberrant protein synthesis that was restored in the presence of BX795 with concurrent facilitation of autophagy. Taken together, we have identified a promising small molecule with neuroprotective actions as candidate therapeutic for PD and other protein conformational disorders.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Bx795, Proteomics, Mrna metabolism, Α-synuclein, Induced pluripotent stem cell derived neurons, P.a53t α-synuclein mutation

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology-Stem Cells, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, 127 Vassilissis Sofias Avenue, 11521 Athens, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca Matsas
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology-Stem Cells, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, 127 Vassilissis Sofias Avenue, 11521 Athens, Greece.


