### Accession
PXD023064

### Title
Systematic HLA Epitope Ranking Pan Algorithm (SHERPA)

### Description
To generate high quality training data for our MHC binding and presentation prediction models, we stably transfected alleles into HLA-null, K562 to create mono-allelic cell lines. Then, we performed immunoprecipitation using W6/32 antibody and gently eluted the peptides. Finally, they were analyzed using LC-MSMS. To validate the performance of our prediction algorithms, we also processed 12 lung and colorectal tumor tissues with the same protocol.

### Sample Protocol
We generated mono-allelic cell lines by stably transfecting K562 parental cells with a single allele of interest. Surface expression of target alleles was confirmed using flow cytometry (using W6/32 antibody) and pelleted. Pelleted cells were resuspended in a lysis buffer and the cell lysate was incubated overnight with W6/32 antibody immobilized on sepharose beads. The beads were rinsed with a wash buffer multiple times, and MHC bound peptides were eluted using an optimized elution buffer. Samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in a data dependent mode (MS1: Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution; Isolation window: 1.6 Da; fragmentation: ET; MS2: Orbitrap at 15,000 FWHM; m/z range: 300-800; cycle time: 3s).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PEAKS software (PEAKS Studio 10.0 build 20190129) using the default two step identification workflow, where the first step performs de novo sequencing to identify mass tags and the second step performs a database search on a subset of putative proteins identified using de novo mass tags. The workflow was run with the following settings. Protein database: Swissprot proteome database (downloaded on 03-20-2019); precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; Enzyme specificity: none; Fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215); Variable modifications: oxidation of Methionine (+15.9949), N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106). Peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered at 1% FDR, estimated using decoy sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Lc-msms, Mhc, Tumor, Mono-allelic, Binding prediction, Peptide

### Affiliations
Personalis Inc.
Personalis, Inc.

### Submitter
Sean Boyle

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Michael Boyle
Personalis, Inc.


