### Accession
PXD037601

### Title
Functional annotation of proteins for signaling network inference in non-model species

### Description
Molecular biology aims to understand the molecular basis of cellular responses, unravel dynamic regulatory networks, and model complex biological systems. However, these studies remain challenging in non-model species as a result of poor functional annotation of regulatory proteins, like kinases or phosphatases. To overcome this limitation, we developed a multi-layer neural network that annotates proteins by determining functionality directly from the protein sequence. We annotated the kinases and phosphatases in the non-model species, Glycine max (soybean), achieving a prediction sensitivity of up to 97%. To demonstrate the applicability, we used our functional annotations in combination with Bayesian network principles to predict signaling cascades using time series phosphoproteomics. We shed light on phosphorylation cascades in soybean seedlings upon cold treatment and identified Glyma.10G173000 (TOI5) and Glyma.19G007300 (TOT3) as key temperature response regulators in soybean. Importantly, the signaling cascade predictions do not rely upon known upstream kinases, kinase motifs, or protein interaction data, enabling de novo identification of kinase-substrate interactions. In addition to high accuracy and strong generalization, we showed that our functional prediction neural network is scalable to other model and non-model species, including Oryza sativa (rice), Zea mays (maize), Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), and Triticum aestivum (wheat). Overall, we demonstrated a data-driven systems biology approach for non-model species leveraging our predicted upstream kinases and phosphatases.

### Sample Protocol
A Glycine max (Soybean) time course experiment was carried in two groups control (20° C) and cold (10C) temperatures. Samples were harvested every in four biological replicates every 6 minutes up to one hour and after 24h, 48h and 72h after treatment exposition. 3 mg of proteins were extracted from a pool of two leaf tips and enriched for phosphopeptides using previously described methods (Vu et al, 2016, J Proteome Res, 15, 4304-17). The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra files were searched against the Soybean database (Williams 82 Genome Sequencing Project, Assembly 4 Annotation 1) with Maxquant software version 1.6.10.43, a program package that allows MS1-based label-free quantification (54, 55). Searches were performed within replicates (0, 6, 12, 16, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, and 60 min samples) with both control and cold treatment groups, with “match between runs” feature enabled in order to maximize peptide identification. Next, the four “Phospho(STY).txt” output files from the four replicates were merged into a single file. For that, if two or more replicates shared same values for all columns: “protein id”, “position”, “aminoacid” and “multiplicity”, the quantification values were merged to a pre-existing row; if not, it was appended to the dataframe as a new row. For downstream analysis only the merged file was used for input on NetPhorce.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temperature, Phosphoproteomics, Protein family, Soybean

### Affiliations
PhD student
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium; (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Cassio Flavio Fonseca de Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium; (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.


