### Accession
PXD012702

### Title
A pathogenic CtBP1 missense mutation causes altered cofactor binding and transcriptional activity

### Description
We previously reported a pathogenic de novo W342 mutation in the transcriptional corepressor CtBP1 in four independent patients with neurodevelopmental disabilities.  Here, we report the clinical phenotypes of seven additional individuals with the same recurrent de novo CtBP1 mutation.  Within this cohort we identified consistent CtBP1-related phenotypes of intellectual disability, ataxia, hypotonia and tooth enamel defects present in all patients. The W342 mutation in CtBP1 is located within a region implicated in a high affinity-binding cleft for CtBP-interacting proteins.  Unbiased proteomic analysis demonstrated reduced interaction of several chromatin modifying factors with the CtBP1 W342 mutant.  Genome-wide transcriptome analysis in human glioblastoma cells lines expressing -CtBP1 R342 (wt) or W342 mutation revealed changes in the expression profiles of genes controlling multiple cellular processes.  Patient-derived dermal fibroblasts were found to be more sensitive to apoptosis during acute glucose deprivation compared to controls.  Glucose deprivation strongly activated the BH3-only pro-apoptotic gene NOXA, suggesting a link between enhanced cell death and NOXA expression in patient fibroblasts.  Our results suggest that context-dependent relief of transcriptional repression of the CtBP1 mutant W342 allele may contribute to deregulation of apoptosis in target tissues of patients leading to neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
HTB17 cells overexpressing 3XFlag vector, 3XFlag CtBP1 or 3XFlag R342W mutant were grown in 20X150 mm dishes with DMEM+10% FBS and collected. The cell pellets were lysed and pulled with Flag antibody coated agarose beads. The beads with pulled proteins were washed and given to proteomics department, Danforth center for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the Uni_human_ database (unknown version, 68997 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme stricttrypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
We previously reported a pathogenic de novo p.R342W mutation in the transcriptional corepressor CTBP1 in four independent patients with neurodevelopmental disabilities [1]. Here, we report the clinical phenotypes of seven additional individuals with the same recurrent de novo CTBP1 mutation. Within this cohort, we identified consistent CtBP1-related phenotypes of intellectual disability, ataxia, hypotonia, and tooth enamel defects present in most patients. The R342W mutation in CtBP1 is located within a region implicated in a high affinity-binding cleft for CtBP-interacting proteins. Unbiased proteomic analysis demonstrated reduced interaction of several chromatin-modifying factors with the CtBP1 W342 mutant. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis in human glioblastoma cell lines expressing -CtBP1 R342 (wt) or W342 mutation revealed changes in the expression profiles of genes controlling multiple cellular processes. Patient-derived dermal fibroblasts were found to be more sensitive to apoptosis during acute glucose deprivation compared to controls. Glucose deprivation strongly activated the BH3-only pro-apoptotic gene NOXA, suggesting a link between enhanced cell death and NOXA expression in patient fibroblasts. Our results suggest that context-dependent relief of transcriptional repression of the CtBP1 mutant W342 allele may contribute to deregulation of apoptosis in target tissues of patients leading to neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

### Keywords
Human, Ctbp1, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Saint Louis University
St. Louis University

### Submitter
Thirugnana Subramanian

### Lab Head
Dr G. Chinnadurai
Saint Louis University


