### Accession
PXD031395

### Title
The AdipoR2 protein recruits an ER-localized fatty acid elongation complex to promote membrane homeostasis

### Description
The human AdipoR2 protein and its C. elegans homolog PAQR-2 are multi-pass plasma membrane proteins that protect cells against membrane rigidification. We seek to better understand the mechanisms by which these proteins can promote the synthesis and incorporation of membrane-fluidizing unsaturated fatty acids into phospholipids. To this end, we performed immunoprecipitations of tagged AdipoR2 and PAQR-2 expressed in HEK293 cells or whole C. elegans, respectively, and identified co-immunoprecipitated proteins using mass spectroscopy. Among the conserved interaction partners, we identified many proteins likely important for the protein life cycles (e.g. ribosome, proteasome, vesicle trafficking components). Importantly, several proteins important for fatty acid synthesis, elongation and incorporation into phospholipids were also identified as evolutionarily conserved AdipoR2/PAQR-2 interaction partners. We experimentally verified several of these interactions, and propose that AdipoR2 and PAQR-2 can recruit an ER-bound membrane complex to promote the production and incorporation of unsaturated fatty acids into phospholipids.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis and protein identification  The proteomic analysis was performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. The C.elegans samples (experiment Rd.1 PAQR-2, Rd.2 PAQR-2, Rd.1 PAQR-1) were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, samples were reduced (100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), in 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 60°C, 30 min), transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) prior to alkylation (10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) in DB, RT, 30 min). Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific, ratio 1:100) at 37°C overnight and an additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation, SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA followed by detergent removal using HiPPR Detergent Removal Resin (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions.  The HEK293 samples (experiment Rd.1, Rd.2) were digested using the suspension trapping (S-Trap™, Protifi) spin column digestion method according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, samples in 2% SDS were reduced (5 mM DTT, 60°C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM  MMTS, RT, 20 min) and mixed with S-Trap binding buffer. Samples were transferred to S-Trap™ micro spin columns followed by washes with binding buffer prior to trypsin digestion (1 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM TEAB at 37°C overnight. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation in three steps; 1) 50 mM TEAB, 2) 0.2% formic acid and 3) 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid and elates were combined. All samples were desalted using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific according to the manufacturer’s guidelines prior to analysis on QExactive HF (experiment Rd.1 PAQR-2, Rd.1 PAQR-1, Rd.1, Rd.2) or Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (experiment Rd.2 PAQR-2) interfaced with Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 60 min (HEK293) or 90 min (C.elegans) at a flow of 300 nL/min. The instruments operated in data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60K and 120K, respectively. The most intense multiply charged ions were selected for fragmentation, for QEHF collision energy HCD settings at 28 and MS2 spectra recorded at a resolution of 30K and for Fusion collision energy CID setting at 35 with detection in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed utilizing Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against SwissProt C.elegans (Nov 2017, 3972 sequences, Rd.1 PAQR-2) or UniProt C.elegans (Sep 2017, 26778 sequences, Rd.2 PAQR-2, Rd.1 PAQR-1 3267). HEK293 samples were matched against SwissProt Human (June 2019, 20432 sequences) or against a custom database containing the AdipoR2 sequence including tag. Mascot 2.5  (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 200 mmu for C.elegans and 30 mmu for Human raw data. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications and cysteine alkylation as static. The filter for PSM validation and identified peptide in the software was set 1% FDR by searching a revered database and identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy.

### Publication Abstract
The human AdipoR2 and its Caenorhabditis elegans homolog PAQR-2 are multipass plasma membrane proteins that protect cells against membrane rigidification. However, how AdipoR2 promotes membrane fluidity mechanistically is not clear. Using 13C-labeled fatty acids, we show that AdipoR2 can promote the elongation and incorporation of membrane-fluidizing polyunsaturated fatty acids into phospholipids. To elucidate the molecular basis of these activities, we performed immunoprecipitations of tagged AdipoR2 and PAQR-2 expressed in HEK293&#xa0;cells or whole C.&#xa0;elegans, respectively, and identified coimmunoprecipitated proteins using mass spectrometry. We found that several of the evolutionarily conserved AdipoR2/PAQR-2 interactors are important for fatty acid elongation and incorporation into phospholipids. We experimentally verified some of these interactions, namely, with the dehydratase HACD3 that is essential for the third of four steps in long-chain fatty acid elongation and ACSL4 that is important for activation of unsaturated fatty acids and their channeling into phospholipids. We conclude that AdipoR2 and PAQR-2 can recruit protein interactors to promote the production and incorporation of unsaturated fatty acids into phospholipids.

### Keywords
Human, Adipor2, Paqr-2, Phospholipids, C.elegans

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Pilon
Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


