### Accession
PXD038946

### Title
Insight into the underlying molecular mechanism of dilated cardiomyopathy through integrative analysis of data mining, iTRAQ-PRM proteomics and bioinformatics

### Description
DCM is a common cardiomyopathy worldwide, which is characterized by ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction. DCM is one of the most common diseases contributing to sudden death and heart failure. However, our understanding of its molecular mechanisms is limited because of its etiology and underlying mechanisms. Poor access to human myocardium is a significant limitation in the study of DCM. Firstly, DCM disease target genes were downloaded from public databases, and 935 genes were identified as key target genes. Next, a total of 787 DEPs, including 353 up-regulated and 434 down-regulated proteins, were identified in our animal experiment. The functional annotation of these DEPs revealed complicated molecular mechanisms including oxidation-reduction process, tricarboxylic acid cycle, protein folding, and triggered a series of molecular pathways involving TCA cycle, Oxidative phosphorylation, Cardiac muscle contraction. Finally, the DEPs were analyzed for association with the target genes screened in the public dataset. The overlapping proteins were validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). We obtained 154 key proteins and further determined the importance of these three pathways. Together, this study provided deep insights into the detailed molecular mechanisms of DCM and facilitated the identification of potential proteins associated with it.

### Sample Protocol
Three randomly selected individuals from the same treatment group were randomly mixed to reduce individual differentiation. Nine samples from each group were subjected to protein extraction. Firstly, an appropriate amount of tissue samples was grinded in liquid nitrogen and the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube, and then sonicated 15 minutes on ice bath using an ultrasonic processor in lysis buffer (7M Urea/2M Thiourea/4% SDS/40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5/1mM PMSF/2mM EDTA) to extract total protein. After centrifugation at 4°C for 20 minutes at 12,000 rpm. Following addition of prechilled acetone and 30 mM DTT to the centrifuge tube, the mixture was precipitated at -20 °C for 2 hours, centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 °C, then vacuum dried. As a final step, the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method. As directed by the manufacturer, the peptides mixture from each sample was labeled using the iTRAQ Reagent-8 plex Multiplex Kit (AB Sciex U.K. Limited). Samples were labelled as following: DCM-I (DCM1, DCM2 and DCM3), 115; DCM-II (DCM4, DCM5 and DCM6), 116; DCM-III (DCM7, DCM8 and DCM9), 117; Control-I (Ctrl-1, Ctrl-2 and Ctrl-3), 118; Control-II (Ctrl-4, Ctrl-5 and Ctrl-6), 119; Control- III (Ctrl-7, Ctrl-8 and Ctrl-9), 121. Then, the six labeled peptide samples were pooled and lyophilized using a vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
The Polypeptide samples were analyzed with the Triple-TOF 5600 Plus liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer coupled with Eksigent nanoLC system (AB SCIEX, Massachusetts, USA). In brief, the labeled samples were fractionated with a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo DINOEX Ultimate 3000BioRS) using a Durashell C18 (5μm，100 Å，4.6×250 mm) at high pH. And then a C18 trap column (5μm, 100μm×20mm) equipped with a C18 analytical column (3μm, 75μm×150mm) was used to elute over a 90 min gradient. Specifically, buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 98% H2O) and buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 98% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% H2O) were used. MS1 spectra were collected for 250ms, followed by MS2 spectra for 50ms, and precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15s.   2.3.3. Proteomic data analysis and bioinformatics The original MS/MS data were processed using ProteinpilotTM V4.5 search engine (AB SCIEX, Massachusetts, USA) for protein identification and quantification. The retrieval parameters were set as follows: Triple TOF 5600 instrument system, iTRAQ 8-plex quantification, biological modifications, cysteine modified with iodoacetamide, biological modifications were chosen as the subject of ID. Peptides were filtered utilizing 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and at least one unique. For further analysis, only proteins with an unused value greater than 1.3 are taken into account. The ABI ProteinPilot software v4.5 were used to calculate iTRAQ ratios and p-values. In this study, proteins with a fold change ≥1.5 (or ≤ 0.67) and p-value < 0.05 as the thresholds were considered as differently expressed proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC), and molecular functions (MF) were performed using the DAVID online database (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). DEPs were divided into functional pathways using the eukaryotic orthologous genome (KOG) database. Not only that, the plugin ClueGo in cyto-scape (version 3.7.1) is used to help researchers understand the biological pathways of differentially expressed proteins. 2.4. Association analysis of key target genes and DEPs in DCM The key genes obtained by data mining were imported into string database (https://string-db.org/) to obtain their corresponding proteins. The overlapping proteins of the two datasets were then identified as key proteins for DCM and visualized with the Venn diagram.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Molecular pathways, Mechanisms, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Gene network, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Chongqing Medical University
Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Jianbo Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianbo Li
Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University


