### Accession
PXD030780

### Title
A multi-species spike-in sample set for performance evaluation of label-free proteomics quantification

### Description
When evaluating the quantitative performance of label-free proteomics method(s), samples with known compositions are necessary to define key parameters such as reproducibility, missing data levels, accuracy, precision, as well as sensitivity/specificity for biomarker discovery. Here, we provide a carefully-designed multi-species spike-in sample set for such purposes, which was prepared by spiking small, variable amounts of E. Coli (for mimicking significant protein changes, i.e., true positives) and yeast (for balancing the variable  levels of E. coli proteins) proteins into a large, constant background of human proteins (representing unchanged proteins). The sample set encompasses a total of 25 LC-MS sample runs (5 E.coli-level groups, 5 LC-MS replicate runs in each group). The proportion of human proteins is 60% across all samples, and each group contains the following percentage of E. coli and yeast proteins : A: 5%/35%, B: 7.5%/32.5%, C: 10%/30%, D: 15%/25%, E: 20%/20%. These files were used to comprehensively evaluate the quantitative performances by ultra-high-resolution (UHR)-IonStar and SWATH-MS in Result 3.2 of “Ultra-High-Resolution IonStar Strategy Enhancing Accuracy and Precision of MS1-Based Proteomics and an Extensive Comparison with State-of-the-Art SWATH-MS in Large-Cohort Quantification (DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c05002)”.

### Sample Protocol
Multi-species protein samples were prepared using a surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/digestion (SEPOD) protocol. Homo sapiens colon cancer cell line SW620, Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4741 and Escherichia coli strain ATCC 25922 were cultured till confluence, collected into cell pellets and lysed in a surfactant cocktail containing 50 mM pH 8.0Tris- formic acid (FA), 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 2% IGEPAL CA-630 with protease inhibitors. Protein lysates from each species were mixed by the scheme described above based on protein concentrations determined by BCA to generate 5 individual samples, and mixed protein was digested by a precipitation/on-pellet digestion procedure. LC-MS data acquisition was performed by a trapping nano LC-ultra-high-resolution (UHR) Orbitrap MS system using featuring a selective trapping column-based sample cleanup/delivery strategy, a 2.5-hr nano LC separation, and a UHR 240k MS1 acquisition method. Detailed settings and results can be found in previously published papers by our group.

### Data Protocol
Data files in this sample set can be processed by most prevalently used label-free proteomics tools, e.g., MaxQuant, Proteome Discoverer, PEAKS. We recommend the use of UHR-IonStar, which enables in-depth and reliable proteomic quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics in large cohorts is highly valuable for clinical/pharmaceutical investigations but often suffers from severely compromised reliability, accuracy, and reproducibility. Here, we describe an ultra-high-resolution IonStar method achieving reproducible protein measurement in large cohorts while minimizing the ratio compression problem, by taking advantage of the exceptional selectivity of ultra-high-resolution (UHR)-MS1 detection (240k_FWHM@<i>m</i>/<i>z</i> = 200). Using mixed-proteome benchmark sets reflecting large-cohort analysis with technical or biological replicates (<i>N</i> = 56), we comprehensively compared the quantitative performances of UHR-IonStar vs a state-of-the-art SWATH-MS method, each with their own optimal analytical platforms. We confirmed a cutting-edge micro-liquid chromatography (LC)/Triple-TOF with Spectronaut outperforms nano-LC/Orbitrap for SWATH-MS, which was then meticulously developed/optimized to maximize sensitivity, reproducibility, and proteome coverage. While the two methods with distinct principles (i.e., MS1- vs MS2-based) showed similar depth-of-analysis (&#x223c;6700-7000 missing-data-free proteins quantified, 1% protein-false discovery rate (FDR) for entire set, 2 unique peptides/protein) and good accuracy/precision in quantifying high-abundance proteins, UHR-IonStar achieved substantially superior quantitative accuracy, precision, and reproducibility for lower-abundance proteins (a category that includes most regulatory proteins), as well as much-improved sensitivity/selectivity for discovering significantly altered proteins. Furthermore, compared to SWATH-MS, UHR-IonStar showed markedly higher accuracy for a single analysis of each sample across a large set, which is an inadequately investigated albeit critical parameter for large-cohort analysis. Finally, we compared UHR-IonStar vs SWATH-MS in measuring the time courses of altered proteins in paclitaxel-treated cells (<i>N</i> = 36), where dysregulated biological pathways have been very well established. UHR-IonStar discovered substantially more well-recognized biological processes/pathways induced by paclitaxel. Additionally, UHR-IonStar showed markedly superior ability than SWATH-MS in accurately depicting the time courses of well known to be paclitaxel-induced biomarkers. In summary, UHR-IonStar represents a reliable, robust, and cost-effective solution for large-cohort proteomic quantification with excellent accuracy and precision.

### Keywords
Performance evaluation, Label-free quantification, Ionstar

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States
Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center

### Submitter
Shuo Qian

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States


