### Accession
PXD010869

### Title
Quantification of brain, muscle, and liver using large SWATH-spectral library

### Description
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) requires a spectral library to extract quantitative measurements from the mass spectrometry data acquired in data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). Large combined spectral libraries containing SWATH assays have been generated for humans and several other organisms, but so far no publicly available library exists for measuring the proteome of zebrafish, a rapidly emerging model system in biomedical research. Here, we present a large zebrafish SWATH spectral library to measure the abundance of 104’185 proteotypic peptides from 10’405 proteins. The library includes proteins expressed in 9 different zebrafish tissues (brain, eye, heart, intestine, liver, muscle, ovaries, spleen, and testes) and provides an important new resource to quantify 40% of the protein-coding zebrafish genes. We employ this resource to quantify the proteome across brain, muscle, and liver and characterize divergent expression levels of paralogous proteins in different tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish husbandry and tissue dissection Adult AB zebrafish were raised at 28°C under standard husbandry conditions. All experimental procedures were carried out according to the Swiss and EU ethical guidelines and were approved by the animal experimentation ethical committee of Canton of Vaud (permit VD3177). The 6 month old male and female zebrafish were euthanized, manually dissected, and tissues were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for further processing following standard protocols.    Sample preparation  Brain from male or female zebrafish, and the muscle from male zebrafish were cut into sections or grinded while cooling with liquid nitrogen. From the grinded tissues, about 3 mg were transferred into pressure cycling technology (PCT) Microtubes. For liver of male or female zebrafish, a piece of 0.9 – 3.8 mg of tissue was transferred into PCT Microtubes for subsequent processing. For all samples, lysis and digestion were performed based on a protocol described in Guo et al.. Lysis buffer, pH 8.0 (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM EDTA, cOmplete protease inhibitor (1:50)) was added to the tissue sections, and lysis and digestion of the samples was performed with the Barocycler NEP2320EXT (Pressure BioSciences) at 31°C. Lysis was conducted using the PCT-MicroPestle with 60 cycles consisting of 50 s at 45 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure. For reduction and alkylation, the buffer was diluted to 3.75 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, before peptides were simultaneously reduced with 9 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 35 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 25°C. The first digestion step was performed using LysC (estimated enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100), and was carried out in the barocycler using 45 cycles of 50 s at 20 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure. For the second digestion, samples were diluted to 2 M Urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested using Trypsin (estimated enzyme/protein ratio of 1:75) for 90 cycles consisting of 50 s at 20 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure. The digestion was quenched by acidifying samples to pH 1.5 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted using C18-columns (The Nest Group Inc.) and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water and eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water. The buffer was evaporated using vacuum centrifugation at 45°C. Dried peptides were either dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren) for injection into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of tissue samples The peptides of brain, liver, and muscle of 6 male wild type zebrafish (6 months old) were measured on a TripleTOF 5600 with a 90 min gradient and the mass spectrometer was operated in SWATH mode. The precursor peptide ions were accumulated for 250 ms in 64 overlapping variable windows within an m/z range from 400 to 1200. Fragmentation of the precursor peptides was achieved by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) with rolling collision energy for peptides with charge 2+ adding a spread of 15eV. The MS2 spectra were acquired in high-sensitivity mode with an accumulation time of 50 ms per isolation window resulting in a cycle time of 3.5 s. The tissues from the different fish were injected consecutively in a block design to prevent any possible confounding effects due to deviation in machine performance. The SWATH-MS data was quantified using the OpenSWATH workflow on the in-house iPortal platform. An m/z fragment ion extraction window of 0.05 Th, an extraction window of 600 s, and a set of 10 different scores were used as described before. To match features between runs, detected features were aligned using a spline regression with a target assay FDR of 0.01. The aligned peaks were allowed to be within 3 standard deviations or 60 s after retention time alignment. For runs where no peak could be identified, the signal was integrated using the single shortest Path method. The data was then further processed using the R/Bioconductor package SWATH2stats. Proteins that had precursors with an m-score lower than 1.4125 × 10-8 and peptides with an m-score threshold lower than 7.0795 × 10-6 were selected for further analysis. This threshold resulted in an estimated peptide FDR of 0.00991, and protein FDR of 0.0092 (using an estimated fraction of false targets (FFT) or π0-value of 0.77 for estimating the FDR). In total 25’914 peptides passed this stringent threshold. The protein abundance was then estimated using the IBAQ method with the aLFQ R/CRAN package.

### Publication Abstract
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) requires a spectral library to extract quantitative measurements from the mass spectrometry data acquired in data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). Large combined spectral libraries containing SWATH assays have been generated for humans and several other organisms, but so far no publicly available library exists for measuring the proteome of zebrafish, a rapidly emerging model system in biomedical research. Here, we present a large zebrafish SWATH spectral library to measure the abundance of 104,185 proteotypic peptides from 10,405 proteins. The library includes proteins expressed in 9 different zebrafish tissues (brain, eye, heart, intestine, liver, muscle, ovary, spleen, and testis) and provides an important new resource to quantify 40% of the protein-coding zebrafish genes. We employ this resource to quantify the proteome across brain, muscle, and liver and characterize divergent expression levels of paralogous proteins in different tissues. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD010876, PXD010869) and SWATHAtlas (PASS01237).

### Keywords
Brain, Liver, Zebrafish, Muscle

### Affiliations
1 Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 2 Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
1 Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 2 Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


