### Accession
PXD018224

### Title
Multi-Omics’ Defines Unstable and Stable Atherosclerotic Plaque Signatures and Identifies Novel Targets for Plaque Stabilisation

### Description
The rupture of unstable atherosclerotic plaques, leading to debilitating or fatal thrombotic events, are a major health concern worldwide. Limited understanding as to the molecular drivers of plaque destabilisation and rupture hinders efforts in diagnosis and treatment prior to thrombotic events. Using an advanced pre-clinical model (tandem stenosis), we characterise the molecular signatures associated with plaque instability in atherosclerotic vessels.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic profiling defined the unique proteome signature of unstable plaque comparative to stable and healthy phenotype. Single cell RNA-sequencing of leukocytes described the genetic expression pertinent to disease phenotype. Using integrative multi-omics we identified the protein heterodimer complex S100a8/S100a9 as unique to unstable plaque, with neutrophils implicated as the transcriptional drivers of S100a8/a9 expression.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (15) Tandem mass spectra were searched against Mus musculus (mouse) reference proteome (59,345 entries, downloaded 6-2019) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters included carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerotic plaque rupture leading to myocardial infarction is a major global health burden. Applying the tandem stenosis (TS) mouse model, which distinctively exhibits the characteristics of human plaque instability/rupture, we use quantitative proteomics to understand and directly compare unstable and stable atherosclerosis. Our data highlight the disparate natures and define unique protein signatures of unstable and stable atherosclerosis. Key proteins and pathway networks are identified such as the innate immune system, and neutrophil degranulation. The latter includes calprotectin S100A8/A9, which we validate in mouse and human unstable plaques, and we demonstrate the plaque-stabilizing effects of its inhibition. Overall, we provide critical insights into the unique proteomic landscape of unstable atherosclerosis (as distinct from stable atherosclerosis and vascular tissue). We further establish the TS model as a reliable preclinical tool for the discovery and testing of plaque-stabilizing drugs. Finally, we provide a knowledge resource defining unstable atherosclerosis that will facilitate the identification and validation of long-sought-after therapeutic targets and drugs for plaque stabilization.

### Keywords
Mouse, Atherosclerosis, Thrombosis, Plaque

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics, Baker Heart Inst., Australia
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Molecular Proteomics, Baker Heart Inst., Australia


