### Accession
PXD028532

### Title
Proteome of human branching and non-branching cholangiocyte organoids

### Description
Current model systems for studying intrahepatic biliary disease fail to recapitulate the architecture of intrahepatic bile ducts. Organoids from intrahepatic cholangiocytes can with a new culture method grow with a branching pattern resembling the structure of intrahepatic bile ducts. This dataset contains data from samples of these organoids and from control organoids cultured without this technique. Culture have been performed using isotope labeled amino acids to help distinguish cell derived proteins from the basement membrane extract used as a culture substrate for the organoids.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized samples were rehydrated in extraction buffer with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 8 M urea, and homogenized using a Bioruptor®Plus (Diagenode SA, Seraing, Belgium). PTotein concentration of sample supernatants was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 30 µg of protein was processed further by reduction with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine for 30 min at 37°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, followed by overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid (FA) to a pH < 3. Samples were desalted using C18 reversed-phase spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA and the peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop 2000c Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The LC MS/MS analysis was performed on Tribrid mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Nanospray source and coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) pump (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). One microgram of peptides was loaded and concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 precolumn (75 μm x 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm x 25 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) with the column temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear 2h gradient at the flow rate of 300 nL/min from 2% solvent B (0.1% FA/ACN, Merck)/98% Solvent A (0.1% FA in water, Merck) to 40% solvent B. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS survey scans from m/z 375-1500 with a resolution 120,000 were performed in the Orbitrap detector. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 4 × 105 with an injection time of 50 ms. The most intense ions (up to 20) with charge states 2-7 from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation. MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) and detected in Orbitrap detectors with a resolution of 30,000. The normalized collision energy (NCE) in HCD cells was set at 30%. The values for the AGC target and injection time were 5 × 104 and 54 ms, respectively. The duration of dynamic exclusion was set at 45s and the mass tolerance window at 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw files was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0). The resulting peak lists were searched in Andromeda against a reviewed human UniProtKB database (release 2021_02), complemented with the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification and deamidation (Asparagine and Glutamine), oxidation (Methionine, Proline) and acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The “match between runs” option was enabled with default settings to match identifications across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Human cholangiocyte organoids show great promise for regenerative therapies and in&#xa0;vitro modeling of bile duct development and diseases. However, the cystic organoids lack the branching morphology of intrahepatic bile ducts (IHBDs). Here, we report establishing human branching cholangiocyte organoid (BRCO) cultures. BRCOs self-organize into complex tubular structures resembling the IHBD architecture. Single-cell transcriptomics and functional analysis showed high similarity to primary cholangiocytes, and importantly, the branching growth mimics aspects of tubular development and is dependent on JAG1/NOTCH2 signaling. When applied to cholangiocarcinoma tumor organoids, the morphology changes to an in&#xa0;vitro morphology like primary tumors. Moreover, these branching cholangiocarcinoma organoids (BRCCAOs) better match the transcriptomic profile of primary tumors and showed increased chemoresistance to gemcitabine and cisplatin. In conclusion, BRCOs recapitulate a complex process of branching morphogenesis in&#xa0;vitro. This provides an improved model to study tubular formation, bile duct functionality, and associated biliary diseases.

### Keywords
Embryonic development, Cholangiocyte organoids, Intrahepatic bile duct, Branching morphogenesis, Disease modelling, Cholangiocarcinoma, Cholangiocytes

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luc van der Laan
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.


