### Accession
PXD038704

### Title
A unique photoprotection mechanism in Chlorella species

### Description
Light is the driving force of photosynthesis. However, excessive light can be harmful. Photoinhibition, or lightinduced photodamage, is one of the key processes limiting photosynthesis. When the absorbed light exceeds the amount that can be dissipated by photosynthetic electron flow and other processes, damaging radicals are formed that mostly inactivate photosystem II (PSII). A welldefined mechanism that protects the photosynthetic apparatus from photoinhibition has been described in the model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and plants. Chlorella ohadii is a green microalga, isolated from biological desert soil crusts, that thrives under extreme high light (HL) in which other organisms do not survive. Here, we show that this alga evolved unique protection mechanisms distinct from those of C. reinhardtii and plants. When grown under extreme HL, significant structural changes were noted in the C. ohadii thylakoids, including a drastic reduction in the antennae and the formation of stripped core PSII, lacking its outer and inner antennae. This is accompanied by a massive accumulation of protective carotenoids and proteins that scavenge harmful radicals. At the same time, several elements central to photoinhibition protection in C. reinhardtii, such as psbS, the stressrelated light harvesting complex (LHCSR), PSII protein phosphorylation and statetransitions are entirely absent or were barely detected in C. ohadii. A carotenoid biosynthesis related protein (CBR) is largely accumulated in the LHCII remains of HL cells and in the absence of psbS and LHCSR can function in sensing the HL and protecting from PI. Taken together, a unique photoinhibition protection mechanism evolved in C. ohadii, enabling the species to thrive under extremelight intensities where other photosynthetic organisms fail to survive.

### Sample Protocol
C. ohadii was grown in Tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP) medium at 28 °C, as previously described (PMID: 33725388). Cultures were grown under white light of either 2000 (HL) or 100 μmols photons m-2s-1 (LL). To achieve full acclimation to HL, the cells were grown in HL for 6 generations and maintained below OD750nm=0.7 to prevent self-shading. Thylakoids were extracted as previously described (PMID: 33725388). Light harvesting complex and photosystem complexes were isolated using sucrose density gradient: Thylakoid membranes were solubilized for 10 min, at 4 oC, in 1% -DDM and then cleared by centrifugation (12,000 g, 10 min). Thereafter, the extracted protein complexes were fractionated over a 4-45% sucrose density gradient in 25 mM MES (pH 6.5) buffer, by centrifugation at 100,000 g, for 20 h, using a SW-41 rotor. Label-free thylakoid membranes and isolated photosynthetic complexes of LL and HL C. ohadii were prepared as described (PMID: 33725388). Desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)., coupled online to a RSLC nano HPLC (Ultimate 3000, UHPLC Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr Maisch; GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with a linear 120 min gradient of 5–28%, followed by a 15 min gradient of 28–95%, and a 10 min wash with 95% acetonitrile mixed with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15 μl min−1). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in positive mode, at a range of m/z 300–1800, resolution 60000 for MS1 and 15000 for MS2, using a repetitively full MS scan, followed by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (2.1.4)(PMID: 27809316) and analysed with Perseus (2.0.7) (PMID: 27348712) to obtain label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values. Database searching was performed using trypsin as the digesting enzyme with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, up to two missed cleavages permitted, mass tolerance of 20 ppm, 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification, and a minimum of two peptides for pairwise comparison in each protein. As the proteome of C. ohadii is yet unavailable, the C. sorokiniana proteome database, downloaded from UniProt (UP000239899), was used for protein identification (20/10/2019, 10201 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
While light is the driving force of photosynthesis, excessive light can be harmful. Photoinhibition is one of the key processes that limit photosynthetic productivity. A well-defined mechanism that protects from photoinhibition has been described. Chlorella ohadii is a green micro-alga, isolated from biological desert soil crusts, which thrives under extreme high light (HL). Here, we show that this alga evolved unique protection mechanisms distinct from those of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii or plants. When grown under extreme HL, a drastic reduction in the size of light harvesting antennae occurs, resulting in the presence of core photosystem II, devoid of outer and inner antennas. This is accompanied by a massive accumulation of protective carotenoids and proteins that scavenge harmful radicals. At the same time, several elements central to photoinhibition protection in C. reinhardtii, such as psbS, light harvesting complex stress-related, photosystem II protein phosphorylation and state transitions are entirely absent or were barely detected. In addition, a carotenoid biosynthesis-related protein accumulates in the thylakoid membranes of HL cells and may function in sensing HL and protecting the cell from photoinhibition. Taken together, a unique photoinhibition protection mechanism evolved in C. ohadii, enabling the species to thrive under extreme-light intensities where other photosynthetic organisms fail to survive.

### Keywords
High light, Chlorella, Ohadii, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion Haifa 32000 Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Gadi Schuster
Faculty of Biology Technion Haifa 32000 Israel


