### Accession
PXD022508

### Title
Desulfobacillus biomass profiling grown at pH 3.9 and pH 5.0

### Description
Novel Desulfobacillus species biomass was grown in reactors at pH3.9 and pH5.0 with 2 biological replicated. Shotgun proteomics was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Duplicate samples at each pH value of the biomass grown in reactors (pH 3.9 A+B and pH 5.0 A+B) were centrifuged, washed and transferred to 2 ml low-binding microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, The Netherlands) prior to protein extraction. Around 0.1 gram of wet weight pellet was resuspended in 500 ml of 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 100 mM Tris –HCl pH 7.6. Cells were lysed by sonication with a 3 mm tip using a Branson sonifier in 6 pulses of 30 s. Around 40 µg of protein was separated by gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and cut into 5 slices per sample to fractionate proteins. The gel slices were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and peptides were loaded on STAGE-tips (Stop And Go Elution, C18-reversed phase SPE) for desalting and concentration.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis a custom Desulfobacillus database with added sequences for typical contaminant proteins (e.g. skin and hair proteins) was used. For database searches, validation and relative quantification the MaxQuant software package was used (version 1.5.0.0). A false discovery rate of 1% was tolerated at both peptide and protein level with LFQ label-free quantitation and match between runs enabled. All MaxQuant parameters are listed in Excel file "Desulfobacillus_shotgunproteomics_analysis.xls" available from this ProteomeXchange deposition. Differential proteins were called based on student t-test p-value and available LFQ value in two biological replicates of at least either group.

### Publication Abstract
In acid drainage environments, biosulfidogenesis by sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) attenuates the extreme conditions by enabling the precipitation of metals as their sulfides, and the neutralization of acidity through proton consumption. So far, only a handful of moderately acidophilic SRB species have been described, most of which are merely acidotolerant. Here, a novel species within a novel genus of moderately acidophilic SRB is described, <i>Acididesulfobacillus acetoxydans</i> gen. nov. sp. nov. strain INE, able to grow at pH 3.8. Bioreactor studies with strain INE at optimum (5.0) and low (3.9) pH for growth showed that strain INE alkalinized its environment, and that this was more pronounced at lower pH. These studies also showed the capacity of strain INE to completely oxidize organic acids to CO<sub>2</sub>, which is uncommon among acidophilic SRB. Since organic acids are mainly in their protonated form at low pH, which increases their toxicity, their complete oxidation may be an acid stress resistance mechanism. Comparative proteogenomic and membrane lipid analysis further indicated that the presence of saturated ether-bound lipids in the membrane, and their relative increase at lower pH, was a protection mechanism against acid stress. Interestingly, other canonical acid stress resistance mechanisms, such as a Donnan potential and increased active charge transport, did not appear to be active.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Desulfobacillus

### Affiliations
Radboudumc
Translational Metabolic Laboratory Department of Laboratory Medicine Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Alain J. van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory Department of Laboratory Medicine Radboudumc


