### Accession
PXD025298

### Title
ASB11 controls purinosome formation through PAICS ubiquitination

### Description
Purine act as building block for DNA and RNA, provide cellular energy and signaling, and can generate cofactors such as NADH and coenzyme A. Purine de novo synthesis pathway begins with amino acids, ribose 5-phosphate, CO2 and NH3 with 6 enzymes and 10 enzymatic steps to convert PRPP to IMP. In previous study, under purine-depleted or other stimuli the six enzymes will form dynamic and reversible complex called purinosome to enhance the pathway flux. However, the mechanism of purinosome formation is unknown. Phosphoribosyl aminoimidazole succinocarboxamide synthetase (PAICS), an enzyme involved in the step7 and 8 of purine biosynthesis. In our lab, we used interactome and ubiquiylome to identify PAICS, which is a substrate of ASB11. ASB11 is a substrate adaptor of cullin 5 ubiquitin ligase complex and is able to bind PAICS for ubiquitination. Here, we found that ASB11 could increase purinosome formation without any stimuli. This effect depends on ASB11 E3 function, which can ubiquitinate PAICS on K74 site. We generate K74R mutation of PAICS so that ASB11 couldn’t ubiquitinate it. Interestingly, this mutant reduces the formation of purinosomes under purine-depleted and other stressed conditions. After further research, we found ASB11 expression level will increase under some specific conditions.  Moreover, we analyzed TCGA database and found that the expression of ASB11 in melanoma cell is higher than normal cell. Consistent with our finding, melanoma cell has partially formed purinosome under basal condition because of the higher expression of ASB11. We guess that ASB11 may plays an important role in cancer cell.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-Labeling and Cell Culture For SILAC experiments, cells were cultured in DMEM (Thermo, #88364) deficient in L-arginine and L-lysine and supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Biological Industries, #04-011-1B), penicillin and streptomycin. Specifically, ASB11- and vector-overexpressed cells were supplied with [13C6, 15N4]HCl (Arg-10) and L-lysine [13C6]HCl (Lys-6) (Thermo, #89990 and #89988), and L-arginine (Arg-0) and L-lysine (Lys-0) (Thermo, #89989 and #89987), respectively. Cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 2 weeks. Treat cells with 1 mM MG132 for 16 hours before harvesting. Approximately 100 million cells per condition were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and then harvested.   Cell Lysis, Protein Digestion Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in an room-temperature urea lysis buffer containing, 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and protease inhibitor (Roche, #04693132001). The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 10 min at RT. Braford assay was used to determine the protein concentration of each sample. Respective SILAC mixes were created by combining 15 mg of protein per SILAC state. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, #D8161) at 37℃ for 70 min and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #I6125) at RT for 60 min, in the dark. Lysates were diluted to 4 M urea with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako, #125-02543), using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50, at 37℃ for 4 hours. The peptide mixtures were further diluted to 1.5M urea and subsequently digested with Trypsin (Promega, V511X) using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50, at 37℃ for O/N. Digests were quenched with trifluroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptide solutions were cleared by centrifugation prior to desalting. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak PlusC18 cartridges (Waters, #WAT020515) and aliquot 50 g desalted for peptide fractionation. Then, samples were lyophilized by SpeedVac.   Fractionation for Proteome Analysis Peptides fractionation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo, #84868). Briefly, dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and then loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column. Peptides were bound to the hydrophobic resin under aqueous conditions and desalted by washing the column with water. Subsequently, bound peptides were eluted into eight different fractions collected by centrifugation with a step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentration. Each fraction was then dried by SpeedVac.  K--GG Peptide Enrichment For enrichment of K-ε-GG peptides, anti-K-ε-GG antibody from the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit was utilized (Cell Signaling Technology, #5562). Peptides were reconstituted in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer. Incubation of sample and beads was performed with gentle end-over-end rotation at 4℃ for O/N. Beads were washed twice with 1.5 ml of ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes with ice-cold 2dH2O. K-ε-GG peptides were eluted from the antibody with 55 l of 0.15% TFA twice and cleared of salt or antibody contamination by using Ziptips C18 (Millipore) and followed by NanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  TurboID 1. Day O:  Cells are seeded on 10-cm-dishes and grow overnight.  2. Day 1:  CaCl2 Transfection with 15μg HA-TurboID vector and HA-TurboID –dnASB11 respectively.  3. Day 2:  Refresh medium with 10ml complete medium after 16hr-post-transfection,  500 μM biotin is added into medium and incubate for overnight.  4. Day 3:  Cells are lysed with 1ml BioID lysis buffer, and sonication is performed on ice for 20 sec (BRANSON SONIFIER, output control: 2, duty cycle: 20)  5. Wash Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1; Invitrogen, 10mg/mL, Cat. No. 65002) with BioID lysis buffer for 5 times. Add 20 μl beads (200 μg) for one 10-cm-dish and incubate overnight at 4oC. * 80 μl cell lysate is retained as input.  6. Day 4: * Save the supernatant for binding efficiency determination. Beads are washed once with wash buffer 1; Beads are washed once with wash buffer 2; Beads are washed once with wash buffer 3; Beads are washed twice with wash buffer 4.  7. Elute proteins with 40 ul 1x sample buffer from beads for 10 mins at 100°C. Samples from pull-down and input are reserved for Western blot.  TurboID Buffer recipe Wash buffer 2,3,4, store at 4℃ BioID lysis buffer: 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCI, 0.4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT,  2% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors  Wash buffer 1 : 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCI, 2% SDS, 5 mM EDTA  Wash buffer 2: 0.2% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCI, 1 mM EDTA,  and 50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5  Wash buffer 3:  250 mM LiCI, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCI,  1 mM EDTA and 10 mM Tris, pH 8.1  Wash buffer 4 : 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, and 50 mM NaCI

### Data Protocol
SILAC-ubiquitylome Shotgun proteomic identifications - NanoLC−nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and MS2 scan analysis at 30K resolution in the orbitrap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5 × 104 and the max injection time was 54 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles; the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.  SILAC-Proteome Shotgun proteomic identifications - NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to the Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 90 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 120K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 106. The 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for CID MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap (AGC target at 10000) with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge state were also excluded.  BioID-Interactome Shotgun proteomic identifications - NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 60 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 60K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 106. The 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for CID MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap (AGC target at 10000) with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge state were also excluded.   Database search The K-ε-GG peptides were identified with MaxQuant. Biotinylated peptides were identified with Proteome Discoverer (v2.4) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The database was downloaded from Uniprot and consists of 20187 human target sequences. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full) allowing for two missed cleavages and precursor mass tolerances were 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.2 Da for fragment ions. Dynamic modifications were set for heavy lysine (13C6) (+ 6.02013), heavy arginine (13C615N4) (+ 10.00827), lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da/+383.22810) (heavy amino acids and lysine-ε-GG were only set for SILAC experiment), methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670). A maximum of 3 dynamic modifications was allowed per peptide and a static modification of +57.02147 Da was set for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Percolator node within Proteome Discoverer was used to filter the peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rate to 1% and peptide areas were calculated using the Precursor Ions Quantifier node. The unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Purine de novo synthesis, Purinosome, Asb11, Paics

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Chieh CHOU

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


