### Accession
PXD013729

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Rhodopsedomonas palustris longevity

### Description
Proteomics analysis of Rhodopseudomonas palustris 6 and 20 days after growth arrest.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were extracted with 1 mL Discovery C18 SPE columns (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) as previously described (DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01894-17). A total of 500 ng digested peptides was loaded into a trap column (5 cm x 360 µm OD x 150 µm ID fused silica capillary tubing, Polymicro, Phoenix, AZ; packed with 3.6-µm Aeries C18 particles, Phenomenex, Torrence, CA) and separated in a capillary column (70 cm x 360 µm OD x 75 µm ID packed with 3-µm Jupiter C18 stationary phase, Phenomenex) with the following gradient: 1-8% B solvent in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min. Solvent A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly analyzed in an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS scans were collected a range of 400-2000 m/z and a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400. The top 12 most intense ions with ≥ 2 charges were submitted to high-collision energy (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30 and resolution of 17,000 at m/z 400. Each parent ion was fragmented once before dynamically excluding it for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2016.136). PIdentification of peptides was done by searching against the R. palustris ATCC BAA-98 (strain CGA009) sequences from the Uniprot Knowledgebase (downloaded on August 30, 2016). The search was performed first with a larger parent mass tolerance (20 ppm) to identify peptides and re-calibrate peptide masses. After re-calibration, the parent mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for a second round of search. During the searches oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, and trypsin digestion was required in both peptide termini. Identifications were filtered with 1% false-discovery rate at peptide-spectrum match and protein levels. The function “matching between runs” was checked to detect peptide peaks in LC-MS/MS runs that they were not fragmented. Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were used to quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Gram-negative bacteria in infections, biofilms, and industrial settings often stop growing due to nutrient depletion, immune responses, or environmental stresses. Bacteria in this state tend to be tolerant to antibiotics and are often referred to as dormant. <i>Rhodopseudomonas palustris</i>, a phototrophic alphaproteobacterium, can remain fully viable for more than 4 months when its growth is arrested. Here, we show that protein synthesis, specific proteins involved in translation, and a stringent response are required for this remarkable longevity. Because it can generate ATP from light during growth arrest, <i>R. palustris</i> is an extreme example of a bacterial species that will stay alive for long periods of time as a relatively homogeneous population of cells and it is thus an excellent model organism for studies of bacterial longevity. There is evidence that other Gram-negative species also continue to synthesize proteins during growth arrest and that a stringent response is required for their longevity as well. Our observations challenge the notion that growth-arrested cells are necessarily dormant and metabolically inactive and suggest that such bacteria may have a level of metabolic activity that is higher than many would have assumed. Our results also expand our mechanistic understanding of a crucial but understudied phase of the bacterial life cycle.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> We are surrounded by bacteria, but they do not completely dominate our planet despite the ability of many to grow extremely rapidly in the laboratory. This has been interpreted to mean that bacteria in nature are often in a dormant state. We investigated life in growth arrest of <i>Rhodopseudomonas palustris</i>, a proteobacterium that stays alive for months when it is not growing. We found that cells were metabolically active, and they continued to synthesize proteins and mounted a stringent response, both of which were required for their longevity. Our results suggest that long-lived bacteria are not necessarily inactive but have an active metabolism that is well adjusted to life without growth.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Rhodopsedomonas palustris, Proteome, Longevity

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


