### Accession
PXD020260

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Identifies Sytenin-1 as a Universal Biomarker of Exosomes

### Description
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles derived from the endosomal compartment. They contain a multitude of bioactive constituents and mediate intercellular communication in health and disease. The frequently used biomarkers of exosomes are heterogeneous and do not exhibit universal utility across different cell types. To uncover ubiquitous and abundant proteins that can serve as universal biomarkers of exosomes, we employed an unbiased and quantitative proteomic approach based on Super SILAC coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). In total 1,243 proteins were consistently quantified in the proteome of exosomes, irrespective of the cellular source or isolation method. Among them, a cohort of 22 proteins were universally enriched, and 15 proteins consistently depleted in the proteome of exosomes when compared to cells. Among the enriched proteins, we found several membrane proteins and GTPases, whereas the cohort of depleted proteins was predominantly composed by nuclear proteins. Our study revealed that Syntenin-1 is the most abundant ubiquitous protein in exosomes from distinct cell sources, thus representing an ideal candidate for universal biomarker of exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
For Super-SILAC standard, once the incorporation rate of heavy Arg10 and Lys8 was superior to 95%, cells were washed twice in PBS and lysed in urea buffer. Lysates were sonicated on ice using a metal tip probe, in short sonication cycles intercalated with ice incubation, to avoid heating the urea buffer. After sonication, lysates mixture was centrifuged at 4 ºC, 15,000 rpm for 15 min, transferred to a clean tube, aliquoted and stored at -80 ºC. Each aliquot was thaw and used only once, to avoid repeated freeze and thaw cycles.  Protein lysates from exosomes (light-labelled) and from the Super-SILAC standard mix (heavy-labelled), both in in urea buffer (8M urea, 75mM NaCl, 50mM TRIS), were quantified using microBCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, light-labelled exosome lysate was combined to the heavy-labelled Super SILAC standard mix at 1:1 ratio (totaling 10 g). Proteins were reduced using 1 mM DTT (Sigma) for 1h at room temperature, and alkylated using 5.5 mM of IAA (Sigma) for 45 min, at room temperature protected from light. Prior to protease digestion, samples were diluted 8-fold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma). To digest the proteins into peptides, Trypsin/LysC mix mass-spec grade (Promega) was used at 1:10 enzyme:protein ratio for an overnight digestion at room temperature. In the following day, samples were acidified to pH <4.0 using 1% TFA (Sigma). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Pierce C18 spin tips (Thermo Scientific), following manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed in the MaxQuant software25 version 1.6.1.0 for all experiments: exosomes of 14 cell lines (n=42 raw files) and for the exosomes isolation methods comparison (n=27 raw files). Andromeda search engine47 performed the search against the human Uniprot database. For identification, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used as threshold for both the peptide and the protein levels. Because a Super-SILAC heavy-labelled standard was used, the option multiplicity 2 was selected, with Arg10 and Lys8 selected as heavy labels, and the re-quantify option was enabled. Other settings included: a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids, specificity for trypsin and maximum two missed cleavages. For modifications: Acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. The match between runs parameter was not enabled. iBAQ option was enabled for the exosomes of 14 cell lines experiment. All other parameters used were MaxQuant default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Biomarker, Quantitative proteomics, Super silac, Exosomes

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Head of Proteomics, CRUK Beatson Institute, UK

### Submitter
Kelly Hodge

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Head of Proteomics, CRUK Beatson Institute, UK


