### Accession
PXD042502

### Title
Parkinson’s VPS35[D620N] retromer lysosomal dysfunction induces LRRK2 mediated lysosomal association of RILPL1 and TMEM55B

### Description
The D620N VPS35 mutation disrupts retrograde endosome to Golgi retromer Trafficking. Thus causes lysosome dysfunction, enhances LRRK2 kinase activity and leads to Parkinson’s disease. We employed a LysoTag immunoprecipitation approach to assess how this impacts lysosomes using quantitative proteomics. The VPS35[D620N] mutation alters the expression of over 350 lysosomal proteins, and induces recruitment of LRRK2 phosphorylated Rab proteins to the lysosome, as well as the phosphoRab effector protein RILPL1.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes were isolated from wild-type and homozygous VPS35[D620N] knock-in MEF cells stably expressing the LysoTag (TMEM192-3XHA) via HA immunoprecipitation. 5 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was used. The samples were placed on a thermomixer (Eppendorf, UK) at 60°C with 1,100 rpm for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added for alkylation. During alkylation, the samples were shielded from light and placed on a thermomixer at 25°C with 1,100 rpm for 30 min. Each sample was then mixed with 5% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 1.2% (v/v) phosphoric acid, and further diluted with 6X wash buffer (90% MeOH, 10% TEABC at pH 7.2). The samples were thoroughly vortexed and loaded onto S-TrapTM (ProtiFi, USA) columns by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 1 min, and the flow-through collected from the columns was discarded. After sample loading, the S-TrapTM columns were washed three times with 150 μL wash buffer. On-column digestion was performed by incubating 60 μL (1.5 μg) Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Mass Spec Grade; Promega, UK) in 50 mM TEABC solution at pH 8 on the samples on a thermomixer at 47°C for 1 hour before reducing the incubation temperature to 22°C for overnight digestion. The samples were then eluted into 1.5 mL low binding tubes (Eppendorf, UK) by centrifugation with 60 μL of 50 mM TEABC solution at pH 8, followed by 60 μL of 0.15% (v/v) formic acid (FA) aqueous solution, and then 60 μL of elution buffer (80% ACN with 0.15% FA in aqueous solution) twice. The eluted samples were immediately snap-frozen on dry ice and dried at 35°C using a SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The dried samples were resuspended in 60 μL solution containing 3% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA, and further incubated on a thermomixer at 22°C with 1200 rpm for 30 min followed by 30 min sonication in a water bath. The sample concentration was then estimated using a NanoDrop instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) by measuring the solution absorbance at 224 nm wavelength. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled to an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). 4 μg of each sample were loaded onto the nano-HPLC system individually. Peptides were trapped by a precolumn (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, C18, 100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) using an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The peptides were then separated by an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at 45°C using a linear gradient of 8 to 25% solvent B (an 80% ACN and 0.1% FA solution) for 98 minutes, 25 to 37% solvent B for 15 minutes, 37 to 95% solvent B for 2 minutes, 95% solvent B for 8.5 minutes, 95% to 3% solvent B for 0.5 minutes, and 3% solvent B for 9.5 minutes. The flow rate was set at 250 nL/min for all experiments. Data were acquired in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode containing 45 isolated m/z windows ranging from 350 to 1500. Collisioninduced dissociation (CID) with nitrogen gas was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The DIA MS experiment's raw data were analysed using the DIA-NN software employing a library-free search mode. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation at Cysteine residue was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation at methionine residue was included as a variable modification. The software automatically detected and adjusted the mass error (ppm). A protein identification cut-off of 1% FDR was used, and a protein quantification required a minimum of 2 peptides in 5 out of 6 samples. The search results were then imported into Perseus software for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parinson's disease; lysosomal proteins; lrrk2; rilpl1; tmem55b

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Yuko Pui Yiu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
University of Dundee


