### Accession
PXD020958

### Title
Identification of transcriptional drifts in endothelial cells associated with environmental changes

### Description
Environmental cues, such as shear stress and heterotypic cell interactions play a critical role in endothelial cell function, yet their unique contributions to the endothelial cell transcriptome remain unclear. Using cell preparations from human umbilical cords (ex vivo), we performed individual sample analysis to assess transcriptional drifts associated with environmental changes but independent of sex or background. Global gene expression profiling by RNA-seq, ATACseq, and MS/MS directed proteomics distinguished freshly isolated endothelial cells from genetically matched culture (in vitro) samples. Over 43% of the transcriptome was significantly changed by the in vitro environment. Amongst several signatures, we observed that TGF-beta and BMP target genes were reduced. In contrast, cytoskeleton-based processes and proliferation-related genes were increased. Subjecting cultured cells to long-term shear stress significantly rescued the expression of approximately 17% of genes including targets of BMP and Notch signaling known to be sensitive to flow. In contrast, co-culture of endothelial cells with smooth muscle cells normalized networks related to cell growth and differentiation, clathrin-vesicle related genes, and recovered targets downstream TGF-beta, recovering approximately 9% of the original in vivo signature. Our findings highlight specific genes, pathways and functional features of endothelial cells that require contextual information and exposure to physical forces. This transcriptional modulation is important to consider in all paradigms that are focused on understanding the ability of endothelial cells to maintain homeostasis and respond to disease processes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced and alkylated using 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 10mM iodoacetamide, respectively and then digested by the sequential addition of trypsin and lys-C proteases as described. The digested peptides were then desalted using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), dried and resuspended in 5% formic acid, and then fractionated online using a 25cm long, 75 uM inner diameter fused silica capillary packed in-house with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (1.9 uM, 100A pores, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The 140-minute water-acetonitrile gradient was delivered using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (Buffer A: water with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were ionized by the application of a distal 2.2kv and introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) method comprised of a full MS1 scan (Resolution = 120,000) followed by sequential MS2 scans (Resolution = 15,000) to utilize the remainder of the 3 second cycle time. Data analysis was performed using the MSGF+ search engine 62 via the target-decoy strategy against the EMBL Human reference proteome (UP000005640 9606). The identification false detection rates (FDRs) at the peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) was defined using Percolator, protein identification confidence was estimated via the stand-alone implementation of FIDO such that analytes had respective q-values at or below 0.01 at both PSM and protein level.  Extracted ion chromatograms were calculated for each peptide using Skyline. The MSStats R-package was used to normalize across runs using quantile normalization, summarize peptide-level intensities into a protein-level abundance, and perform statistical testing to compare protein abundance across conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental cues, such as physical forces and heterotypic cell interactions play a critical role in cell function, yet their collective contributions to transcriptional changes are unclear. Focusing on human endothelial cells, we performed broad individual sample analysis to identify transcriptional drifts associated with environmental changes that were independent of genetic background. Global gene expression profiling by RNA sequencing and protein expression by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry directed proteomics distinguished endothelial cells in vivo from genetically matched culture (in vitro) samples. Over 43% of the transcriptome was significantly changed by the in vitro environment. Subjecting cultured cells to long-term shear stress significantly rescued the expression of approximately 17% of genes. Inclusion of heterotypic interactions by co-culture of endothelial cells with smooth muscle cells normalized approximately 9% of the original in vivo signature. We also identified novel flow dependent genes, as well as genes that necessitate heterotypic cell interactions to mimic the in vivo transcriptome. Our findings highlight specific genes and pathways that rely on contextual information for adequate expression from those that are agnostic of such environmental cues.

### Keywords
Endothelial cell, Rna-seq, Atacseq, Proteomics, Human umbilical cords

### Affiliations
UCLA
Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University 303 ESuperior Street – SQ 8-522 Chicago, IL 60611

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Iruela-Arispe
Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University 303 ESuperior Street – SQ 8-522 Chicago, IL 60611


