### Accession
PXD023297

### Title
Tau accumulation induces spatial memory deficit via disrupting medial septum-hippocampus cholinergic pathway

### Description
By precisely dissected MS for proteomics, we found that donepezil remarkably restored (at high dose), even elevated (at low dose) the level of vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 37D (VP37D), an autophagy-related protein, in hTauMS mice.

### Sample Protocol
Urea (8 M) was used for protein homogenization and the extractive was centrifuged after ultrasonic for 12 cycles (4s on and 6s off), and nanodrop 2000C (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) was used to quantify the concentration.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) against the Uniprot_mouse database (download from Uniprot database on 2020-5). The searching parameters were set to the modified default value

### Publication Abstract
Tau accumulation and cholinergic impairment are characteristic pathologies in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the causal role of tau accumulation in cholinergic lesion is elusive. Here, we observed an aberrant tau accumulation in the medial septum (MS) of 3xTg and 5xFAD mice, especially in their cholinergic neurons. Overexpressing hTau in mouse MS (MS<sup>hTau</sup> ) for 6&#xa0;months but not 3&#xa0;months induced spatial memory impairment without changing object recognition and anxiety-like behavior, indicating a specific and time-dependent effect of MS-hTau accumulation on spatial cognitive functions. With increasing hTau accumulation, the MS<sup>hTau</sup> mice showed a time-dependent cholinergic neuron loss with reduced cholinergic projections to the hippocampus. Intraperitoneal administration of donepezil, a cholinesterase inhibitor, for 1&#xa0;month ameliorated the MS-hTau-induced spatial memory deficits with preservation of MS-hippocampal cholinergic pathway and removal of tau load; and the beneficial effects of donepezil was more prominent at low dose. Proteomics revealed that MS-hTau accumulation deregulated multiple signaling pathways with numerous differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Among them, the vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 37D (VP37D), an autophagy-related protein, was significantly reduced in MS<sup>hTau</sup> mice; the reduction of VP37D was restored by donepezil, and the effect was more significant at low dose than high dose. These novel evidences reveal a causal role of tau accumulation in linking MS cholinergic lesion to hippocampus-dependent spatial cognitive damages as seen in the AD patients, and the new tau-removal and autophagy-promoting effects of donepezil may extend its application beyond simple symptom amelioration to potential disease modification.

### Keywords
Cholinergic neuron, Tau accumulation, Mouse, Alzheimer’s disease, Medial septum, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education of China for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education of China and Hubei Province for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
haitao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-zhi Wang
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education of China for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


