### Accession
PXD034465

### Title
Surface proteome profiling of p53-restorable murine liver cancer cells

### Description
Characterization of the surface proteome changes between proliferating and senescent liver cancer cells induced by p53 restoration.

### Sample Protocol
We adapted the protocol from previous published study (Perna F et al. Cancer Cell. 2017) and followed the manufacturer instruction (Pierce Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit #89881) to enrich cell surface proteins of proliferating and senescent cells through biotin-based labeling followed by pull-down purification. In brief, we plated 1 and 3 15 cm plates of proliferating and senescent cells (6 days after doxycycline withdrawal) with an initial seeding of 7x105 and 2x106 million cells respectively and collected the cells 2 days later, with the cells approximatively at 85% confluency. Before harvesting the cells, cells were incubated with biotin solution for 30 minutes at 4C to allow the surface protein labeling. Cells were then washed with cold PBS and scraped down followed by lysis (buffer provided in the kit). Lysates were centrifuged and the clarified supernatant was used for purification of biotinylated proteins on NeutrAvidin Agarose. Supernatant was incubated with NeutrAvidin Agarose for 2 h at room temperature in the closed column to allow biotinylated proteins binding. Column containing Agarose slurry was washed to remove unbound proteins. The proteins were then digested in situ in the column overnight using 4μg of trypsin (Promega, V5111) per column at 37C on a rotor. Digested proteins were subjected to liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Non-biotinylated cell lysates were also included and served as background controls.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS .raw files were processed using Mascot and searched for protein identification against the SwissProt protein database for human/mouse (please adjust the species accordingly). Carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification and the following variable modifications allowed: oxidation (M), N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation (N and Q), and phosphorylation (S, T and Y). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 10 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.080 Da and full trypsin digestion, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. False discovery rate was restricted to 1% in both protein and peptide level. Normalized protein intensities were obtained using Scaffold (4.8.4)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Senescence, Surface proteome, P53 restoration

### Affiliations
Chair, Cancer Biology & Genetics Program, SKI;  Chair, Geoffrey Beene Cancer Research Center;  Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Yu-Jui Ho

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Lowe
Chair, Cancer Biology & Genetics Program, SKI;  Chair, Geoffrey Beene Cancer Research Center;  Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute;


