### Accession
PXD025928

### Title
Study of the TRAPP complexes by HDX-MS

### Description
Use of HDX-MS to study the allosteric and structural differences between the TRAPPII and TRAPPIII complex in the presence and absence of membrane and rab GTPases

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) TRAPPII vs TRAPPIII  HDX reactions comparing both complexes were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final concentration of 160nM for TRAPPII or TRAPPIII. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for five time points (3s at 0°C and 3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at 20°C). Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 40µl of D2O buffer solution (10mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 97% D2O) to give a final concentration of 78% D2O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80°C. Hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) TRAPPII and TRAPPIII apo vs Membrane  HDX reactions comparing both complexes bound to membranes were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final concentration of 120nM for TRAPPII or TRAPPIII and 0.1mg/ml membranes. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for three time points (3s, 100s and 3000s at 20°C). Prior to the addition of D2O, TRAPP was incubated at 20°C with vesicles for one minute to facilitate TRAPP-membrane interactions. Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 32.1µl of D2O buffer solution (10mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 97% D2O) to the protein/membrane solutions, to give a final concentration of 62% D2O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80°C. Hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) TRAPPIII apo vs Rab bound  HDX reactions comparing TRAPPIII and TRAPPIII-Rab1 complex were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final concentration 100nM TRAPPIII per sample and 560 nM Rab1. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for four time points (3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at 20°C). Prior to the addition of D2O, proteins were incubated on ice in the presence of 20mM EDTA for 30 minutes to facilitate release of nucleotide. Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 43.1µl of D2O buffer solution (10mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 97% D2O) to give a final concentration of 82% D2O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80°C. HDX-MS data Analysis  Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over one (at 10°C) immobilized pepsin column (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: >5% change in exchange, >0.5 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.  Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Publication Abstract
Transport Protein Particle complexes (TRAPP) are evolutionarily conserved regulators of membrane trafficking, with this mediated by their guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) activity towards Rab GTPases. In metazoans evidence suggests that two different TRAPP complexes exist, TRAPPII and TRAPPIII. These two complexes share a common core of subunits, with complex specific subunits (TRAPPC9 and TRAPPC10 in TRAPPII and TRAPPC8, TRAPPC11, TRAPPC12, TRAPPC13 in TRAPPIII). TRAPPII and TRAPPIII have distinct specificity for GEF activity towards Rabs, with TRAPPIII acting on Rab1, and TRAPPII acting on Rab1 and Rab11. The molecular basis for how these complex specific subunits alter GEF activity towards Rab GTPases is unknown. Here we have used a combination of biochemical assays, hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and electron microscopy to examine the regulation of TRAPPII and TRAPPIIII complexes in solution and on membranes. GEF assays revealed that TRAPPIII has GEF activity against Rab1 and Rab43, with no detectable activity against the other 18 Rabs tested. The TRAPPIII complex had significant differences in protein dynamics at the Rab binding site compared to TRAPPII, potentially indicating an important role of accessory subunits in altering the active site of TRAPP complexes. Both the TRAPPII and TRAPPIII complexes had enhanced GEF activity on lipid membranes, with HDX-MS revealing numerous conformational changes that accompany membrane association. HDX-MS also identified a membrane binding site in TRAPPC8. Collectively, our results provide insight into the functions of TRAPP complexes and how they can achieve Rab specificity.

### Keywords
Trappii trappiii rab hdx-ms

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John Burke
University of Victoria


