### Accession
PXD017286

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Datasets for Mec1/ATR Signaling Upon Hyper-Resection

### Description
The Mec1/ATR kinase is crucial for genome maintenance, although the mechanisms by which it controls DNA repair pathways remain elusive. Here we uncovered a role for Mec1/ATR in controlling homologous recombination (HR) factors in response to hyper-resection of DNA ends. Cells lacking RAD9, a checkpoint activator and an inhibitor of resection, exhibit Mec1-dependent hyper-phosphorylation of proteins associated with single strand DNA transactions, including the ssDNA binding protein Rfa2, the translocase/ubiquitin ligase Uls1 and the HR-regulatory Sgs1-Top3-Rmi1 (STR) complex. Extensive Mec1-dependent phosphorylation of the STR complex, mostly on the Sgs1 helicase subunit, promotes an interaction between STR and the DNA repair scaffolding protein Dpb11.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomic experiments, 200mL of yeast grown in SILAC media (complete synthetic medium -Arg-Lys supplemented with either isotopically heavy (containing C13 and N 15) or normal (containing C12 and N 14) lysine and arginine to mid-log phase and treated as described in the figure legend.  Cells were pelleted at 1000rcf and washed with TE buffer containing 1mM PMSF, Phosphatase Inhibitors (5mM NaF and 10mM beta-glycerophosphate).  Pellets were lysed by bead beating with 0.5mm glass beads for 3 cycles of 10 minutes with 1-minute rest time between cycles, at 4˚C.  Seven mg of each light and heavy labeled protein lysate was denatured and reduced with 1% SDS and 5mM DTT at 65˚C, then alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide. Light and heavy protein lysates were mixed and precipitated with a cold solution of 50% acetone, 49.9% ethanol, 0.1% acetic acid. Protein pellet was resuspended with 2M urea and subsequently digested with TPCK-treated trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Phosphoenrichment was performed using a Thermo-Fisher Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (cat# A32992) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  Purified phosphopeptides were then fractionated using HILIC chromatography and subjected to LC-MS/MS on a Thermo-Fisher Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic data were analyzed using an in-house pipeline. Briefly, spectral data were analyzed using the COMET search engine and budding yeast database downloaded from SGD.  For phosphoproteomic experiments, data plotted represent the combined independent results of a “forward” (condition 1 = light / condition 2 = heavy) and a “reverse” (condition 1 = heavy / condition 2 = light) SILAC experiment.  Using this experimental design, phosphorylation events that were not consistently identified in two independent, separately SILAC labelled yeast cultures were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mec1, Yeast, Resection, Sgs1, Dna repair, Dna damage, Atr

### Affiliations
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA
Graduate Student, Smolka Lab, Cornell University

### Submitter
Ethan Sanford

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Smolka
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA


