### Accession
PXD018520

### Title
Carboxypeptidase B-assisted charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography for deep screening of C-terminome

### Description
The determination of protein C-termini is of great significance for protein function annotation and proteolysis re-search. However, the progress of C-terminomics is still far behind its counterpart, N-terminomics, because of the low reactivity of the carboxyl group. Herein, we developed a negative selection strategy, termed carboxypeptidase B-assisted charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (CPB-ChaFRADIC), to achieve a global C-terminome analysis. The highly reactive carboxypeptidase B cleavage was utilized to reduce the charge state of non-C-terminal peptides. Together with high-performance charge-based frac-tional diagonal chromatography, the C-terminal peptides could be isolated. Such a strategy was also applied for profiling C-termini from Escherichia coli cell lysates, and 441 canonical C-termini and 510 neo-C-termini originating from proteolytic processing were identified. These findings represent 2-fold and 5.8-fold that of identified C-termini via direct analysis, respectively. Using parallel digestion with trypsin and LysC, such a strategy enabled the identification of 604 canonical C-termini and 818 neo-C-termini, rep-resenting the largest C-terminome dataset of E. coli, and no deficiency in His/Lys/Arg-containing C-terminal peptides was observed. The presented CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy is therefore a highly efficient and unbiased strategy for large-scale C-terminome analysis. Furthermore, using the CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy, we identified 87 cleavage sites and 82 substrates of caspase-3 in Jurkat cells, demonstrating that the CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy shows great promise in promoting proteolysis research.

### Sample Protocol
Amidation of carboxyl group on Proteins. The free carboxyl groups at C-termini, aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues were blocked by amidation as described below. 500 μg proteins dissolved in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride containing 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.2) were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C, followed by alkylation of thiol group with 30 mM acrylamide for 1 h at room temperature. The excess acrylamide was extinguished with an additional 10 mM DTT. After that, the protein solution was transferred to centrifugal filters with 10 K molecular weight cut off, and centrifuged at 14,000g for one-time buffer displacement with 200 mM MES（pH 3.5）to remove residual reagents. Subsequently, the solution consisting 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM MES (pH 3.5), 2 M methylamine was added. The amidation of carboxyl group was triggered by addition of 50 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 1h at 25 °C, and the pH was adjusted if needed. The addition of EDC and NHS was repeated twice with the last incubation extending to 4 h.  Proteolytic Digestion. Following amidation, the samples were submitted to four-time buffer exchange with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 2 M guanidine hydrochloride. After buffer displacement, the samples were digested at 37 °C with trypsin/LysC at a ratio of enzyme/substrate ratio (m/m) as 1:25 for 12 h. The resulting solution was filtrated out followed by washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The filtrate fractions containing digests were collected, desalted using a C18 trap column (4.6 mm i.d. × 1 cm) packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil Pur C18-AQ (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and dried using a Speed Vac Concentrator (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA).  Enrichment of C-terminal peptides with CPB-ChaFRADIC. SCX separations were performed using a 150 × 4.6 mm SCX column (ZORBAX 300-SCX, 5 μm particle size, Agilent) and a Shimadzu HPLC system equipped with a LC-20AD binary pump and a SPD-20A ultraviolet detector. A dual buffer system consisting of SCX buffer A (10 mM NaH2PO4, 20% ACN, pH 2.7) and SCX buffer B (10 mM NaH2PO4, 20% ACN, 1 M NaCl, pH 2.7) were used to establish a 80 min gradient, composed of 5 min of 0% B, 65 min of 0-70% B and then 10 min of 70% B, with the flow rate at 0.5 mL/min. About 500 μg of digested proteins were redissolved in 100 μL of SCX buffer A and loaded onto the SCX column. Fractions of 6 min were collected from 15 min to 63 min after sample injection. Totally, 8 fractions were obtained. The collected fractions were dried, desalted and resolubilized in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, carboxypeptidase B was added into the fractions at a ratio of enzyme/substrate ratio (m/m) as 1:7. The cleavage of carboxyl-terminal K/R was allowed at 25 °C for 1 h. After that, the fractions were dried and redissolved in SCX buffer A, followed by secondary SCX separation under exactly the same conditions as the primary run. Secondary fractions were collected during the same time interval as that used for the primary fraction. Collected fractions were dried, redissolved in 0.1% TFA, and desalted using Pierce C18 100 μL Tips (Thermo, Rockford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For in vitro caspase-3 cleavage experiment, the dried secondary fractions were redissolved in 100 μL 100 mM NaOH, and then the control and experiment groups were incubated in either “light” or “heavy” dimethyl labeling buffer respectively for 2 h at 25 °C. The “light” dimethyl labeling buffer comprised 100 mM CH2O, 60 mM NaBH3CN. The “heavy” labeling buffer comprised 100 mM CD2O, 60mM NaBH3CN. After desalted using Pierce C18 100 μL Tips, the differentially labeled samples were pooled and dried for further use.

### Data Protocol
The raw data corresponding to E. coli cells were searched against the E. coli protein database downloaded from UniProt (released on 2015-12-25, 4,479 entries) using Mascot server (version 2.4, Matrix Science) incorporated in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass tolerances were set as 7 ppm for parent ions and 20 mmu for fragments. Propionamidation (+71.0371 Da) on cysteine, methylamine protection (+13.0316 Da) on aspartate and glutamate were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine, methylamine protection (+13.0316 Da) on protein C-terminus, lysine depletion (-128.1742 Da) and arginine depletion (-156.1876 Da) on peptide C-terminus were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/Lys-C was selected as the protease allowing 2 missed cleavages. To identify the neo-N-termini, oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine and methylamine protection (+13.0316 Da) on peptide C-terminus were set as variable modifications, and semi-style cleavage adopted. The search results were filtered by the incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer. Only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and Mascot p ≤ 0.01 were passed for identification.  The raw data corresponding to Jurkat cells were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Sequest for search and precursor ions quantifier node for quantification. The human protein database downloaded from UniProt (released on 2018-03-20) was used as target sequences. Mass tolerances were set as 10 ppm for parent ions and 20 mmu for fragments. Propionamidation (+71.0371 Da) on cysteine, 13C6 label on arginine (+6.0201 Da), methylamine protection (+13.0316 Da) on aspartate and glutamate, heavy dimethylation on D4-lysine (36.0815 Da) and N-terminus (+32.0564 Da) or light dimethylation on D4-lysine (+32.0564) and N-terminus (+28.0313 Da) were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine, methylamine protection (+13.0316 Da) on peptide C-terminus were set as variable modifications. Semi-trypsin was selected as the protease allowing 2 missed cleavages. The results were filtered by the incorporated percolator in Proteome Discoverer to control the false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Additionally, only peptides fulfilled the trypsin cleavage at their N-termini were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
The determination of protein C-termini is of great significance for protein function annotation and proteolysis research. However, the progress of C-terminomics is still far behind its counterpart, N-terminomics, because of the low reactivity of the carboxyl group. Herein, we developed a negative selection strategy, termed carboxypeptidase B-assisted charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (CPB-ChaFRADIC), to achieve a global C-terminome analysis. The highly reactive carboxypeptidase B cleavage was utilized to reduce the charge state of non-C-terminal peptides. Together with high-performance charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography, the C-terminal peptides could be isolated. Such a strategy was applied for profiling C-termini from <i>Escherichia coli</i> cell lysates and 441 canonical C-termini and 510 neo-C-termini originating from proteolytic processing were identified. These findings represent 2-fold and 5.8-fold that of identified C-termini via direct analysis, respectively. Using parallel digestion with trypsin and LysC, such a strategy enabled the identification of 604 canonical C-termini and 818 neo-C-termini, representing the largest C-terminome data set of <i>E. coli</i>, and no deficiency in His/Lys/Arg-containing C-terminal peptides was observed. The presented CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy is therefore a highly efficient and unbiased strategy for large-scale C-terminome analysis. Furthermore, using the CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy, we identified 107 cleavage sites and 102 substrates of caspase-3 in Jurkat cells, demonstrating that the CPB-ChaFRADIC strategy shows great promise in promoting proteolysis research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018520.

### Keywords
Cleavage site, C-terminomic, Chafradic, Caspase

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics

### Submitter
Lingfan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lihua Zhang
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


