### Accession
PXD031143

### Title
Haptenation of Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor

### Description
Firstly, the adductome of the two major mouse blood proteins, as well as of the protein macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) with the model hapten tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)was invastigated. After incubation at different molar ratios of TRITC, an untargeted Full MS/dd-MS2 experimental approach was used with a QExactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The data were processed with Proteome Discoverer and the suggested sites of adductions were confirmed in parallel reaction monitoring mode (PRM) on the same instruments. Blood and lymph node samples of mise treated topically with the same hapten were screened for the peptides containing the most reactive sites of the aformentioned proteins. Only the adducted N-terminal peptide of the protein MIF could be detected. Thereafter, a quantification approach in PRM mode using standards was implemented to quantify this peptide, both modified and unmodified. Quantification was based in characteristic b and y ions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample types: Commercial mouse serum and red blood cell lysate, as well as purchased mouse MIF were incubated with different molar ratios of TRITC. TRITC excess was removed.  Mouse blood and lymph node single cell suspension samples of mice topically treated with TRITC and their equivalent control samples. In all cases the equivalent of 100 µg of protein was reduced, alkylated and digested over night with Trypsin. After digestion samples were cleaned up using CC18 SPE catriges, evaporated to dryeness with reconstituted to appropriate solvent. Analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to a QExactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were separated on an AcclaimTM RSLC 120 C18 column (2.2 µM, 150 mm x 2.1) from Thermo Scientific . The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% FA in Milli-Q water containing 5% ACN and (B) 0.1% FA in ACN containing 5% Milli-Q water. Unargeted analysis was performed in positive ion mode in Full MS/dd-MS2 with an exclusion list based on the control untreated sample. Expected chromatographic peak width was 15 seconds, full MS was conducted at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 1e6, a maximum IT of 30 ms and a scan range of 200 to 3000 m/z. dd- MS2 was performed at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum IT of 50 ms, an isolation window of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 25. all targeted analysis were performed in PRM mode at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target of 1x105, a maximum IT of 50 ms, an isolation window of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 30.  Quantification of the N-terminal MIF peptide in the samples of topically treated mice was based on its isotopically labeled equivalent MIF-d5 added to each sample before the beginning of the sample preparation. Quantification of the adducted N-terminal MIF peptide (TRITC-MIF) was based on an external standard prepared in house.

### Data Protocol
The only software tool used was Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3) in order to process the raw mass spectrometry data from the untargeted analysis (Full MS/dd-MS2) of the commercial mouse serum, red blood cell lysate and well mouse MIF incubated with TRITC. In the modified PWF Basic Sequest HT processing step, the raw data were searched against the UniProtKb/Swiss-Prot mouse Alb, Hb and MIF with variable modifications of oxidation at methionine, carboxymethylation of cysteine and the added mass of TRITC (+443.1303 Da). Possible modification sites of TRITC at the amino acid residues of Cys, His, Lys, Arg, Ser, Thr, Tyr, and N-terminus of peptides. In the CWF basic consensus step, the generated peptide spectral matches were grouped, validated and filtered before turning into a peptide and protein report. The validation of the peptide spectral matches was set at a strict target false discovery rate of 0.01 and a relaxed target false discovery rate of 0.05. Peptides below the high confidence level were filtered out.  Data from the quantification PRM experiments were handled manually using XCalibur from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Quantification of the TRITC-MIF peptide was based on the singly charged TRITC fragment with a mass of 444.1386 m/z and the singly charged MIF peptide with a mass of 1287.6873 m/z. Quantification of the unmodified N-terminal MIF peptide was based on the sum of the areas of the three most prominent ions, b2, y7 and y9.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High resolution mass spectrometry (hrms), Contact allergy, Allergic contact dermatitis (acd), Tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (tritc), Biomarkers, Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (mif)

### Affiliations
Stockholm University

### Submitter
Lorena Ndreu

### Lab Head
Dr Isabella Karlsson
Stockholm University


