### Accession
PXD007902

### Title
Myristic acid induces proteomic and secretomic changes associated with steatosis, cytoskeleton remodeling, endoplasmatic reticulum stress and exosome release in HepG2 cells

### Description
Myristic acid, the 14-carbon saturated fatty acid (C14:0), is usually associated with negative consequences for human health, and in particular its consumption is correlated to an increased cardiovascular disease risk. Since it is a little abundant into the cells, its specific properties and functional roles have not been fully described. The aim of this study was to explore the cell response to this fatty acid to help explain clinical findings on the relationship between C14:0 and cardiovascular disease. The human liver HepG2 cell line was used as a model to investigate the hepatic response to C14:0 in a combined proteomic and secretomic approach. A total of 47 intracellular and 32 secreted proteins were found to be deregulated among the different dosages of C14:0 treatments (50, 125, and 250 μM) as compared to control. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that myristic acid modulates the lipid droplet formation and the cytoskeleton organization, in addition it induces ER stress as well as changes in exosome and extracellular miRNA sorting. Our data provide for the first time quantitative proteomic data regarding C14:0 and contribute to the explanation of the molecular mechanisms through which this fatty acid can cause adverse health effects.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain whole lysate samples, cells were harvested after 24 h of treatment and centrifuged at 3000g for 10 min at 4°C to discard RPMI media. After two wash with cold PBS, cells were lysed in PBS by sonication, using an ultrasonic probe with an amplitude of 70% for few seconds. Cell debris were removed with centrifugation at 3000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. As concerning the secretome preparation, the media containing secreted proteins were collected by centrifugation at 5,000 x g for 10 min to pellet floating cells and proteins in the media were concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 filers 3K (Merk Millipore). Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad). For each sample 10 ug of protein were taken for digestion.  Tris-HCl-TFE buffer (25% trifluoroethanol, 25% H2O, 50% Tris-HCl 100 mM) was added to each samples. Reduction step was performed using TCEP, (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), 10 mM final concentration. CAA (chloroacetamide) 40 mM was used for alkylation. After 10 minutes, 95°C, by shaking each sample was diluted to 10% TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. Obtained peptides were then diluted in solvent A (0,3% FA, 5% ACN) and stored at -20 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using Data analysis software (Bruker), Sum Peak algorithm, and by MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 against the human public database SwissProt database with taxonomy homo sapiens (downloaded on 11.06.2015, 42150 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR. In addition, a label free quantitation including the Match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed [13] requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.5.0.31.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Myristic acid, Lc-ms/ms, Hepg2

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.


