### Accession
PXD039995

### Title
A combinatorial approach to uncover an additional Integrator subunit

### Description
RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) controls expression of all protein coding genes and most noncoding loci in higher eukaryotes. Calibrating RNAPII activity requires an assortment of polymerase-associated factors that are recruited at sites of active transcription. The Integrator complex is one of the most elusive transcriptional regulators in metazoans, deemed to be recruited after initiation to help establish and modulate paused RNAPII. Integrator is known to be composed of 14 subunits that assemble and operate in a modular fashion.  We employed proteomics and machine-learning structure prediction (AlphaFold2) to identify an additional Integrator subunit, INTS15.  We report that INTS15 assembles primarily with the INTS13/INTS14/INTS10 module and interfaces with the Int-PP2A module. Functional genomics analysis further reveals a role for INTS15 in modulating RNAPII pausing at a subset of genes. Our study shows that omics approaches combined with AlphaFold2-based predictions provide additional insights into the molecular architecture of large and dynamic multiprotein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
For endogenous Co-IP’s, 1.5mg nuclear extract was used per IP and diluted in Co-IP buffer (20mM Tris pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors).  For each IP, 4ug of antibody (or 10uL of serum) was used and 30uL of Dynabeads Protein A or Protein G. The IPs were incubated at 4°C for 2 hours, rotating, and then washed three times with Co-IP buffer. The IPs were then washed with 0.05% NP-40 in 1X PBS. 0.1M glycine pH 3.0 was used to elute, and 1M Tris base pH 11.0 was added to neutralize the eluate pH. The eluates were either analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by Western blot, or by LC-MS/MS, described below.  For FLAG IP’s, 1.5mg nuclear extract was used per IP.  The extract was diluted in Co-IP buffer and combined with 20uL of anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma). The IP was rotated at 4°C for 2 hours, washed 3 times with BC500, 1 wash with BC250 + 0.1% NP-40, and eluted with FLAG peptide (Sigma).   Eluates were prepared for SDS-PAGE and run on a Novex WedgeWell 10% Tris-Glycine Gel (Invitrogen) with Tris-Glycine-SDS buffer (BioRad). The samples were run at 110V for 10 minutes to allow the samples to enter the gel.  Following, the gel was stained overnight with the Colloidal Blue staining kit (Invitrogen).  Samples were then processed at the Wistar Institute proteomics facility for MS.  Each sample was cut from the gel.  Following excision, samples were reduced with TCEP, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The samples were then digested with trypsin and run on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer and analyzed by LC-MS/MS with the standard 90-minute LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Following, the MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (10/10/2019) with full tryptic specificity with MaxQuant 1.6.15.0. False discovery rates for protein and peptide identification were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ip-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Wistar Institute
The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19103, USA

### Submitter
Sarah Offley

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Gardini
The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19103, USA


