### Accession
PXD041696

### Title
mTORC2-NDRG1-Cdc42 axis couples fasting to mitochondrial fission

### Description
Fasting triggers diverse physiological adaptations including increases in circulating fatty acids and mitochondrial respiration to facilitate organismal survival. The mechanisms driving mitochondrial adaptations and respiratory sufficiency during fasting remain incompletely understood. Here we show that fasting or lipid availability stimulates mTORC2 activity. Activation of mTORC2 and phosphorylation of its downstream target NDRG1 at Ser336 sustains mitochondrial fission and respiratory sufficiency. Timelapse imaging shows that NDRG1, but not phosphorylation-deficient NDRG1Ser336Ala mutant, engages with mitochondria to facilitate fission in both control and Drp1-deficient cells, reflecting independency from Drp1. Using proteomics, an siRNA screen, and epistasis experiments, we show that mTORC2-phosphorylated NDRG1 cooperates with small GTPase Cdc42 and effectors and regulators of Cdc42 to orchestrate fission. Accordingly, RictorKO, NDRG1Ser336Ala mutants, and Cdc42-deficient cells each display mitochondrial phenotypes reminiscent of fission failure. During nutrient surplus, mTOR complexes perform anabolic functions; however, paradoxical reactivation of mTORC2 during fasting unexpectedly drives mitochondrial fission and respiration.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for phosphoproteomics: Liver tissue (500 μg), liver MAM fractions (700 μg) or co-IP eluents from FLAG pulldowns performed in total cell lysates (700 μg) of siCon or siRictor NIH3T3 cells co-expressing Flag-NDRG1WT were homogenized in 2% SDS/5 mM DTT (supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors) to retrieve proteins in solution and incubated for 1 h at RT for disulfide bond reduction. Proteins were alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was performed utilizing S-trap mini cartridges (ProtiFi) as per manufacturer's instructions. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched from the S-trap eluate using titanium dioxide beads (TiO2, GL Sciences) as previously described. Following TiO2 enrichment, peptides were concentrated with a speed vac, desalted in HLB resin (Waters) and concentrated in a speed vac once more prior for analyzing peptides by nLC-MS/MS.  nLC-MS/MS acquisition: Samples were resuspended in 10 μl of water/0.1% TFA and loaded onto a Dionex RSLC Ultimate 300 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed with a two-column system, consisting of a C18 trap cartridge (300 μm ID, 5 mm length) and a picofrit analytical column (75 μm ID, 30 cm length) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin. Peptides were separated using a 180 min gradient from 2-28% buffer-B (buffer-A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer-B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire spectra in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Briefly, the full MS scan was set to 300-1200 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x105. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap using the top speed mode (2 secs), an AGC target of 10e4 and an HCD collision energy of 30. Two additional targeted scans were added in each instrument duty cycle to detect the low abundance NDRG1Ser336 peptide; a selected ion monitoring (SIM) scan for the intact mass quantification and a targeted MS/MS scan for the identification of the peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using the software Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using standard settings for tolerances, modifications and filters, and phosphorylation on serine/threonine/tyrosine as dynamic modifications. SwissProt mouse proteome database was used (downloaded August 2019). Peptide abundance was obtained using the intensity of the extracted ion chromatogram; values were log2 transformed, normalized and missing values were imputed. Comparisons between groups were performed in a binary manner; each sample type (basal, corn oil, palmitic acid and refed) were compared with the fasted condition utilizing a two-tails heteroscedastic t-test (significant, if P-value <0.05). The data distribution in each dataset was assumed to be normal.  Significantly modified proteins were selected by P<0.05 followed by Benjamini-Hochberg correction. When FDR correction led to a no hit, inspection of uncorrected P-values distribution was performed: if an anti-conservative distribution was observed, we applied alternative method of false discovery rate control by combining threshold for significance (P<0.05) with fold-change cut-off (fold-change>1.5) as previously suggested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mtorc2; fasting; mitochondria; fission; respiration; lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Sidoli
Albert Einstein College of Medicine


