### Accession
PXD023561

### Title
Characterization of the scavenger cell proteome in mouse and rat liver

### Description
The structural-functional organization of ammonia and glutamine metabolism in the liver acinus involves highly specialized hepatocyte subpopulations such as glutamine producing perivenous scavenger cells. However, it is still unclear whether this cell population is homogeneous and involves further subpopulations. This was investigated in the present study by proteome profiling of periportal glutamine synthetase-negative hepatocytes and perivenous glutamine synthetase (GS) expressing scavenger cells isolated from mouse and rat liver. Apart from established markers of GS+ hepatocytes such as glutamate transporter 1 (GLT1), ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) or ammonium transporter Rh type B (RHBG), we identified novel scavenger cell-specific proteins such as the basal transcription factor 3 (BTF3) and the heat-shock protein 25 (HSP25). Interestingly, BTF3 and HSP25 were heterogeneously distributed among GS+ hepatocytes as shown by immunofluorescence analyses in mouse, rat and human liver slices. Feeding experiments showed that RHBG but not GS protein levels were increased in the liver of mice fed with a high protein diet compared to standard chow. While the spatial distribution of GS and carbamoylphosphate synthetase-1 (CPS1) was not affected, periportal areas constituted by GLS2 positive hepatocytes were enlarged or reduced in response to high or low protein diet, respectively. The data suggest that the population of perivenous GS+ scavenger cells is heterogeneous and not uniform as previously suggested which may reflect a functional heterogeneity, possibly relevant for liver regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched hepatocyte populations (rat GS+ and GS-, mouse GS+ and GS-, mouse GLT1+ and E-Cad+) were prepared by in gel digestion with trypsin essentially as described in PMID 29322779.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from QExactive plus measurements were processed with MaxQuant essentially with standard parameters except enabling ‘label-free quantification’ and ‘match between runs’.

### Publication Abstract
The structural-functional organization of ammonia and glutamine metabolism in the liver acinus involves highly specialized hepatocyte subpopulations like glutamine synthetase (GS) expressing perivenous hepatocytes (scavenger cells). However, this cell population has not yet been characterized extensively regarding expression of other genes and potential subpopulations. This was investigated in the present study by proteome profiling of periportal GS-negative and perivenous GS-expressing hepatocytes from mouse and rat. Apart from established markers of GS<sup>+</sup> hepatocytes such as glutamate/aspartate transporter II (GLT1) or ammonium transporter Rh type B (RhBG), we identified novel scavenger cell-specific proteins like basal transcription factor 3 (BTF3) and heat-shock protein 25 (HSP25). Interestingly, BTF3 and HSP25 were heterogeneously distributed among GS<sup>+</sup> hepatocytes in mouse liver slices. Feeding experiments showed that RhBG expression was increased in livers from mice fed with high protein diet compared to standard chow. While spatial distributions of GS and carbamoylphosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) were unaffected, periportal areas constituted by glutaminase 2 (GLS2)-positive hepatocytes were enlarged or reduced in response to high or low protein diet, respectively. The data suggest that the population of perivenous GS<sup>+</sup> scavenger cells is heterogeneous and not uniform as previously suggested which may reflect a functional heterogeneity, possibly relevant for liver regeneration.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte, Liver, Subpopulation, Cell heterogeneity, Glutamine synthetase, Scavenger cells, Liver zonation

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany


