### Accession
PXD030416

### Title
LC MS/MS of calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) knockdown in cultured murine podocytes versus wildtype

### Description
Calcimimetic agents allosterically increase the calcium (Ca2+) sensitivity of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR), which is expressed in the tubular system and to a lesser extent in podocytes. Activation of this receptor can reduce glomerular proteinuria and structural damage in proteinuric animal models. However, the precise role of the podocyte CaSR is still unclear. A CaSR knockdown in cultured murine podocytes and a podocyte-specific CaSR knockout in BALB/c mice were generated to study its role in proteinuria and kidney function. Podocyte CaSR knockdown abolished the calcimimetic R-568 mediated Ca2+-influx, disrupted the actin cytoskeleton, reduced cellular attachment and migration velocity. Adriamycin (ADR)-induced proteinuria enhanced glomerular CaSR expression in wild type mice. Albuminuria, podocyte foot process effacement, podocyte loss and glomerular sclerosis were significantly more pronounced in ADR-treated podocyte-specific CaSR knockout mice compared to wild type littermates. The co-treatment of WT mice with ADR and the calcimimetic cinacalcet reduced the proteinuria in WT, but not in podocyte specific CaSR knockout mice. In addition, four children with nephrotic syndrome, objecting glucocorticoid therapy, were treated with cinacalcet for 1 to 33 days. Proteinuria declined transiently by up to 96% and edema resolved. The activation of podocyte CaSR regulates key podocyte functions in vitro and reduces toxin induced proteinuria and glomerular damage in mice. Our findings suggest a potential novel role of CaSR signaling in control of glomerular disease.  Proteomic samples: two backgrounds (CaSR Knockdown vs WT) two conditions (Treatment = 1µM R568 vs untreated control) two timepoints (24h and 48h) five replicates each 2 x 2 x 2 x 5 = 40 samples

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, supplemented with 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Samples were sonicated, reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated using 10 mM IAA. Overnight digestion was carried out using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified using formic acid and purified using in-house made stage-tips. 1 µg of protein was used for LC-MS/MS acquisition. Liquid-chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) measurements were performed on a quadrupole- ion-trap-orbitrap MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher) operated in positive ion mode coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using an 80-minute gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 30% ACN in 65 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched, quantified and normalized using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Ref) with default settings for orbitraps. The match between runs (MBR), LFQ, IBAQ and classical normalization features were enabled. We used the UniProt mouse reference proteome as database (downloaded in August 2021) with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite (V1.6.15.0)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Casr, Mouse, Podocytes, Calcium-sensing receptor, Murine

### Affiliations
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Zentrum für Innere Medizin, III. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik (Nephrologie/Rheumatologie/Endokrinologie), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Moritz Lassé

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Matthias Rinschen
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


