### Accession
PXD025047

### Title
Newly Synthesized protein after VapC5 induction in Mycobacterium abscessus ATCC19977

### Description
Analyzing newly synthesized protein after VapC5 induction in mycobacterium abscessus 19977

### Sample Protocol
Mab cultures (VapC5-pMC1s and control-pMC1s vector) were induced for either 6, 8, or 12h and then labeled with methionine analog azidohoalanine (AHA, AnaSpec) for 2 hrs. Newly synthesized proteins were selectively captured using an alkyne-containing column from the Click-iT™ Protein Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher) followed by in-column trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digests were analyzed using an Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer and nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific). The raw LC-MS data was converted into MASCOT Generic Format (MGF) using Proteome Discover 2.1 (ThermoFisher) and searched against either the NCBI Mab database (Accession: CU458896.1) together with a database of common laboratory contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) using a local implementation of the global proteome machine (GPM Fury).

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium abscessus (Mab) infections are inexplicably intractable to clearing after aggressive and lengthy treatment regimens. Here we discovered that acquisition of a single toxin-antitoxin system enables Mab to activate a phenotypic switch that enhances survival upon treatment with current first-line antibiotics. This switch is tripped when the VapC5 toxin inactivates tRNA<sup>SerCGA</sup> by cleavage at only one site within its anticodon, leading to growth arrest. Concomitant tRNA<sup>SerCGA</sup> depletion then reprograms the transcriptome to favor synthesis of proteins naturally low in the cognate Ser UCG codon including the transcription factor WhiB7 and members of its regulon as well as the ribosomal protein family. This programmed stockpiling of ribosomes is predicted to override the efficacy of ribosome-targeting antibiotics while the growth arrest phenotype attenuates antibiotics targeting cell wall synthesis. In agreement, VapC5 increases Mab persister formation upon exposure to amikacin and the next-generation oxazolidinone tedizolid (both target ribosomes) or cefoxitin (inhibits cell wall synthesis). These findings expand the repertoire of genetic adaptations harnessed by Mab to survive assaults intended to eradicate it, as well as provide a much-needed framework for selection of shorter and more efficacious alternate treatment options for Mab infections using currently available antimicrobials whose targets are not confounded by VapC5.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mycobacterium abscessus atcc19977

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, USA
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Unnati Chauhan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Woychik
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, USA


