### Accession
PXD003200

### Title
Proteomic characterization of MEIOC interactants: part 2

### Description
Identification of MEIOC interactants by immunoprecipitation and shotgun proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised as three polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were pooled and analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Sexual reproduction is crucially dependent on meiosis, a conserved, specialized cell division programme that is essential for the production of haploid gametes. Here we demonstrate that fertility and the implementation of the meiotic programme require a previously uncharacterized meiosis-specific protein, MEIOC. Meioc invalidation in mice induces early and pleiotropic meiotic defects in males and females. MEIOC prevents meiotic transcript degradation and interacts with an RNA helicase that binds numerous meiotic mRNAs. Our results indicate that proper engagement into meiosis necessitates the specific stabilization of meiotic transcripts, a previously little-appreciated feature in mammals. Remarkably, the upregulation of MEIOC at the onset of meiosis does not require retinoic acid and STRA8 signalling. Thus, we propose that the complete induction of the meiotic programme requires both retinoic acid-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The latter process involving post-transcriptional regulation likely represents an ancestral mechanism, given that MEIOC homologues are conserved throughout multicellular animals.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; immunoprecipitation; meiosis; conserved proteins; meioc; interactions; transcript stabilizer

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


