### Accession
PXD040702

### Title
Phytochrome B photobodies are comprised of phytochrome B and its primary and secondary interacting proteins

### Description
Phytochrome B (phyB) is a plant photoreceptor that forms a membraneless organelle called a photobody. However, its constituents are not fully known. Here, we isolated phyB photobodies from Arabidopsis leaves using fluorescence-activated particle sorting and analyzed their components. We found that a photobody comprises ~1,500 phyB dimers along with other proteins that could be classified into two groups: The first includes proteins that directly interact with phyB and localize to the photobody when expressed in protoplasts, while the second includes proteins that interact with the first group proteins and require co-expression of a first-group protein to localize to the photobody. As an example of the second group, TOPLESS (TPL) interacts with PHOTOPERIODIC CONTROL OF HYPOCOTYL 1 (PCH1) and localizes to the photobody when co-expressed with PCH1. Mutations in TPL family members cause shortened hypocotyls under red light, demonstrating that the method identifies photobody components that regulate red light signaling. Together, our results support that phyB photobodies include not only phyB and its primary interacting proteins but also its secondary interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an RSLCnano u3000 / Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo) system. The sorted photobodies and the input sample were collected and dried with a SpeedVac. The half of isolated particles (1.0, 0.7 and 0.9 μg of protein mass for three biological replicates) were used for the analysis. The dried samples were resuspended in 5.8 μL of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), reduced, alkylated, and digested with 1 μg trypsin/lysC (Pierce, A40009) on an S-trap micro (PROTIFI, C02-micro-80) for 1 h at 47°C, according to the manufacturer’s protocol (v4.7). After digestion, peptides were eluted, dried using a Speedvac, and dissolved in 12 μL of 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid (Millipore). The dissolved peptides (5 μL) were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 164535) and separated by analytical column (PepMap RSLC, ES802). The mobile phases were water with 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The following gradient of buffer B was applied at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (% buffer B): 2% to 20% over 100 min, and 20% to 32% over 20 min. The column temperature was set to 50°C. The survey scan settings were as follows: Resolution = 120,000, Max IT = auto, AGC 300%, mass range 350-1200 Th. The selected precursor was fragmented by HCD and analyzed by an Orbitrap. Other parameters for the MS/MS scan were as follows: Top15 double play, Resolution = 30,000, max IT = 200 ms, Threshold 1E5, normalized collision energy = 30%, isolation width = 2.0, dynamic exclusion parameter after n times = 1, exclusion duration time = 45 sec, mass tolerance low/high = 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the LC-MSMS were analyzed with Maxquant v1.6.10.43 and Perseus v1.5.8. The utilized Maxquant parameters were as follows:　database = UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana, enzyme = trypsin/P, variable modification = Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), fixed modification = methylthio (C), LFQ (Label-Free quantification), and match between runs. The obtained ProteinGroup.txt file was filtered for ‘razor+unique peptide >=2’ using Perseus. The number of the detected peptides in three biological replicates were 13,149, 8,625 and 6,823 for inputs and 4,493, 1,789 and 1,201 for sorted particles.

### Publication Abstract
Phytochrome B (phyB) is a plant photoreceptor that forms a membraneless organelle called a photobody. However, its constituents are not fully known. Here, we isolated phyB photobodies from Arabidopsis leaves using fluorescence-activated particle sorting and analyzed their components. We found that a photobody comprises ~1,500 phyB dimers along with other proteins that could be classified into two groups: The first includes proteins that directly interact with phyB and localize to the photobody when expressed in protoplasts, while the second includes proteins that interact with the first group proteins and require co-expression of a first-group protein to localize to the photobody. As an example of the second group, TOPLESS interacts with PHOTOPERIODIC CONTROL OF HYPOCOTYL 1 (PCH1) and localizes to the photobody when co-expressed with PCH1. Together, our results support that phyB photobodies include not only phyB and its primary interacting proteins but also its secondary interacting proteins.

### Keywords
Phytochrome, Photobody

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology (KRIBB)
Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST

### Submitter
Ga Seul Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Giltsu Choi
Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST


