### Accession
PXD030277

### Title
Glycoproteomics of human THP-1-derived M0, M1 and M2 macrophages

### Description
In this study, we used human THP-1-derived macrophages as an immune cell model, and systematically performed glycoproteomics of three subtypes of macrophages by StrucGP.To study the N‑Glycoproteomic of them, the intact glycopeptides were first enriched and identified using triplicate mass spectrometry (MS)-based glycoproteomic approaches, then StrucGP was used for subsequent analysis. In total three subtypes of macrophages, these intact glycopeptides consist of 253 N-linked glycan structures at 652 unique glycosites from 372 N-glycoproteins, along with their PSM information. A total of 135, 163, and 201 N-glycan structures were identified from M0, M1, and M2 macrophages, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The intact glycopeptides were enriched from THP-1 macrophages using HLB columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and HILIC micro-column (SeQuant). Briefly, one aliquot of the tryptic peptides eluted from HLB column was diluted by 95% ACN and 10% FA to a final solvent composition of 80% ACN/1% TFA for HILIC enrichment. Before sample loading, in-house HILIC micro-columns were washed twice each by 0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/1% TFA. After samples were loaded, the columns were washed three times with 80% ACN/1% TFA. The glycopeptides bound to the column were eluted in 0.4 ml of 0.1% TFA solution. The flow-through was further diluted by 100% ACN and 10% TFA to a final solvent composition of 95% ACN/1% TFA for MAX enrichment.

### Data Protocol
The identification of intact glycopeptides was performed by StrucGP. Briefly, all MS data were first converted into ‘mzML’ format by the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP, v.5.0.0). The intact glycopeptide analyses were performed using the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGPh was used for the analysis of samples. The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin (or Glu-C) with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and the potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) was as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 or 2 Da was allowed in addition to the 20-ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, both peptide and glycan portions required <1% FDR for the intact glycopeptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
The structure of N-glycans on specific proteins can regulate innate and adaptive immunity via sensing environmental signals. Meanwhile, the structural diversity of N-glycans poses analytical challenges that limit the exploration of specific glycosylation functions. In this work, we used THP-1-derived macrophages as examples to show the vast potential of a N-glycan structural interpretation tool StrucGP in N-glycoproteomic analysis. The intact glycopeptides of macrophages were enriched and analyzed using mass spectrometry (MS)-based glycoproteomic approaches, followed by the large-scale mapping of site-specific glycan structures via StrucGP. Results revealed that bisected GlcNAc, core fucosylated, and sialylated glycans (e.g., HexNAc<sub>4</sub>Hex<sub>5</sub>Fuc<sub>1</sub>Neu5Ac<sub>1</sub>, N<sub>4</sub>H<sub>5</sub>F<sub>1</sub>S<sub>1</sub>) were increased in M1 and M2 macrophages, especially in the latter. The findings indicated that these structures may be closely related to macrophage polarization. In addition, a high level of glycosylated PD-L1 was observed in M1 macrophages, and the LacNAc moiety was detected at Asn-192 and Asn-200 of PD-L1, and Asn-200 contained Lewis epitopes. The precision structural interpretation of site-specific glycans and subsequent intervention of target glycoproteins and related glycosyltransferases are of great value for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for different diseases.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophages

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, China
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi province, China

### Submitter
Pengfei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Pengfei Li
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi province, China


