### Accession
PXD017935

### Title
Methylation of Salmonella Typhimurium flagella promotes bacterial adhesion and host cell invasion

### Description
The long external filament of bacterial flagella is composed of several thousand copies of a single protein, flagellin. Here, we explore the role played by lysine methylation of flagellin in Salmonella, which requires the methylase FliB. We show that both flagellins of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, FliC and FljB, are methylated at surface-exposed lysine residues by FliB. A Salmonella Typhimurium mutant deficient in flagellin methylation is outcompeted for gut colonization in a gastroenteritis mouse model, and methylation of flagellin promotes bacterial invasion of epithelial cells in vitro. Lysine methylation increases the surface hydrophobicity of flagellin and enhances flagella-dependent adhesion of Salmonella to phosphatidylcholine vesicles and epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
FliC and FljB purified from the WT and a ∆fliB mutant were separated using SDS-PAGE. The corresponding bands were cut from the gel and each was cut into 1 × 1 mm pieces. An in-gel digestion was performed. In order to destain the gel pieces, a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiCa) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) solution was added and incubated 30 min at room temperature to dehydrate the gel. After removal of the supernatant, 50 mM AmBiCa was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature to rehydrate the pieces. This step was repeated two times. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 10 mM DTT in 50 mM AmBiCa for 30 min at 56 ºC. After cooling to room temperature and removal of the supernatant, the reduced cysteines were alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AmBiCa for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After removal of the supernatant the gel pieces were dried in vacuo. Ice cold 50 mM AmBiCa in 10% ACN containing 12.5 ng/µL trypsin was added and digested overnight. Peptides were extracted by transferring the supernatant to a fresh collection tube and adding 50 mM AmBiCa in 10% ACN to the gel pieces and transferring the second supernatant into the same collection tube. Peptides were dried in vacuo and stored at -20 ºC.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the ProteomeDiscoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Spectra were identified using the Sequest HT search engine with precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminus as well as mono-, di- and tri-methylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as enzyme and three missed cleavages were allowed with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. Spectra were searched against a Salmonella Typhimurium FASTA database.

### Publication Abstract
The long external filament of bacterial flagella is composed of several thousand copies of a single protein, flagellin. Here, we explore the role played by lysine methylation of flagellin in Salmonella, which requires the methylase FliB. We show that both flagellins of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, FliC and FljB, are methylated at surface-exposed lysine residues by FliB. A Salmonella Typhimurium mutant deficient in flagellin methylation is outcompeted for gut colonization in a gastroenteritis mouse model, and methylation of flagellin promotes bacterial invasion of epithelial cells in vitro. Lysine methylation increases the surface hydrophobicity of flagellin, and enhances flagella-dependent adhesion of Salmonella to phosphatidylcholine vesicles and epithelial cells. Therefore, posttranslational methylation of flagellin facilitates adhesion of Salmonella Typhimurium to hydrophobic host cell surfaces, and contributes to efficient gut colonization and host infection.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Salmonella, Protein methylation, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute for Biology – Bacterial Physiology, Berlin, Germany
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Erhardt
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute for Biology – Bacterial Physiology, Berlin, Germany


