### Accession
PXD015405

### Title
Label-free based DIA quantification of a lung cancer cell line and its potential application in nanomedicine.

### Description
Lung cancer is the uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells in the lungs, which can form tumors and interfere with the functioning of the lung. This disease is registered worldwide as the most common type of cancer in men as well as the most common cause of death; besides lung cancer mortality in women has experienced a significant increase in recent years. In Mexico, lung cancer was recorded as the leading cause of death, representing 9.7% of the total annual cancer deaths. Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) is a malignant epithelial tumor classified as a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma tumor that usually occurs in the central airways4 with high growth rate and early development of metastases. The classic treatments used to treat this type of pathologies are radiotherapies, chemotherapies, and surgeries that tend to be ineffective and with side effects that lead patients' quality of life to low levels. Due to this lack of effectiveness of classic therapies, we are looking for alternative therapies that may be more effective and hopeful for cancer patients; especially those treatments based on the use of nanomedicine. The objective of this work was to use Label-free based DIA approach to evaluate the differences in the proteome of enriched membranes between a SCLC cell line H69AR (ATCC® CRL-11351) and a non-tumoral lung cell line MRC5 (ATCC® CCL171), and additionally, compare which protein receptors are overexpressed in cancer vs normal cells, in this way we can select the best target for functionalization of core-shell nanoparticles (CSNPs) to improve the affinity of the therapy for the cancer cell instead of normal cell, this in order to decrease the negative effects of chemotherapeutic drugs in healthy cells.

### Sample Protocol
50 μg of protein obtained from enriched membranes of SCLC cell line H69AR (ATCC® CRL-11351) and a non-tumoral lung cell line MRC5 (ATCC® CCL171 were digested using RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA). Resulting peptides were injected in a mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si in MSE mode to calculate the AUC. Afterward, the same amount of tryptic peptides in each condition were analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50-2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. Generated *.raw files were analyzed in the DriftScope v2.8 software (Waters) to selectively apply quasi-specific collision energies based on the drift time for each peptide detected in the mass spectrometer. A *.rul file was generated and used to apply specific collision energy for every peptide detected in the UDMSE mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS intensities contained in the generated *.raw files were normalized, aligned, compared and relatively quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0.3 against a reversed Homo sapiens database. The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphoryl (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The results generated from Progenesis Software were exported to *.xlsx files in order to verify two levels of data quality control for label-free experiments according to the figures of merit (FOM) described by Souza et al. All proteins considered differentially expressed presented at least a ratio ±1.2 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm).

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is, currently, one of the main malignancies causing deaths worldwide. To date, early prognostic and diagnostic markers for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) have not been systematically and clearly identified, so most patients receive standard treatment. In the present study, we combine quantitative proteomics studies and the use of magnetic core-shell nanoparticles (mCSNP's), first to identify a marker for lung cancer, and second to functionalize the nanoparticles and their possible application for early and timely diagnosis of this and other types of cancer. In the present study, we used label-free mass spectrometry in combination with an ion-mobility approach to identify 220 proteins with increased abundance in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines. Our attention was focused on cell receptors for their potential application as mCSNP's targets; in this work, we report the overexpression of Transferrin Receptor (TfR1) protein, also known as Cluster of Differentiation 71 (CD71) up to a 30-fold increase with respect to the control cell. The kinetics of endocytosis, evaluated by a flow cytometry methodology based on fluorescence quantification, demonstrated that receptors were properly activated with the transferrin supported on the magnetic core-shell nanoparticles. Our results are important in obtaining essential information for monitoring the disease and/or choosing better treatments, and this finding will pave the way for future synthesis of nanoparticles including chemotherapeutic drugs for lung cancer treatments.

### Keywords
Small cell lung cancer, Mrc5, Label-free, H69ar, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Cinvestav-IPN
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Tapia-Ramirez
Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Cinvestav-IPN


