### Accession
PXD024792

### Title
Aquaporin-4 mRNA binding proteins

### Description
RNA-protein pull down and differential quantitative mass spectrometry  analysis of M1 mRNA binding proteins in spinal cord of WT and M23-null mice.

### Sample Protocol
Spinal cord from M23-null and WT mice were explanted and immediately extracted using 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol and Complete Roche protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein concentrations were obtained using the Protein-BCA kit (Pierce). Spinal cord extracts (120g/each assay) were incubated with capped M1-AQP4mRNA-coated or PolyA RNA-coated beads in the presence of di RNAse OUT (ThermoFisher) at a final concentration of 0.4U/l according to the Pierce™ Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit instructions. After the binding phase and washing steps, proteins were eluted from beads by biotin elution buffer provided by the same kit. Eluates were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was perfomed by Ceinge Biotecnologie Avanzate (https://www.ceinge.unina.it/home).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the raw data obtained from the LC-MS/MS analysis were entered into the MaxQuant software, using the MS/MS Ion Search option to search the Andromeda protein database. Andromeda is integrated into MaxQuant as well as the viewer application for inspection of raw data and identification of results. The LC-MS/MS raw data are used by MaxQuant for the identification step using the Andromeda database by matching peaks in the spectra to the theoretical fragment masses

### Publication Abstract
In astrocytes, unknown mechanisms regulate the expression of M1 and M23 isoforms of water channel aquaporin-4 (M1-AQP4 and M23-AQP4). The ratio between these two isoforms controls the AQP4 assembly state in the plasma membrane known as orthogonal arrays of particles (OAPs). To give new insights into these mechanisms, here, we explore the regulation of AQP4 expression in the spinal cord of a CRISPR/Cas9 M23-null mouse model (M23-null). In the M23-null spinal cord OAP assembly, the perivascular localization of AQP4 and M1-AQP4 protein were drastically reduced. In heterozygous, M1-AQP4 was proportionally reduced with M23-AQP4, maintaining the isoform ratio unaffected. We hypothesize a role of the M23-AQP4 in the regulation of M1-AQP4 expression. M1-AQP4 transcription, splicing and M1-AQP4 protein degradation were found to be unaffected in M23-null spinal cord and in M23-null astrocyte primary culture. The translational control was investigated by mRNA-protein pull down and quantitative mass spectrometry, to isolate and quantify AQP4 mRNA binding proteins (AQP4-RBPs). Compared to WT, in M23-null spinal cord, the interaction between AQP4 mRNA and polypyrimidine tract binding protein 1, a positive regulator of AQP4 translation, was higher, while interaction with the RNA helicase DDX17 was lower. In astrocyte primary cultures, DDX17 knockdown upregulated AQP4 protein expression and increased cell swelling, leaving AQP4 mRNA levels unchanged. Here, we identify AQP4-RBPs and provide evidence that in mouse spinal cord M23-AQP4 deletion changes the interaction between AQP4 mRNA and some RBPs involved in AQP4 translation. We describe for the first time the RNA helicase DDX17 as a regulator of AQP4 expression in astrocytes.

### Keywords
Rna-protein pulldown, Mouse spinal cord

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.


### Submitter
Francesco Pisani

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Pisani
Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.


