### Accession
PXD017683

### Title
Skeletal Muscle from Mice fed with HFD LC-MSMS

### Description
Whether muscle mitochondrial dysfunction is the cause or consequence of metabolic disorders remains controversial. Herein, we demonstrate that inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthase in muscle in vivo alters whole-body lipid homeostasis. Mice with restrained activity of the enzyme presented intrafiber lipid droplets, dysregulation of acyl-glycerides and higher visceral adipose tissue deposits, causing these animals to be prone to insulin resistance. This mitochondrial energy crisis increase lactate production, prevents fatty acid β-oxidation, and forces the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) to provide acetyl-CoA for de novo lipid synthesis. In turn, muscle acetyl-CoA accumulation feeds back to oxidative phosphorylation dysfunction through the acetylation-dependent inhibition of respiratory complex II that results in augmented ROS production. Finally, by screening 702 FDA-approved drugs, we identified edaravone as a potent mitochondrial antioxidant and enhancer. The edaravone-driven restoration of ROS and lipid homeostasis in skeletal muscle reestablished insulin sensitivity, thus suggesting that muscular mitochondrial perturbations are a direct cause in the setting of metabolic disorders and repurposing edaravone as a potential treatment for these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ) Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis was performed by the Proteomic Facility at CBMSO, UAM University, Spain following standard protocols detailed in the Expanded View Section.    Expanded View Methods Quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ) Protein digestion. In solution digestion: After denaturation of protein with 8 M urea, samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT (1 hour at 37°C) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (1 hour at room temperature), respectively. Next, samples were diluted to reduce the urea concentration below 1.4 M and digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C using a 1:5 (w/w) trypsin/protein ratio. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted on OASIS C18 columns (Waters) until the mass spectrometric analysis. iTraq labeling and high pH fractionation. The resultant peptide mixture from desalted protein tryptic digests (100 µg) was dissolved in 30 ul of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8, and labeled using the iTRAQ reagent 4plex Multi-plex kit (Applied Biosystems). Labeling was stopped by the addition of 0.1% formic acid. The obtained “4plex-labeled mixture” was analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS to check the efficiency of the labeling. The sample was then fractionated using the high-pH, reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). The sample was re-swollen in 0.1% TFA and then loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column. A step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations in a volatile high-pH solution was applied to the columns to elute bound peptides into nine different fractions (5-80% acetonitrile) collected by centrifugation. The fractions obtained were dried and stored until analysis by mass spectrometry for quantification. Quantitative analysis by RP-LC-MS/MS. The fractions were resuspended in 10 ul of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, Estados Unidos). Peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1 mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Proxeon) and then separated using a 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Proxeon) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 68 min, followed by a gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 90 min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was performed using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Orbitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000, followed by twenty high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass analysis in an Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) resolution. MS2 experiments were performed using HCD to generate high resolution and high mass accuracy MS2 spectra. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode, and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120025) were used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30-second periods. Precursors of unknown or +1 charge state were rejected

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analyses Proteomics. Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using a PEAKS Studio X search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). A database search was performed against uniprot-Mus musculus.fasta (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions, and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ reagent labeling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were limited to 0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified and sent to be quantified. Quantitation of iTRAQ-labeled peptides was performed with a PEAKS Studio X search engine. The -10LgP, Quality and Reporter Ion Intensity were used for Spectrum filter and Significance (ANOVA method) for Protein filter. For protein quantification, we considered protein groups for peptide uniqueness and used only unique peptides, and the modified peptides were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
It is controversial whether mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle is the cause or consequence of metabolic disorders. Herein, we demonstrate that in&#xa0;vivo inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthase in muscle alters whole-body lipid homeostasis. Mice with restrained mitochondrial ATP synthase activity presented intrafiber lipid droplets, dysregulation of acyl-glycerides, and higher visceral adipose tissue deposits, poising these animals to insulin resistance. This mitochondrial energy crisis increases lactate production, prevents fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation, and forces the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) to provide acetyl-CoA for de novo lipid synthesis. In turn, muscle accumulation of acetyl-CoA leads to acetylation-dependent inhibition of mitochondrial respiratory complex II enhancing oxidative phosphorylation dysfunction which results in augmented ROS production. By screening 702 FDA-approved drugs, we identified edaravone as a potent mitochondrial antioxidant and enhancer. Edaravone administration restored ROS and lipid homeostasis in skeletal muscle and reinstated insulin sensitivity. Our results suggest that muscular mitochondrial perturbations are causative of metabolic disorders and that edaravone is a potential treatment for these diseases.

### Keywords
Mouse skeletal muscle hfd

### Affiliations
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa - Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CBMSO-UAM)
PI in de Department of Molecular Biology in Centro de Biología Molecular ‘“Severo Ochoa’” (CBMSO)- Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), leading the project "Role of mitochondrial bioenergetics in skeletal muscle secretrome during exercise and pathology".

### Submitter
Cristina Sánchez González

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formentini
PI in de Department of Molecular Biology in Centro de Biología Molecular ‘“Severo Ochoa’” (CBMSO)- Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), leading the project "Role of mitochondrial bioenergetics in skeletal muscle secretrome during exercise and pathology".


