### Accession
PXD045607

### Title
Massive intein content in Anaeramoeba reveals new aspects of intein mobility in eukaryotes

### Description
Inteins are self-splicing protein elements found in viruses and all three domains of life. How the DNA encoding these selfish elements spreads within and between genomes is poorly understood, particularly in eukaryotes where inteins are scarce. Here we show that the nuclear genomes of three strains of Anaeramoeba encode between 45 and 103 inteins, in stark contrast to four found in the most intein-rich eukaryote described previously. The Anaeramoeba inteins reside in a wide range of proteins, only some of which correspond to intein-containing proteins in other eukaryotes, prokaryotes and viruses. Our data also suggest that viruses have contributed to the spread of inteins in Anaeramoeba and the colonization of new alleles. The persistence of Anaeramoeba inteins might be partly explained by intragenomic movement of intein-encoding regions from gene to gene. Our intein dataset greatly expands the spectrum of intein-containing proteins and provides insights into the evolution of inteins in eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomics sample preparation and digestion: For protein extraction, A. flamelloides BUSSELTON2 was grown in 3% ASL (artificial sea water + 3 % Luria broth) and harvested as described in Jerlström-Hultqvist et al 2023. Briefly, cultures grown in filled, tightly-capped T175-flasks were harvested by decanting the supernatant and rinsing the amoeba monolayer with artificial sea water. Adherent cells were detached by cold-shock followed by percussive force to ensure efficient cell detachment. The resulting cell suspensions were counted in a Neubauer chamber and centrifuged at 500 ×g, 8 min, 4 °C and cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Three replicate samples of 1.31×107,  1.31×107 and 4.5×106 cells were homogenized using a FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) with Lysing Matrix C in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) and protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) on a Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD). Two aliquots (40 µg) from each sample were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in dark, and quenched with 10 mM DTT for 10 min. Protein samples were added to washed hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag™ SpeedBeads (Carboxylate-Modified, Cytiva) in a bead to protein ratio of 10:1. The SP3-workflow was adapted from the protein and peptide clean-up for mass spectrometry protocol provided by the manufacturer. In short, proteins were precipitated on the beads by 100% ethanol, washed with 80% ethanol and dried at room temperature. For digestion, LysC+Trypsin (Promega, ratio [1:25]) in 100 mM TEAB was added, incubated overnight at 37 °C while shaking and a second portion of enzyme (ratio [1:25]) was added followed by incubation for an additional four hours. The second aliquot from each sample was digested with Chymotrypsin similarly. Peptides from the supernatants were purified using the HiPPR detergent removal kit and Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to manufacturer´s instructions. Samples were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
nanoLC-MS/MS analysis and database search: Sample were each analysed twice on an Orbitrap Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with a nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (350x0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using 3% - 80% acetonitrile gradient in 0.2% formic acid over 100 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120 000 resolution, scan range 375-1500 and maximum injection time 50 ms. MS2 analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, where the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.4 m/z isolation window and dynamic exclusion within 10 ppm for 45 s. The isolated precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% collision energy with the maximum injection time of 50 ms for 3 s (‘top speed’ setting) and detected in the orbitrap.  Data files were matched for identification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Sequest against two databases: (i) Anaeramoeba flamelloides BUSSELTON2 proteins with exteins and inteins, Desulfobacter sp. Buss2-1 symbiont (NCBI Genbank: CP054838.1) proteins (db1 - 34,253 entries) and (ii) as above, with additional bacteria from the Anaeramoeba flamelloides BUSSELTON2 metagenome (db2 - 75,454 entries). The additional bacteria represent ten well-assembled bacterial genomes from the Anaeramoeba flamelloides BUSSELTON2 metagenomic assembly. Finally, the databases were clustered using CD-HIT at 95% identity to reduce redundancy. This left 29,674 proteins in db1 and 70,066 proteins in db2, respectively. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.06 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage for trypsin and two for chymotrypsin. Methionine oxidation and cysteine alkylation were selected as variable and fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified proteins were filtered at 1% FDR level.

### Publication Abstract
Inteins are self-splicing protein elements found in viruses and all three domains of life. How the DNA encoding these selfish elements spreads within and between genomes is poorly understood, particularly in eukaryotes where inteins are scarce. Here, we show that the nuclear genomes of three strains of <i>Anaeramoeba</i> encode between 45 and 103 inteins, in stark contrast to four found in the most intein-rich eukaryotic genome described previously. The <i>Anaeramoeba</i> inteins reside in a wide range of proteins, only some of which correspond to intein-containing proteins in other eukaryotes, prokaryotes, and viruses. Our data also suggest that viruses have contributed to the spread of inteins in <i>Anaeramoeba</i> and the colonization of new alleles. The persistence of <i>Anaeramoeba</i> inteins might be partly explained by intragenomic movement of intein-encoding regions from gene to gene. Our intein dataset greatly expands the spectrum of intein-containing proteins and provides insights into the evolution of inteins in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Anaeramoeba, Lc-ms/ms, Intein, Protist

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University
Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Sweden

### Submitter
Jon Jerlström Hultqvist

### Lab Head
Dr Jon Jerlström
Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Sweden


