### Accession
PXD000786

### Title
BMP1/Tolloid-like substrates by iTRAQ degradomics

### Description
In this study, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to reveal the release of proteolytic fragments from the cell surface or the ECM by BMP-1. Thirty-seven extracellular proteins were found in significantly higher or lower amounts in the conditioned medium of HT1080 cells overexpressing BMP-1 and thus, could be considered as candidate substrates. Strikingly, three of these new candidates (betaglycan, CD109 and neuropilin-1) were TGF-Beta co-receptors, also acting as antagonists when released from the cell surface, and were chosen for further substrate validation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture supernatant from HT1080 human fibrosarcoma where concentrated by ultrafiltration or purified on two SPE columns C4 and C18 connected in series. Each sample is treated by a classical iTRAQ protocol, fractionated on a SCX colum and analyzed by LC-MSMS in duplex experiment.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (.mgf files) were generated for each MS/MS file with Analyst 1.1 software (Mascot.dll script, default parameters) and used for database searches with MASCOT 2.2.2. Mass spectrometry data were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (release 2012_01, 40 400 entries including reversed decoy sequences) with a mass tolerance of 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ions. Cysteine carboxymethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation and iTRAQ labeling of the N-terminus and lysine were fixed as variable modifications. One miscleavage was allowed and trypsin or semi-trypsin cleavage specificity was selected for iTRAQ proteomics or iTRAQ-ATOMS respectively. A secondary peptide and protein validation was achieved with the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) version 4.4 (46;47). Briefly, MS/MS data (.wiff) were converted to mzXML files with mzWiff software (default parameters). Mascot results files (.dat) were converted to pepXML files and combined using the XInteract, PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet tools. Quantitation was achieved using the LIBRA tool of the TPP (default parameters). The final protein lists were compiled using ProteinProphet with a probability of >= 0.8 resulting in low error rates of 2%. For iTRAQ proteomics, log2(BMP-1:E94A) was calculated for each protein and the normalized ratios were submitted to Wessa.net (http://www.wessa.net/rwasp_fitdistrnorm.wasp) to check for normal distribution. The returned standard deviation was used for the determination of the cut-off of each experiment (= 2 x standard deviation, corresponding to a p-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The metalloproteinase BMP-1 (bone morphogenetic protein-1) plays a major role in the control of extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly and growth factor activation. Most of the growth factors activated by BMP-1 are members of the TGF-&#x3b2; superfamily known to regulate multiple biological processes including embryonic development, wound healing, inflammation and tumor progression. In this study, we used an iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification)-based quantitative proteomic approach to reveal the release of proteolytic fragments from the cell surface or the ECM by BMP-1. Thirty-eight extracellular proteins were found in significantly higher or lower amounts in the conditioned medium of HT1080 cells overexpressing BMP-1 and thus, could be considered as candidate substrates. Strikingly, three of these new candidates (betaglycan, CD109 and neuropilin-1) were TGF-&#x3b2; co-receptors, also acting as antagonists when released from the cell surface, and were chosen for further substrate validation. Betaglycan and CD109 proved to be directly cleaved by BMP-1 and the corresponding cleavage sites were extensively characterized using a new mass spectrometry approach. Furthermore, we could show that the ability of betaglycan and CD109 to interact with TGF-&#x3b2; was altered after cleavage by BMP-1, leading to increased and prolonged SMAD2 phosphorylation in BMP-1-overexpressing cells. Betaglycan processing was also observed in primary corneal keratocytes, indicating a general and novel mechanism by which BMP-1 directly affects signaling by controlling TGF-&#x3b2; co-receptor activity. The proteomic data have been submitted to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000786 and doi: 10.6019/PXD000786 .

### Keywords
Tfg-beta, Protease, Bmp-1, Itraq, Itraq-atoms

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
IBCP-CCMP, CNRS, LYON France

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Frederic Delolme
IBCP-CCMP, CNRS, LYON France


