### Accession
PXD002652

### Title
Lingula anatina shell proteome

### Description
To provide insights into calcium phosphate biomineralization in bachiopod, we used a proteomic approach to study Lingula anatina shell matrix.

### Sample Protocol
The shells of Lingula adults were decalcified with acetic acid. Acid soluble and insoluble proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin. Peptides were identified with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using SEQUEST software to extract peak lists. Resulting peak lists were analyzed using an in-house MASCOT (v2.3.2) server against Lingula predicted gene models.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionary origins of lingulid brachiopods and their calcium phosphate shells have been obscure. Here we decode the 425-Mb genome of Lingula anatina to gain insights into brachiopod evolution. Comprehensive phylogenomic analyses place Lingula close to molluscs, but distant from annelids. The Lingula gene number has increased to &#x223c;34,000 by extensive expansion of gene families. Although Lingula and vertebrates have superficially similar hard tissue components, our genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses show that Lingula lacks genes involved in bone formation, indicating an independent origin of their phosphate biominerals. Several genes involved in Lingula shell formation are shared by molluscs. However, Lingula has independently undergone domain combinations to produce shell matrix collagens with EGF domains and carries lineage-specific shell matrix proteins. Gene family expansion, domain shuffling and co-option of genes appear to be the genomic background of Lingula's unique biomineralization. This Lingula genome provides resources for further studies of lophotrochozoan evolution.

### Keywords
Shell, Lingula anatina, Brachiopod

### Affiliations
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University
Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Japan

### Submitter
Takeshi Takeuchi

### Lab Head
Dr Noriyuki Satoh
Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Japan


