### Accession
PXD040248

### Title
Carbon fixation in the chemolithoautotrophic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus involves two low-potential ferredoxins as partners of the pentameric PFOR and OGOR enzymes

### Description
Aquifex aeolicus is a microaerophilic hydrogen- and sulfur -oxidizing bacterium that assimilates CO2 via the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle (rTCA). Key enzymes of this pathway are pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) and 2-oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (OGOR), which are responsible, respectively, for the reductive carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to pyruvate and of succinyl-CoA to 2-oxoglutarate, two energetically unfavorable reactions that require a strong reduction potential. We have confirmed, by biochemistry and proteomics, that A. aeolicus possesses a pentameric version of these enzyme complexes ((αβγδε)2) and that they are highly abundant in the cell. In addition, we have purified and characterized from the soluble fraction of A. aeolicus, two low redox potential and oxygen-stable [4Fe-4S] ferredoxins (Fd6 and Fd7, E0 = -440 and -460 mV respectively) and have shown that they can physically interact and exchange electrons with both PFOR and OGOR, suggesting that they could be the physiological electron donors of the system in vivo. Shotgun proteomics indicated that all the enzymes assumed to be involved in the rTCA cycle are produced in the A. aeolicus cells. A number of additional enzymes, previously suggested to be part of a putative partial Wood-Ljungdahl pathway used for the synthesis of serine and glycine from CO2 [1], were identified by mass spectrometry, but their abundance in the cell seem to be much lower than those of the rTCA cycle. Their possible involvement in the carbon assimilation is discussed. 1- Braakman, R.; Smith, E. Metabolic Evolution of a Deep-Branching Hyperthermophilic Chemoautotrophic Bacterium. PloS One 2014, 9, e87950, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0087950.

### Sample Protocol
Aquifex aeolicus VF5 growth condition A. aeolicus VF5 cells were routinely grown at 85 °C in an incubator as described previously, in the presence of hydrogen (80 mmol/flask) and thiosulfate (S2O32-, 1 g L-1) [2]. Briefly, cells were grown in 2-L bottles under 1.4 bars of H2/CO2 (80:20) in SME medium containing only inorganic compounds (400 mL per bottle), modified according to [3], at pH 6.8 in the presence of thiosulfate and oxygen (the amount of dissolved oxygen, provided by the air in the headspace, in the medium was estimated by using the Henry equation to be in the range 0.5–0.8%). The 2L bottles were closed with a hermetically sealed cap with a septum for inoculation with a syringe. Each bottle was positioned horizontally and a magnetic bar was present in each bottle to stir the culture at 350 rpm. Cells were harvested in the late exponential phase (OD600nm is about 0.8) by centrifugation at 16000 rpm for 14 min and the cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C before use. Samples preparation and global proteomic analysis For shotgun protein identification (proteomic profiles), two methods of A. aeolicus protein extraction and digestion were used.  The first method (“stacking method”) allowed to prepare soluble and membrane extracts by re-suspending about 2g of A. aeolicus cells, stored at -80 °C, in 3mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 with protease inhibitors (SIGMAFAST tablets). The cells were lysed twice with a cell disrupter (Constant system Ltd) at 1.6 kbar. After a short spin at 3200 g for 8 minutes, the crude extract was ultracentrifuged at 150000 g for 45 minutes, to obtain the total soluble extract (supernatant) and the membranes (pellet further resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 to have a protein concentration of 10 mg mL-1). The membrane fraction then was solubilized with SDS at 5% (w/v) for 30 min at 37 °C. The total proteins present in the soluble extract and the membrane fraction were identified by shotgun proteomics after loading and migration of both samples (100 µg) on a denaturing stacking gel (5% acrylamide) for approximately 10 min at 25 mA and 250 V (migration was stopped when the dye front reached the limit between the stacking gel and the running gel). The protein band visible in the stacking gel for each sample after staining with Coomassie blue and containing theoretically the totality of proteins present in the extract, was cut out from gel and stored at -20 °C before analysis by LC-MS/MS to identify proteins. This experiment was performed in duplicate.  The second method of protein sample preparation (“S-Trap method”) used the S-TrapTM Micro Spin Column (Protifi) according to the manufacturer instructions. A total protein extract (soluble and membrane proteins) was obtained using 5% SDS and digested in the S-TrapTM column before LC-MS/MS analysis. This experiment was done in duplicate.  In all cases, samples were digested with porcine trypsin (Promega), then analyzed with an ESI-Q-Exactive Plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) equipped with an EASY-spray column (PepMaP TM RSLC, C18, 2µm, 75µm ID x 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were separated by a two step -linear gradient from 6% to 40% of mobile phase B (0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (FA)/ 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile) in mobile phase A (0.1% (vol/vol) FA) for 52 minutes. For peptide ionization in the nanosource spray, voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. Top 10 Data Dependent workflow was used in a 400-1600 m/z range and a dynamic exclusion of 60 s.   2- Guiral, M.; Tron, P.; Aubert, C.; Gloter, A.; Iobbi-Nivol, C.; Giudici-Orticoni, M.-T. A Membrane-Bound Multienzyme, Hydrogen-Oxidizing, and Sulfur-Reducing Complex from the Hyperthermophilic Bacterium Aquifex aeolicus. J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280, 42004–42015, doi:10.1074/jbc.M508034200. 3- Huber, R.; Wilham, T.; Huber, D.;l Trincone, A.; Burggraf, S.; Konig, H.; Rachel, R.; Rockinger, I.; Fricke, H.; Stetter, K. O. Aquifex pyrophilus gen. nov. sp. nov., represents a Novel Group of Marine Hyperthermophilic Hydrogen-Oxidizing Bacteria. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 1992, 15, 340-351.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher, version: 2.4.1.15) using the Sequest HT algorithm with the search following settings: A. aeolicus (taxonomy ID 63363 and subtaxonomies)  extracted from Uniprot (3388 sequence entries, version 2020-12-16) plus the sequences of A. aeolicus Fd6 (NCBI protein ID: WP_024015104) and Fd7 (NCBI protein ID: WP_164930743.1) which were added manually ; trypsin enzyme (maximum 2 missed cleavages); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (Cys); variable modification: oxidation (Met); mass values specific for monoisotopic; precursor mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da. Peptide validation was based on score threshold  at maximum Delta Cn 0.05. Proteins were identified if minimum 2 unique peptide sequences more than 6 amino acids passed the high confidence filter. Raw data for total protein identification from samples prepared according to the « stacking method » (Table 1 and Table S1 in this paper):   File names for the biological duplicates (Stacking experiments):  For Membrane fractions :  20201218_10_063_MG_Aa_Mb  for “ sample 1” in SDRF file 20220303_07_013_MG_Mb_AaVF5 for “sample 2” in SDRF file For soluble fractions :  20201218_13_063_MG_Aa_Sol for “sample 3” in SDRF file 20220303_03_013_MG_Sol_AaVF5 for “sample 4” in SDRF file  Only data processed for 20201218_13_063_MG_Aa_Sol (“sample 3” in SDRF file) are listed in Table 1. 20201218_10_063_MG_Aa_Mb  processed data and 20201218_13_063_MG_Aa_Sol  processed data were pooled in “Stacking” 1 of Table S1. 20220303_07_013_MG_Mb_AaVF5 processed data and 20220303_03_013_MG_Sol_AaVF5 processed data were pooled in “Stacking” 2 of Table S1.  Raw data for total protein identification from samples prepared according to the « S-Trap method » (Table 1 and Table S1 in this paper):  File names for the biological duplicates (S-trap experiments): 20201125_08_056_MG_Aquifex_Strap for “sample 5” in SDRF file (processed data “S-Trap” 1 of Table S1) 20210308_15_019_MG_S-Trap_Aqui   for “sample 6” in SDRF file (processed data “S-Trap” 2 of Table S1)

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aquifex aeolicus</i> is a microaerophilic hydrogen- and sulfur -oxidizing bacterium that assimilates CO<sub>2</sub> via the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle (rTCA). Key enzymes of this pathway are pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) and 2-oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (OGOR), which are responsible, respectively, for the reductive carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to pyruvate and of succinyl-CoA to 2-oxoglutarate, two energetically unfavorable reactions that require a strong reduction potential. We have confirmed, by biochemistry and proteomics, that <i>A. aeolicus</i> possesses a pentameric version of these enzyme complexes ((&#x3b1;&#x3b2;&#x3b3;&#x3b4;&#x3b5;)<sub>2</sub>) and that they are highly abundant in the cell. In addition, we have purified and characterized, from the soluble fraction of <i>A. aeolicus</i>, two low redox potential and oxygen-stable [4Fe-4S] ferredoxins (Fd6 and Fd7, E<sup>0</sup> = -440 and -460 mV, respectively) and shown that they can physically interact and exchange electrons with both PFOR and OGOR, suggesting that they could be the physiological electron donors of the system in vivo. Shotgun proteomics indicated that all the enzymes assumed to be involved in the rTCA cycle are produced in the <i>A. aeolicus</i> cells. A number of additional enzymes, previously suggested to be part of a putative partial Wood-Ljungdahl pathway used for the synthesis of serine and glycine from CO<sub>2</sub> were identified by mass spectrometry, but their abundance in the cell seems to be much lower than that of the rTCA cycle. Their possible involvement in carbon assimilation is discussed.

### Keywords
Carbon fixation; reverse tca cycle; low potential ferredoxin; pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase; oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase; wood-ljungdahl pathway; chemolithoautotrophic bacteria; hyperthermophilic bacteria; hydrogenase

### Affiliations
CNRS
Proteomic Platform of Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée CNRS FR 3479

### Submitter
Regine Lebrun

### Lab Head
Dr Lebrun Regine
Proteomic Platform of Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée CNRS FR 3479


