### Accession
PXD010747

### Title
SWATH proteomics reveals that reductants selectively disrupt collagen homeostasis in human dermal fibroblasts and modify growth factor-independent signalling through the MAPK/Akt pathway

### Description
We have used an unbiased, label-free SWATH proteomic approach to quantitate the response of skin fibroblast cells to the reductant DTT in the presence or absence of the growth factor PDGF. Of the 4487 proteins that were identified, only 47 proteins showed a statistically significant change of 2-fold or more with reducing stress. Our data demonstrates that reducing stress results in the loss of a small subset of reductant-sensitive proteins, including the fibrillar collagens (COL1A1/2 and COL3A1) and the myopathy-associated bundling collagen COL6A1/2/3.

### Sample Protocol
Treated cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 16,000 g supernatants taken for analysis. Peptide samples were prepared using a commercial FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon) and trypsin (Promega, #V5111). Spin-filter eluates were freeze-dried and re-suspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and de-salted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore).  Sample fractions containing 5 µg peptides were analysed using an ekspert™ nanoLC 425 with low micro gradient flow module (Eksigent) coupled to a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer with a DuoSpray source (SCIEX) and a 50-micron ESI electrode (Eksigent). Samples were loaded and washed on a TriArt C18 Capillary guard column 1/32", 5 µm, 5 x 0.5 mm trap column (YMC) and online chromatographic separation performed over 57 min on a Triart C18 Capillary column 1/32", 12 nm, S-3 µm, 150 x 0.3 mm (YMC) at a flow rate of 5 µl min-1 with a linear gradient of 3-32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 43 min, then to 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 2 min, held for 3 min before returning to 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and re-equilibrated. SWATH acquisition was over 55 min, with a cycle time of 3.2 sec. Each cycle consisted of MS acquisition for 250 msec followed by SWATH MS/MS using a 100 Variable window method (downloaded from http://sciex.com/community/entity/11856) in high sensitivity mode with rolling CE, 2+ ions selected. Analyst software version 1.7.1 (SCIEX) was used to acquire all MS and MS/MS data. Samples were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) at a ratio of 1 µg protein to 0.1 µl 10 x RT peptide mix. Three biological and three technical replicates were obtained for each treatment condition.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification were obtained by searching spectra against the 10316 entries in the panhuman 10000 protein 2014 spectral library (PDX000954) in PeakView version 2.2 with the MS/MSALL with SWATH™ acquisition microapp, version 2.0. Chromatographic retention time calibration was performed using iRT peptides, and SWATH data processing carried out with the default settings as advised by SCIEX (300 peptides per protein, 5 transitions per peptide, 95% peptide confidence threshold, 1% peptide false discovery rate threshold, 3.0 XIC extraction window and XIC width 75 ppm). Following processing, data was exported to MarkerView version 1.2.1 and normalised by total area sums before pairwise analysis by t-test. FDR correction of t-test associated p-values was performed using the p.adjust function in R. Co-efficient of variance calculations were performed using peak area values for each protein manually in excel. R was used for the production of graphics. Statistical testing for overrepresentation or enrichment of GO terms was performed using the Panther tools available at pantherdb.org including Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Redox stress is a well-known contributor to aging and diseases in skin. Reductants such as dithiothreitol (DTT) can trigger a stress response by disrupting disulfide bonds. However, the quantitative response of the cellular proteome to reductants has not been explored, particularly in cells such as fibroblasts that produce extracellular matrix proteins. Here, we have used a robust, unbiased, label-free SWATH-MS proteomic approach to quantitate the response of skin fibroblast cells to DTT in the presence or absence of the growth factor PDGF. Of the 4487 proteins identified, only 42 proteins showed a statistically significant change of 2-fold or more with reductive stress. Our proteomics data show that reductive stress results in the loss of a small subset of reductant-sensitive proteins (including the collagens COL1A1/2 and COL3A1, and the myopathy-associated collagens COL6A1/2/3), and the down-regulation of targets downstream of the MAPK pathway. We show that a reducing environment alters signaling through the PDGF-associated MAPK/Akt pathways, inducing chronic dephosphorylation of ERK1/2 at Thr202/Tyr204 and phosphorylation of Akt at Ser473 in a growth factor-independent manner. Our data highlights collagens as sentinel molecules for redox stress downstream of MAPK/Akt, and identifies intervention points to modulate the redox environment to target skin diseases and conditions associated with erroneous matrix deposition.

### Keywords
Collagen, Pdgf, Swath, Skin fibroblasts, Mapk, Redox signalling

### Affiliations
Durham University
Department of Biosciences, Durham University, UK

### Submitter
Adrian Brown

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian Paul Brown
Department of Biosciences, Durham University, UK


