### Accession
PXD012087

### Title
Kinome profiling of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma identifies Tyro3 as a therapeutic target in PEL

### Description
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) make up the majority of lymphoma diagnoses and represent a very diverse set of malignancies. We sought to identify kinases uniquely upregulated in different NHL subtypes. Using Multiplexed Inhibitor Bead-mass spectrometry (MIB/MS), we found Tyro3 was uniquely upregulated and important for cell survival in primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), which is a viral lymphoma infected with Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV).

### Sample Protocol
Suspension cells were pelleted and washed three times in cold PBS. Pellets were lysed on ice in MIB lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cell lysates were sonicated, clarified, and the supernatant was syringe-filtered through a 0.2 µm SFCA membrane. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and around 2.5 mg were used for each sample. The filtered lysate was brought to 1 M NaCl and passed through a column of multiplexed kinase inhibitor-conjugated beads (MIBs) consisting of Sepharose-conjugated Purvalanol B, PP58, CTx-0294885, VI-16832, and two custom-synthesized pan-kinase inhibitor compounds, UNC-8088A and UNC-2142A. The MIBs were washed with 5 mL of high-salt buffer and 5 mL of low-salt buffer. The columns were washed a final time with 1 mL 0.1% SDS before elution in 1 mL of 0.5% SDS. Eluted kinases were reduced (dithiothreitol) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) prior to being concentrated with Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters and detergent was removed from the concentrated eluate by chloroform/methanol extraction. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and were digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin. Peptides were dried down in a speed-vac and cleaned with C-18 spin columns according to the manufacturer instructions. Peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and 25-50% injected onto a Thermo Easy-Spray 75uM x 25cm C-18 column via an Easy nanoLC-1000. Peptides were separated as a single fraction on a 300 minute gradient (5-40% acetonitrile) and identified by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Parameters: 3e6 AGC MS1, 80ms MS1 max inject time, 1e5 AGC MS2, 100ms MS2 max inject time, 20 loop count, 1.8 m/z isolation window, 45s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were identified using MaxQuant software and the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database. Peptide abundance was calculated using label-free quantification (LFQ). Mass spectrometry runs were normalized by natural log-transformed and median-centering LFQ values on a common-captured set of 151 kinases. Heat maps were generated using the Euclidian hierarchical clustering program from GENE-E.

### Publication Abstract
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) make up the majority of lymphoma diagnoses and represent a very diverse set of malignancies. We sought to identify kinases uniquely up-regulated in different NHL subtypes. Using multiplexed inhibitor bead-mass spectrometry (MIB/MS), we found Tyro3 was uniquely up-regulated and important for cell survival in primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), which is a viral lymphoma infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). Tyro3 was also highly expressed in PEL cell lines as well as in primary PEL exudates. Based on this discovery, we developed an inhibitor against Tyro3 named UNC3810A, which hindered cell growth in PEL, but not in other NHL subtypes where Tyro3 was not highly expressed. UNC3810A also significantly inhibited tumor progression in a PEL xenograft mouse model that was not seen in a non-PEL NHL model. Taken together, our data suggest Tyro3 is a therapeutic target for PEL.

### Keywords
Non-hodgkin lymphoma, Kinome profiling, Tyro3, Primary effusion lymphoma

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599, USA.

### Submitter
Jason Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Blossom Andrea Damania
Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599, USA.


