### Accession
PXD016762

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics to identify biomarker for sub-clinical mastitis in Karan Fries Cow.

### Description
Mastitis is defined as inflammation of the mammary gland and one of the most serious concerns with regards to milk production and animal health in dairy industry. Indeed, mastitis have marked influence on the milk yield, milk constituents, milk quality and nourishment of the neonates. We performed a comparative proteome analysis of the bovine milk obtained from healthy, sub-clinical and clinical mastitis from Indian indigenous cattle Karan Fries.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples were processed as previously described (Reinhardt et al., 2013) with slight modifications. The milk was defatted by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C followed by ultra-centrifuged at  60,000 g for 2 hours at,4°C.The whole milk was fractionated into casein pellet and exome fraction at the bottom, the supernatant of crude whey fraction in the middle, and a fat layer on the top. The crude whey fraction was separated out for further analysis.  Depletion efficiency of casein from whey was further confirmed by loading the sample in 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

### Data Protocol
For digestion 100 µg of protein from each sample was dissolved in dissolution buffer (0.5M triethylammonium-bicarbonate, pH-8.5), denatured with 2% SDS followed by reduction of protein using 50mM tris-(2 carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60◦C for 1hr. Alkylation of cysteine residues were done using 20mm IAA in dark for 30 min followed by tryptic digestion (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:50 for 16 h at 37 °C. Digested peptides of Healthy, SCM and CM were separately labeled with TMT labels (114,115,116) using iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Sub-clinical mastitis, Itraq

### Affiliations
National Dairy Research institute
ICAR

### Submitter
Ashok Kumar Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Mohanty
National Dairy Research institute


