### Accession
PXD023976

### Title
Unresolved stalled ribosome complexes restrict cycle progression after genotoxic stress

### Description
Translation of damaged mRNA can lead to ribosome stalling, thereby producing incomplete proteins toxic to the cell. The mechanism of ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) disassembles stalled ribosomes through the actions of the ASC-1 complex (ASCC). Here, we show that some reagents that chemically damage RNA, such as ultraviolet light (UV), cause ribosome stalling, which leads to accumulation of the ASC-1 complex (ASCC) on stalled ribosomes and stable interaction of the ASCC3 helicase with RNA. In contrast, the ASCC was not similarly affected by emetine or anisomycin-induced ribosome stalling. Our work identified two different types of stalled ribosome. Ribosomes arrested by emetine or anisomycin are transient as they are resolved by the ASCC. Whereas the ASCC fails to split some stalled ribosomes, such as those induced by UV, resulting in long-lived stalled ribosome complexes. We show that ribosome stalling activates the G1/S and G2/M cell cycle checkpoints with long-lived stalled ribosomes causing prolonged checkpoint activation. Thus, the cell adjusts this adaptive survival response to match the nature of the stalled ribosome.

### Sample Protocol
RNA interactome capture (RIC) was performed on untreated and UVC cross-linked MCF10A cells to catalogue cytoplasmic RBPs.  The changes in cytoplasmic RNA-protein interactions after UVB irradiation were assessed by comparing the RIC eluates from untreated MCF10A cells and MCF10A cells treated with 300 J/m2 UVB and allowed to recover for 1 hour.Cytoplasmic RIC was performed on 2 x 108 MCF10A cells per condition. Cells were cross-linked using 150 mJ/cm2 UVC and harvested by scraping into cytoplasmic lysis buffer supplemented with 1X complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors and 200U NxGen RNase inhibitor. After the nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4oC, lithium chloride, lithium dodecyl sulphate (LiDS), and DTT were added to the cytoplasmic lysate to a final concentration of 0.5 M, 0.75% and 5 mM, respectively. Lysates were incubated with oligo(dT)25 beads  for one hour at room temperature with mixing. The beads were washed for 5 minutes with 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.5 M LiCl, 0.5% LiDS, 5 mM DTT and then washed twice for 5 minutes with 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.5 M LiCl, 0.1% LiDS, 5 mM DTT. Subsequently, the beads were washed twice with 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.1 M LiCl, 0.1% LiDS, 5 mM DTT and 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.1 M LiCl. RNA and protein was eluted by incubating the beads in 20 mM Tris pH 7.4 at 70oC for 3 minutes. RNA was digested with 40 mg/ml RNase A, 100U/ml RNase T1 and 125U Turbonuclease for 2 hours. Digested eluates were resolved using SDS PAGE prior to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data was collected in Waters ‘.raw’ format and processed and searched against a reviewed reversed human Swissprot database using Proteinlynx Global Server 3.0 (Waters) and an in-house RNA interactome db. The project was re-analysed using ISOQuant, an open source  software from Stefan Tenzer at the University of Mainz to produce highly stringent   quantification data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna interactome capture, Asc-1 complex, Ascc3, Ribosome-associated quality control, Rna damage

### Affiliations
MRCTox
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Rebecca Jukes

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Anne Willis
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, UK


