### Accession
PXD026973

### Title
Neuronal ribosomes dynamically exchange ribosomal proteins in a context-dependent manner.

### Description
Owing to their morphological complexity and dense network connections, neurons modify their proteomes locally, using mRNAs and ribosomes present in the neuropil (tissue enriched for dendrites and axons). Although ribosome biogenesis largely takes place in the nucleus and perinuclear region, neuronal ribosomal protein (RP) mRNAs have been frequently detected remotely, in dendrites and axons. Here, using imaging and ribosome profiling, we directly detected the RP mRNAs and their translation in the neuropil. Combining brief metabolic labeling with mass spectrometry, we found that a group of RPs rapidly associated with translating ribosomes in the cytoplasm and that this incorporation is independent of canonical ribosome biogenesis. Moreover, the incorporation probability of some RPs was regulated by location (neurites vs. cell bodies) and changes in the cellular environment (following oxidative stress). Our results suggest new mechanisms for the local activation, repair and/or specialization of the translational machinery within neuronal processes, potentially allowing neuronal synapses a rapid means to regulate local protein synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured neurons: Dissociated rat cortical neuron cultures were prepared and maintained as described previously (Aakalu et al. 2001). Cells were plated at a density of 4e6 cells/cm2 on poly-D-lysine–coated 10cm dishes and at a density of 9e6 cells/cm2 on poly-D-lysine–coated 75 mm inserts (3.0µm pore size, Corning 3420). One day after plating on the inserts, cells were incubated with 5µM AraC for 2 days. Neurons were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in growth medium [Neurobasal-A supplemented with B27 and GlutaMAX-I (Life Technologies)] for 14-16DIV. All experiments complied with national animal care guidelines and the guidelines issued by the Max Planck Society and were approved by local authorities.  SILAC and treatments: To generate heavy medium, cells were plated in growth medium containing 84mg/L of L-Arginine-HCl, 13C6, 15N4 and 146 mg/L of L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6, 15N2 and cultured for 13-16DIV. The heavy medium was then collected to label sister cultured plates for the indicated amount of time (1hr, 2hr, 3hr or 2 days). To assess the specificity of the labeling for new assembled ribosomes, samples after 2hr heavy labelling were prepared using lysis buffer and cushion solution supplemented with 0mM or 15mM EDTA. To inhibit ribosome biogenesis, cells were treated with 20µg/µL Leptomycin for 2 days in the presence of heavy medium. To induce oxidative stress, after 2hr heavy labeling H2O2 was added for 10min to a final concentration of 0.1mM or 1mM to the heavy medium, followed by 50min recovery period in heavy medium. To reduce the likelihood of purifying polypeptide chains still emerging from the ribosome, a 5min wash with light medium was used to allow termination of translation after the 1hr, 2hr or 3hr labeling.   Lysis and ribosome purification: Cells were washed three times and scraped in ice-cold DPBS with 100μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX). Cell suspensions were splitted in two aliquots for total lysis and for ribosome purification, and centrifuged for 500 x g for 5 min. For total lysis, cell pellets were lysed in 8M urea, 200mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.4], 4% CHAPS, 1M NaCl, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor, using a pesle and sonication for 4×30s at 4°C. The samples were incubated with Benzonase (1µL of a ≥250 units/mL stock) for 10min, and centrifuged for 5min at 10,000 x g to clear the samples from cell debris. For ribosome purification, cell pellets were lysed in 20mM Tris pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 24 U/mL TurboDNase, 100µg/mL cycloheximide, 1% TritonX-100, 1mM DTT, RNasin(R) Plus RNase inhibitor 200U/mL and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor. For the compartmentalized chambers, the upper layer was scraped in DPBS+CHX and then the lower layer directly in the ribosome lysis buffer. Lysates were pipetted up and down until homogenization was clear with a 0.4 × 20mm needle on ice. Lysates were centrifuged for 10min at 10,000g at 4°C, and the supernatants were loaded on 1 mL sucrose cushion (34% sucrose, 20mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 100 μg/ml cycloheximide, 1mM DTT) in polycarbonate centrifuge tubes. Samples were centrifuged for 30min at 55.000rpm in SW55Ti rotor (max acc. and 7 dec.) and resuspended in 120mM NaCl 3mM KCl 10mM d-Glucose 10mM HEPES 2mM CaCl2 2 mM MgSO4.  Digestion: Proteins were digested according to the FASP protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) or using S-Traps according to an adapted version of the suspension trapping protocol as described by the manufacturer (ProtiFi). Peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007), dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS: The peptide samples were reconstituted in 5% ACN and 0.1% FA supplemented with an iRT peptide standard (Biognosys). Peptides were separated by nano-HPLC (U3000 RSLCnano, Dionex). The samples were loaded with loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water; 6min; 6µL/min) on a PepMap100 loading column (C18, L = 20 mm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and subsequently separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, L = 50cm, <2µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) by a gradient of phase A (0.1% FA in water) and phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water). The gradient was ramped from 4% B to 48% B in 90min at a flow rate of 300nL/min. All solvents were purchased from Fluka in LC-MS grade. Eluting peptides were ionized online using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed in a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For DDA-mode, precursor ion spectra were acquired over the mass range 350–1400 m/z (R = 70k, AGC target 3e6, maximum IT = 60ms). The top-10 precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (HCD; NCE = 30) and analyzed in MS2 mode (R = 17.5k, isolation window = 1.7 Da, AGC target 2e4, maximum IT = 50ms). In a PRM approach (Peterson et al., 2012), MS2 scans were acquired (R = 17.5k, isolation window = 1.7Da, AGC target 1e5, maximum IT = 64ms) according to the scheduled inclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and relative quantification, MS  data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.3 and 1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) using customized Andromeda parameters. For all searches, spectra were matched to a Rattus norvegicus database (reviewed and unreviewed; downloaded from uniprot.org) considering tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages and to contaminant and decoy databases. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and protein-N-terminal acetylation as well as methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) and protein level. Only proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were retained for downstream analysis. For relative protein quantification, the data was searched with a multiplicity of 2 (light (Lys0, Arg0) and heavy (Lys8, Arg10)) and the LFQ values were computed without normalization.   For the targeted analysis of ribosomal proteins by PRM, raw data was analyzed in Skyline (20.1.0.155) (MacLean et al., 2010). To obtain information on target peptides, a series of DDA scout runs was measured. Targeted peptides were selected based on uniqueness, no missed cleavages, recurrent occurrence and signal intensity. Given a high degree of sequence similarity, some ribosomal proteins could not be represented by more than one unique peptide. Peptide identity was confirmed using a spectral library generated in Skyline using the results of a MaxQuant search (msms.txt) with a multiplicity of 1 (only light) of the DDA data. In Skyline, a scheduled method was generated using target detection windows of 3 min which was split into three inclusion lists to analyze separate injections measured with PRM methods 1-3. For final data curation, PRM raw data was imported as multiple-injection replicates in Skyline and peak picking was confirmed manually in accordance to retention time, mass accuracy and library matches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome assembly, Protein complex, Psilac, Oxidative stress, Translation, Ribosome, Ribosome biogenesis, Hydrogen peroxide, Neurons, Neuronal ribosomes, Local translation, Prm, H2o2, Stress, Rrna, Ribosomal proteins, Protein synthesis, Silac, Neuronal processes

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research


