### Accession
PXD019310

### Title
Proteomic fingerprinting discriminates cryptic gastropod species

### Description
This study uses five species of the genus Ecrobia as a model taxon to demonstrate the applicability of proteomic fingerprinting measured by MALDI-TOF MS (matrix-assisted laser/desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry) to cryptic gastropod species and evaluate the discriminative power the proteomic profiles.

### Sample Protocol
All specimens were hand-picked, preserved in 80% undenatured ethanol and stored at -20°C until processing. A small piece of microgastropod foot tissue was dissected and briefly dried at room temperature. Depending on sample size, 10–20 μl matrix solution (α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid as saturated solution in 50% acetonitrile, 47.5% LC-MS grade water and 2.5% trifluoroacetic acid) was added. After 10 min of extraction, 1 μl of each sample was added to the target plate. Protein mass spectra were measured from 2 to 20 kDa with a linear-mode MALDI-TOF System (Microflex LT/SH, Bruker Daltonics). Peak intensities were analyzed in the range of 2 to 10 kDa using a centroid peak detection algorithm, a signal to noise threshold of 2 and a minimum intensity threshold of 400 with a peak resolution higher than 400 for mass spectra evaluation. The protein/oligonucleotide method was employed for fuzzy control with a maximal resolution 10 times above the threshold. For each sample, 240 satisfactory shots were summed up.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using the packages MALDIquant and MALDIquantForeign for the R 3.6.2 statistical programming environment. Peaks were identified using a signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 7 after square-root transformation, Savitzky-Golay smoothing, baseline removal (SNIP-algorithm) and normalization (TIC) of spectra. Peaks were repeatedly binned until the intensity matrix reached a stable peak number (tolerance 0.002, strict approach) and missing values were interpolated from the corresponding spectrum. All peaks with a SNR <1.75 were assumed to be below detection limit and set to zero in the final peak matrix. More details can be found in the provided R Script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Maldi-tof ms, Ecrobia, Species discrimination, Mass spectra

### Affiliations
German Center for Marine Biodiversity Research, Senckenberg
German Center for Marine Biodiversity Research Senckenberg Südstrand 44 26382 Wilhelmshaven Germany

### Submitter
Janna Peters

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Martinez Arbizu
German Center for Marine Biodiversity Research Senckenberg Südstrand 44 26382 Wilhelmshaven Germany


