### Accession
PXD029116

### Title
Articular cartilage proteome differentiates by zones during osteoarthritis

### Description
Articular cartilage is deprived of blood vessels and nerves, and the only cells residing in this tissue are chondrocytes. The molecular properties of the articular cartilage and the architecture of the extracellular matrix demonstrate a complex structure that differentiates on the depth of tissue. Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease, the most common form of arthritis, affecting the whole joint. It is associated with ageing and affects the joints that have been continually stressed throughout life including the knees, hips, fingers, and lower spine region. OA is a multifactorial condition of joint characterised by articular cartilage loss, subchondral bone sclerosis, and inflammation leading to progressive joint degradation, structural alterations, loss of mobility and pain. Articular cartilage biology is well studied with a focus on musculoskeletal diseases and cartilage development. However, there are relatively few studies focusing on zonal changes in the cartilage during osteoarthritis.

### Sample Protocol
Osteoarthritic articular cartilage specimens were collected from the patients undergoing total knee replacement, and normal articular cartilage was obtained from donors with no history of OA. Donors of cartilage samples for LC-MS/MS proteomics were all males. The mean age of the old group was 71.6 years old (67-75 years old) and the OA group 76.4 years old (69-85 years old).  Frozen cartilage samples were processed using a cryostat. Full-thickness cartilage was cut in the coronal plane at 20μm thickness. Cryosections used for laser microdissection (LMD) were collected onto PET membrane (1.4μm) slides. Superficial, middle and deep zones of articular cartilage were microdissected and collected into 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were in situ digested using trypsin and Rapigest SF Surfactant was used prior to it.  Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted on a QExactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher, UK).

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the raw files of the acquired spectra were analysed using Progenesis QI software (Waters, Manchester, UK) which aligns the files and then peak picks for quantification by peptide abundance. Spectra for each feature were exported from Progenesis QI and utilised for peptide identification with a local Mascot server (Version 2.6.2), searching against the Unihuman Reviewed database with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.01 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis, the most common joint disorder, is characterised by deterioration of the articular cartilage. Many studies have identified potential therapeutic targets, yet no effective treatment has been determined. The aim of this study was to identify and rank osteoarthritis-associated genes and micro-RNAs to prioritise those most integral to the disease. A systematic meta-analysis of differentially expressed mRNA and micro-RNAs in human osteoarthritic cartilage was conducted. Ingenuity pathway analysis identified cellular senescence as an enriched pathway, confirmed by a significant overlap (p &lt; 0.01) with cellular senescence drivers (CellAge Database). A co-expression network was built using genes from the meta-analysis as seed nodes and combined with micro-RNA targets and SNP datasets to construct a multi-source information network. This accumulated and connected 1689 genes which were ranked based on node and edge aggregated scores. These bioinformatic analyses were confirmed at the protein level by mass spectrometry of the different zones of human osteoarthritic cartilage (superficial, middle, and deep) compared to normal controls. This analysis, and subsequent experimental confirmation, revealed five novel osteoarthritis-associated proteins (PPIB, ASS1, LHDB, TPI1, and ARPC4-TTLL3). Focusing future studies on these novel targets may lead to new therapies for osteoarthritis.

### Keywords
Zonal changes and ageing, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Musculoskeletal and Ageing Science Research Lead, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences,  Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Peffers
Musculoskeletal and Ageing Science Research Lead, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences,  Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, University of Liverpool


