### Accession
PXD016430

### Title
MiR-29 coordinates age-dependent plasticity brakes in the adult visual cortex

### Description
Visual cortical circuits show profound plasticity during early life and are later stabilized by molecular "brakes" limiting excessive circuit rewiring beyond a critical period. How the appearance of these factors is coordinated during the transition from development to adulthood remains unknown. We analyzed the role of miR-29a, a miRNA targeting factors involved in several important pathways for plasticity such as extracellular matrix and chromatin regulation. We found that visual cortical miR-29a expression in the visual cortex dramatically increases with age, but it is not experience-dependent. Precocious high levels of miR-29a induced by targeted intracortical injections of a miR-29a mimic blocked ocular dominance plasticity and caused an early appearance of perineuronal nets. Conversely, inhibition of miR-29a in adult mice using LNA antagomirs activated ocular dominance plasticity, reduced perineuronal net intensity and number, and changed their chemical composition restoring permissive low chondroitin 4-O-sulfation levels characteristic of juvenile mice. Activated adult plasticity had the typical functional and proteomic signature of juvenile plasticity. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies indicated that miR-29a manipulation regulates the expression of plasticity factors acting at different cellular levels, from chromatin regulation to synaptic organization and extracellular matrix remodeling. Intriguingly, the projection of miR-29a regulated gene dataset onto cell-specific transcriptomes revealed that parvalbumin-positive interneurons and oligodendrocytes were the most affected cells. Overall, miR29a is a master regulator of the age-dependent plasticity brakes promoting stability of visual cortical circuits.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, tissues were lysed (4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH8, 1mM EDTA, 100 mM DTT) by sonication using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) with 10 cycles 60 sec ON/ 30 sec OFF at the highest setting at 20 °C. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested with LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using a Waters Oasis HLB µElution Plate. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to the MS (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 103) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 103 ions or after filling time of 300 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60s and relative mass window of 10 ppm.  Isotopes were excluded.  Additionally only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (only the most intense charge state selected). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed.

### Data Protocol
The Andromeda search engine, part of MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28), was used to search the data. The data were searched against a species specific (Mus musculus Swissprot) database and a list of common contaminants. The data were searched with the following modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed), and oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full-scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide and protein level 1% FDR were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Visual cortical circuits show profound plasticity during early life and are later stabilized by molecular "brakes" limiting excessive rewiring beyond a critical period. The mechanisms coordinating the expression of these factors during the transition from development to adulthood remain unknown. We found that miR-29a expression in the visual cortex dramatically increases with age, but it is not experience-dependent. Precocious high levels of miR-29a blocked ocular dominance plasticity and caused an early appearance of perineuronal nets. Conversely, inhibition of miR-29a in adult mice using LNA antagomirs activated ocular dominance plasticity, reduced perineuronal nets, and restored their juvenile chemical composition. Activated adult plasticity had the typical functional and proteomic signature of critical period plasticity. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies indicated that miR-29a manipulation regulates the expression of plasticity brakes in specific cortical circuits. These data indicate that miR-29a is a regulator of the plasticity brakes promoting age-dependent stabilization of visual cortical connections.

### Keywords
Visual cortex, Age-dependent plasticity, Mir-29

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute 
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.  Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.

### Submitter
Erika Kelmer Sacramento

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Cellerino
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.  Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.


