### Accession
PXD030849

### Title
Cullin-independent recognition of HHARI substrates by a dynamic RBR catalytic domain

### Description
RING-Between-RING (RBR) E3 ligases mediate ubiquitin transfer through an obligate E3- ubiquitin thioester intermediately prior to substrate ubiquitination.  While RBRs share a conserved catalytic module, substrate recruitment mechanisms remain enigmatic and the relevant domains have yet to be identified for any member of the class.  Here we characterize the interaction between the auto-inhibited RBR, HHARI (AriH1), and its target protein, 4EHP, using a combination of XL-MS, HDX-MS, NMR, and biochemical studies.  The results show that 1) a di-aromatic surface on the catalytic HHARI Rcat domain forms a binding platform for substrates and 2) a phospho-mimetic mutation on the auto-inhibitory Ariadne domain of HHARI promotes release and reorientation of Rcat for transthiolation and substrate modification.  The findings represent the first identification of a direct binding interaction between a RING-Between-RING ligase and its substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were expressed and purified as described in Reiter et al. 2022.  Chemical cross­linking and mass spectrometry analysis (XL­MS) was carried out as described by 49. Reactions were 50 μL total volume in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT plus 0.5 mM DSS. HHARI only reactions contained 0.2 μg/μl (3.6 μM) HHARI. HHARI plus 4EHP reactions additionally contained 0.08 μg/μL (3.9 μM) 4EHP. Ska core complex was purified as described by and spiked into all reactions at 0.02 μg/μL (1:10 Ska complex:HHARI weight to weight ratio) as a normalization control. Crosslinking was carried out for 15 mins at room temperature before quenching by addition of 5 μL 1 M NH4HCO3. Four separate reaction conditions were performed: (1) Wild-type HHARI; (2) Wild-type HHARI + 4EHP; (3) Activated HHARI; (4) Activated HHARI + 4EHP. Each reaction was performed in triplicate.   MS injections were 3 μl of trypsin digested protein was loaded by autosampler onto a 150­μm Kasil fritted trap packed with 2 cm of Reprosil­Pur C18­AQ (3­μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 2 μl per min. After desalting with 8 μl of 0.1% formic acid plus 2% acetonitrile, the trap was brought online with a Self-Packed PicoFrit Column (New Objective part number PF360-75-10-N-5, 75 µm i.d.) packed with 30 cm of Reprosil­Pur C18­AQ (3­μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) mounted to a heated nanospray ionization source (CorSolutions LLC, Ithaca, NY) set at 50°C and placed in line with a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC pump plus autosampler. Peptides were eluted from the column at 0.25 µL/min using an acetonitrile gradient consisting of the following steps: (1) 0-10 mins; 6-10% B; (2) 10-90 mins; 10-32% B; (3) 100-130 mins; 32-75% B; (4) 130-135 mins; 75% B; (5) 135-136 mins; 75-100% B; (6) 136-151 mins; 100% B, followed by re-equilibration to 0% buffer B prior to the subsequent injection. Buffer A was: 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
A Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to perform mass spectrometry in positive ion mode.   For cross-link identification experiments, data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used with a maximum of 20 tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra acquired per MS spectrum (scan range of m/z 400–1,600). The resolution for MS and MS/MS was 60,000 at m/z 200. Automatic gain control targets for MS and MS/MS were set to set to a nominal value of 3e6 and 2e4, respectively, and maximum fill times were 50 and 100 ms, respectively. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an isolation width of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS acquisitions were prevented for +1, +2, >+7 or undefined precursor charge states. Dynamic exclusion was set for 10 s. All spectra were collected in centroid mode. For quantification experiments, single-injection data independent acquisition (DIA) runs were performed. MS spectra were acquired at 30,000 resolution with a scan range from 595 to 1205 m/z, automatic gain control of 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 45 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution using 8 m/z precursor isolation windows in a staggered-window pattern with optimized window placements from 600.5 to 1200.8m/z and a loop count of 75. Automatic gain control was 1e6 and maximum fill time was 22 ms. All data were collected in centroid mode. Acquired spectra were converted into mzML using ProteoWizard’s msconvert. All proteins in the sample were identified using Comet. Cross­linked peptides were identified within these proteins by Kojak version 2.0.0-dev available at (http://www.kojak­-ms.org). Q­values were assigned to each PSM using Percolator version 2.08. Target databases consisted of all proteins identified in the sample analyzed. Decoy databases consisted of the corresponding set of reversed protein sequences. Data were filtered to show hits to the target proteins that had a Percolator assigned peptide level q value ≤ 0.01 and were identified by 2 or more PSMs. The complete unfiltered list of all PSMs and their Percolator assigned q values are available on the ProXL web application at: https://proxl.yeastrc.org/proxl/p/hhari along with the raw MS spectra and search parameters used. Cross-linked peptides identified by Kojak in DDA data were used to generate targets in Skyline for subsequent quantification of DIA data acquired on the same samples. Quantitative XL-MS data can be found on Panorama Public here: https://panoramaweb.org/hhari.url.

### Publication Abstract
RING-between-RING (RBR) E3 ligases mediate ubiquitin transfer through an obligate E3-ubiquitin thioester intermediate prior to substrate ubiquitination. Although RBRs share a conserved catalytic module, substrate recruitment mechanisms remain enigmatic, and the relevant domains have yet to be identified for any member of the class. Here we characterize the interaction between the auto-inhibited RBR, HHARI (AriH1), and its target protein, 4EHP, using a combination of XL-MS, HDX-MS, NMR, and biochemical studies. The results show that (1) a di-aromatic surface on the catalytic HHARI Rcat domain forms a binding platform for substrates and (2) a phosphomimetic mutation on the auto-inhibitory Ariadne domain of HHARI promotes release and reorientation of Rcat for transthiolation and substrate modification. The findings identify a direct binding interaction between a RING-between-RING ligase and its substrate and suggest a general model for RBR substrate recognition.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Skyline, Rbr, E3 ligase, Kojak, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Xl-ms, Proxl, Cullin, Hhari

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle

### Submitter
Alex Zelter

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel E. Klevit
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


