### Accession
PXD008805

### Title
Asparagine bioavailability governs metastasis in a model of breast cancer

### Description
Using a functional model of breast cancer heterogeneity, we previously showed that clonal sub-populations proficient at generating circulating tumour cells were not all equally capable of forming metastases at secondary sites1. A combination of differential expression and focused in vitro and in vivo RNAi screens revealed candidate drivers of metastasis that discriminated metastatic clones. Among these, Asparagine Synthetase (ASNS) expression in a patient’s primary tumour was most strongly correlated with later metastatic relapse. Here, we have shown that asparagine bioavailability strongly influences metastatic potential.  Limiting asparagine by Asns knockdown, treatment with L-asparaginase, or dietary asparagine restriction reduced metastasis without impacting growth of the primary tumour, whereas increased dietary asparagine or enforced Asns expression promoted metastatic progression. Altering asparagine availability in vitro strongly influenced invasive potential, and this was correlated with an impact on proteins that promote the epithelial to mesenchymal transition. This provides at least one potential mechanism for how the bioavailability of a single amino acid could regulate metastatic progression.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were lysed with 0.1M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate), 0.1% SDS buffer followed by tip sonication and boiling at 90˚C for 5min. The protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Quick StartTM) and 90ug of total protein per sample were reduced with tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine (ΤCEP, Sigma) for 1h at 60˚C at a final concentration of 5mM. Cysteines were blocked for 10min at room temperature using methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma) at final concentration of 10mM. Samples were digested overnight at 37˚C with trypsin (Pierce) and the peptides were labelled with the TMT10plex reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). The TMT mixture was fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system at high pH using the X-Bridge C18 column (3.5μm 2.1x150mm, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The parameters for the SequestHT node were as follow: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da), Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus, K (+229.163Da) and  Methylthio at C (+45.988Da).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Asparagine synthetase, Tmt, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Institute, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr SImon Knott
Cedars-Sinai Medical Institute, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA


