### Accession
PXD030329

### Title
Pig Enamel, Saliva and Serum Proteome

### Description
Molar Hypomineralization is a developmental enamel defect, characterized by demarcated opacities, hypersensitivity, and soft enamel with elevated protein content. Excess protein in enamel, specifically albumin, not only arrests crystal growth during enamel development but also decreases the success rate of current restorative approaches. The development of targeted treatment options for MH is hampered by scarcity of available human samples to develop and test new treatment approaches. Additionally, there is still a need for an animal model mimicking the human MH phenotype in enamel composition and tooth size. We propose herein deciduous porcine enamel as a model for demarcated opacities in human enamel, based on its similarity in dimensions, mechanical properties, and, in particular, protein composition. In this project we aimed to characterize the distribution and developmental origins of albumin in porcine enamel.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to gel electrophoresis, prior to Mass Spectrometry analysis, using 10% Mini-Protean TGX Precast protein gels. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1). Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC. After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr). The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest. All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate. Statistical analysis and data visualization were performed using Prism 9.

### Publication Abstract
Excess albumin in enamel is a characteristic of the prevalent developmental dental defect known as chalky teeth or molar hypomineralization (MH). This study uses proteomic analyses of pig teeth to discern between developmental origin and post-eruptive contamination and to assess the similarity to hypomineralized human enamel. Here, the objective is to address the urgent need for an animal model to uncover the etiology of MH and to improve treatment. Porcine enamel is chalky and soft at eruption; yet, it hardens quickly to form a hard surface and then resembles human teeth with demarcated enamel opacities. Proteomic analyses of enamel from erupted teeth, serum, and saliva from pigs aged 4 (<i>n</i> = 3) and 8 weeks (<i>n</i> = 2) and human (<i>n</i> = 4) molars with demarcated enamel opacities show alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). AFP expression is limited to pre- and perinatal development and its presence in enamel indicates pre- or perinatal inclusion. In contrast, albumin is expressed after birth, indicating postnatal inclusion into enamel. Peptides were extracted from enamel and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) after tryptic digestion. The mean total protein number was 337 in the enamel of all teeth with 13 different unique tryptic peptides of porcine AFP in all enamel samples but none in saliva samples. Similarities in the composition, micro-hardness, and microstructure underscore the usefulness of the porcine model to uncover the MH etiology, cellular mechanisms of albumin inclusion, and treatment for demarcated opacities.

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Enamel, Saliva, Pig

### Affiliations
Forsyth Institute
The Forsyth Institute

### Submitter
Hakan karaaslan

### Lab Head
Dr Felicitas Bidlack
The Forsyth Institute


