### Accession
PXD011199

### Title
Colonic proteome signature in immunoproteasome-deficient stressed mice and its relevance for irritable bowel syndrome

### Description
A role for immunoproteasome in the regulation of intestinal permeability has been previously suggested both in mice during water avoidance stress (WAS) and in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). We thus aimed (i) to evaluate the colonic proteome in wild-type (wt) and β2i immunoproteasome subunit knock-out (β2i-/-) mice during WAS and (ii) to investigate the colonic expression of 49 ubiquitinated-proteins in diarrhea-predominant IBS patients (IBS-D).

### Sample Protocol
Protein spots of interest were manually excised from colloidal Coomassie blue-stained 2D gels and digested. Briefly, gel fragments were washed three times for 20 min in destaining solution containing 50% (v/v) methanol and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The excised spots were then air-dried for 1 h, which was followed by in-gel digestion in 30 µL of a digestion buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 ng/µL sequencing grade bovine trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Meylan, France). After overnight digestion, the aliquots were treated with 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 5 % (v/v) formic acid. Speed-vas-dried peptide extracts were resuspended in 10 µL of 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and then analyzed with a nanoflow liquid chromatograph LC1200 system coupled to a Q-TOF 6550 mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source and an HPLC-chip cube interface (Agilent Technologies). A 20-min linear gradient (3–75% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, was used to separate peptides on a polaris-HR-Chip C18 column (150 mm long × 75 µm inner diameter). Full autoMS1 scans from 290 to 1700 m/z and autoMS2 from 59 to 1700 m/z were recorded. In every cycle, a maximum of 5 precursors sort by charge state (2+ preferred and single-charged ions excluded) were isolated and fragmented in the collision cell that was automatically adjusted depending on the m/z. Active exclusion of these precursors was enabled after 1 spectra within 0.13 min, and the absolute threshold for precursor selection was set to 1000 counts (relative threshold 0.001%).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS/MS peak lists were extracted and compared with the protein databases using the MASCOT Daemon version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine. The searches were performed with the following specific parameters: enzyme specificity, trypsin; one missed cleavage permitted; no fixed modifications; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, serine, tyrosine and threonine phosphorylation; monoisotopic; peptide charge, 2+ and 3+; mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions, 0.06 Da; ESI-QUAD-TOF as instrument; taxonomy, Mus musculus; database, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Protein hits were automatically validated if they satisfied one of the following criteria: identification with at least two top ranking peptides (bold and red) each with a MASCOT score of more than 41 (P < 0.001), or at least two top ranking peptides (bold and red) each with a MASCOT score of more than 31 (P < 0.01). To evaluate false-positive rates, all the initial database searches were performed using the “decoy” option of MASCOT. Results were considered relevant if the false-positive rate never exceeded 1%.

### Publication Abstract
A role for immunoproteasome in the regulation of intestinal permeability has been previously suggested both in mice during water avoidance stress (WAS) and in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Here, we provide evidence that the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) contributes to the pathophysiology of IBS. Indeed, we report that colonic proteome is altered in WAS mice and that &#x3b2;2i subunit deficiency modifies the proteome response that is associated with a limitation of colonic hyperpermeability. Interestingly, we show specific alterations of proteins involved in UPS, mitochondrial, and energy metabolism. We also report changes in the pattern of colonic ubiquitome in diarrhea-predominant IBS (IBS-D) patients and particularly a reduced expression of ubiquitinated proteins involved in the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-&#x3ba;B) inflammatory signaling pathway. All these data suggest that immunoproteasome targeting may represent a new therapeutic strategy for the treatment of IBS patients with increased intestinal permeability.

### Keywords
Colonic proteome; immunoproteasome; irritable bowel syndrome; water avoidance stress.

### Affiliations
Inserm U1073
INSERM U1073

### Submitter
Alexis Goichon

### Lab Head
Dr Goichon A
Inserm U1073


