### Accession
PXD014890

### Title
Regulation of the ER stress response by a mitochondrial microprotein

### Description
Cellular homeostasis relies on having dedicated and coordinated responses to a variety of stresses. The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a common stress that triggers a conserved pathway called the unfolded protein response (UPR) that mitigates damage, and dysregulation of UPR underlies several debilitating diseases. Here, we discover that a previously uncharacterized 54-amino acid microprotein PIGBOS regulates UPR. PIGBOS localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane where it interacts with the ER protein CLCC1 at ER-mitochondria contact sites. Functional studies reveal that the loss of PIGBOS leads to heightened UPR and increased cell death. The characterization of PIGBOS reveals an unprecedented role for a mitochondrial protein, in this case a microprotein, in the regulation of UPR originating in the ER. This study demonstrates microproteins to be an unappreciated class of genes that are critical for inter-organelle communication, homeostasis, and cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA, MP Biomedicals, #196057) overnight at 4°C. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Thermo, #20491) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I1149). Proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, V5111). The reaction was quenched with formic acid at a final concentration of 5% (v/v). The digested samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The digest was injected directly onto a 30 cm, 75 µm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 µm C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 200 nl/min on a nLC 1000 (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 5-40% B over 110 min, an increase to 50% B over 10min, an increase to 90% B over another 10 min and held at 90% B for a final 10min of washing was used for 140 min total run time. The column was re-equilibrated with 20 µl of buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Q Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode.  Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 70K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z and an AGC target of 5e6. The ten most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS analysis with HCD fragmentation of 25NCE, an AGC target of 5e6 and minimum intensity of 4e3. Maximum fill times were set to 60 ms and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans respectively. Quadrupole isolation of 2.0 m/z was used, dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec and unassigned charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter1 and searched with ProLuCID2 against human UniProt database appended with microprotein sequences. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was counted as a static modification. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 50 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Data was filtered to 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance post search. Identified proteins were filtered using DTASelect3 and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery rate to 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular homeostasis relies on having dedicated and coordinated responses to a variety of stresses. The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a common stress that triggers a conserved pathway called the unfolded protein response (UPR) that mitigates damage, and dysregulation of UPR underlies several debilitating diseases. Here, we discover that a previously uncharacterized 54-amino acid microprotein PIGBOS regulates UPR. PIGBOS localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane where it interacts with the ER protein CLCC1 at ER-mitochondria contact sites. Functional studies reveal that the loss of PIGBOS leads to heightened UPR and increased cell death. The characterization of PIGBOS reveals an undiscovered role for a mitochondrial protein, in this case a microprotein, in the regulation of UPR originating in the ER. This study demonstrates microproteins to be an unappreciated class of genes that are critical for inter-organelle communication, homeostasis, and cell survival.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial, Er stress response, Smorfs, Microprotein

### Affiliations
Salk
PBLA, Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Jolene Diedrich

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Saghatelian
PBLA, Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA


