### Accession
PXD018217

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 is required for translesion DNA synthesis

### Description
Lesions on DNA can uncouple DNA synthesis from helicase unwinding, generating stretches of unreplicated single stranded DNA (ssDNA) behind the replication fork. These ssDNA gaps need to be filled in to complete DNA duplication and thereby avoid the generation of DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs), a major source of genomic instability. Gap filling repair involves either translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) or template switching (TS) to bypass the lesion. At the heart of these processes, ubiquitylated PCNA recruits many proteins that dictate pathway choice, but the enzymes regulating PCNA ubiquitylation in vertebrates remain poorly defined. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 promotes non-specific ubiquitylation of proteins on ssDNA, to enhance protein accumulation and stimulate gap filling repair. The absence of RFWD3 leads to a profound defect in recruitment of key repair and signaling factors to damaged chromatin, including ubiquitin and proteins known to ubiquitylate and interact with ubiquitylated PCNA. As a result, PCNA ubiquitylation is severely inhibited without RFWD3, and TLS across different DNA lesions drastically impaired. We propose that RFWD3 is an essential coordinator of the response to ssDNA gaps, where it triggers wide spread ubiquitylation to drive recruitment of effectors of PCNA ubiquitylation and DNA damage bypass.

### Sample Protocol
CHROMASS experiments were performed as previously described (Räschle et al., 2015). Briefly, isolated sperm chromatin was either untreated or treated with 2,000 J/m2 of UV-C. Each reaction was performed in quadruplicate. The sperm chromatin was then incubated at a final concentration of 16 ng/µL in non-licensing extracts that were either mock-, REV1- or RFWD3-depleted. Reactions were stopped after 45 min. Specifically, 10 µL of replication reaction was stopped with 60 µL of ELB buffer supplemented with 0.2% Triton-X, and chromatin spin down performed as described above. The chromatin pellet was then resuspended in 50 µl denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8), and transferred to a new low binding tube. Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT for 15 min at RT) and alkylated (0.55 M chloroacetamide for 40 min at RT protected from light). Proteins were first digested with 0.5 µg LysC (2.5 hours at RT) and then with 0.5 µg trypsin at 30°C overnight. Peptides were acidified using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (to pH <4), followed by addition of 400 mM NaCl, and purified by StageTip (C18 material). For this, StageTips were first activated in 100% methanol, then equilibrated in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, and finally washed twice in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded on the equilibrated stage tips and washed twice with 50 µL 0.1% formic acid. StageTip elution was performed with 80 μL of 25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, eluted samples were dried to completion in a SpeedVac at 60°C, dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid, and stored at −20°C until MS analysis.  All MS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 µm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 57.5 min, and the analytical buffer B ramp ranging from 8% to 28%. The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) with the spray voltage set at 2 kV, an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and an RF funnel level of 40%. CHROMASS samples were measured as two technical replicates, with 5 μL of the sample per injection, and with different technical settings (“Normal” and “Fast”) to balance speed versus sensitivity. Raw files with a “b” appended to the file name correspond to those analyzed using “Fast” settings. All measurements were performed with a full scan range of 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution of 60,000, MS1 AGC target of 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 s. MS2 AGC target was set to 200,000 and minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000. “Normal” runs, MS2 maximum injection time was 55 ms, MS2 resolution was 30,000, and loop count was 14. “Fast” runs, MS2 maximum injection time was 25 ms, MS2 resolution was 15,000, and loop count was 20.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.5.3.30. All data was processed in single computational runs, and default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 10th of February 2018. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed. Maximum variable modifications per peptide was reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled (Cox et al., 2014), with “Fast LFQ” disabled. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR data filtering at the PSM- and protein-levels was applied (default). Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min. For assessment of ubiquitylation sites, all data was re-analyzed with all the above settings, and the inclusion of di-glycine on lysine residues as an additional variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Lesions on DNA uncouple DNA synthesis from the replisome, generating stretches of unreplicated single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) behind the replication fork. These ssDNA gaps need to be filled in to complete DNA duplication. Gap-filling synthesis involves either translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) or template switching (TS). Controlling these processes, ubiquitylated PCNA recruits many proteins that dictate pathway choice, but the enzymes regulating PCNA ubiquitylation in vertebrates remain poorly defined. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 promotes ubiquitylation of proteins on ssDNA. The absence of RFWD3 leads to a profound defect in recruitment of key repair and signaling factors to damaged chromatin. As a result, PCNA ubiquitylation is inhibited without RFWD3, and TLS across different DNA lesions is drastically impaired. We propose that RFWD3 is an essential coordinator of the response to ssDNA gaps, where it promotes ubiquitylation to drive recruitment of effectors of PCNA ubiquitylation and DNA damage bypass.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Ubiquitin, Rfwd3, Pcna, Dna, Chromass, Tls, Damage, Ts

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


