### Accession
PXD014553

### Title
Comprehensive Identification of Soybean Long Non-coding RNAs Reveals a Subset of Small Peptide-Coding Transcripts

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are defined as non-protein-coding transcripts that are at least 200 nucleotides long. They are known to play pivotal roles in regulating gene expression, especially during stress responses in plants. We used a large collection of in-house transcriptome data from various soybean (Glycine max and Glycine soja) tissues treated under different conditions to perform a comprehensive identification of soybean lncRNAs. We also retrieved publicly available soybean transcriptome data that were of sufficient quality and sequencing depth to enrich our analysis. In total, RNA-seq data of 332 samples were used for this analysis. An integrated reference-based, de novo transcript assembly was developed that identified ~69,000 lncRNA gene loci. We showed that lncRNAs are distinct from both protein-coding transcripts and genomic background noise in terms of length, number of exons, transposable element composition, and sequence conservation level across legume species. The tissue-specific and time-specific transcriptional responses of the lncRNA genes under some stress conditions may suggest their biological relevance. The transcription start sites of lncRNA gene loci tend to be close to their nearest protein-coding genes, and they may be transcriptionally related to the protein-coding genes, particularly for antisense and intronic lncRNAs. A previously unreported   subset of small peptide-coding transcripts was identified from these lncRNA loci via tandem mass spectrometry, which paved the way for investigating their functional roles. Our results also highlight the current inadequacy of the bioinformatic definition of lncRNA, which excludes those lncRNA gene loci with small open reading frames (ORFs) from being regarded as protein-coding.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean seeds of germplasm C08 were germinated in vermiculite moistened with tap water in the greenhouse. The water content of vermiculite was ~70%. Seven-day-old germinated seedlings were transferred to a hydroponic system with half-strength Hoagland’s solution. Root tissues were collected when the third trifoliate fully opened. The protein extraction method was modified from a previous study (Chen et al., 2014). Briefly, 40 g of root tissues was ground into a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. 100 µL of 0.1% (v/v)   trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was then added and blended for another 2 min to produce a crude root extract, which was then centrifuged twice at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. After having been sequentially passed through filter paper and a MF-Millipore Membrane Filter, 0.45-μm pore size (Millipore, USA), the supernatant was then loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, USA), which had been equilibrated with 30 mL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA. 60 µL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA was used to wash the column after loading. Then 100 mL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA/60% (v/v) methanol was applied to elute the proteins/peptides. The eluate was vacuum-dried to remove the methanol content, followed by lyophilization. The dried sample was dissolved in 150 μL of 2% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution and alkylated as described by a protocol from University of Washington Proteomics Resource (UWPR, 2011) as follows: The sample was heated at 55°C for 30 min with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 5 mM, followed by alkylation with a final concentration of 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min. Alkylation was quenched by adding extra DTT to make up to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for another 15 min. SDS was removed by a detergent-removal column (Thermo Scientific, USA). The protein solution was fractionated by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Agilent Technologies, USA) into six groups based on differential acetonitrile (ACN) concentration ranges: 0%-9%, 9%-21%, 21%-30%, 30%-39%, 39%-51%, and 51%-69%. Each fraction was lyophilized again and dissolved in 0.05% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for downstream liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were analyzed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v5.1.0 (Pedrioli, 2010). Specifically, Comet (Eng et al., 2013) was used for database searching. Databases used included the in-house soybean amino acid sequence database and a customized Swiss-Prot database (UniProt Consortium, 2019). The customized Swiss-Prot database included protein sequences of archaea, bacteria, and viruses. The expected value cutoff for considering a spectrum to be a match was set at < 10. Any spectrum that had a hit in the customized Swiss-Prot database was filtered out before analysis using the in-house database. Mass spectra simultaneously matched to multiple categories, including protein, UTR, and lncRNA, were classified as ambiguous hits.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are defined as non-protein-coding transcripts that are at least 200 nucleotides long. They are known to play pivotal roles in regulating gene expression, especially during stress responses in plants. We used a large collection of in-house transcriptome data from various soybean (<i>Glycine max</i> and <i>Glycine soja</i>) tissues treated under different conditions to perform a comprehensive identification of soybean lncRNAs. We also retrieved publicly available soybean transcriptome data that were of sufficient quality and sequencing depth to enrich our analysis. In total, RNA-sequencing data of 332 samples were used for this analysis. An integrated reference-based, de novo transcript assembly was developed that identified &#x223c;69,000 lncRNA gene loci. We showed that lncRNAs are distinct from both protein-coding transcripts and genomic background noise in terms of length, number of exons, transposable element composition, and sequence conservation level across legume species. The tissue-specific and time-specific transcriptional responses of the lncRNA genes under some stress conditions may suggest their biological relevance. The transcription start sites of lncRNA gene loci tend to be close to their nearest protein-coding genes, and they may be transcriptionally related to the protein-coding genes, particularly for antisense and intronic lncRNAs. A previously unreported subset of small peptide-coding transcripts was identified from these lncRNA loci via tandem mass spectrometry, which paved the way for investigating their functional roles. Our results also highlight the present inadequacy of the bioinformatic definition of lncRNA, which excludes those lncRNA gene loci with small open reading frames from being regarded as protein-coding.

### Keywords
Small peptide, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Soybean, Long non-coding rna

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
WENGUI LIN

### Lab Head
Dr Sai Ming Ngai
The Chinese University of Hong Kong


