### Accession
PXD037133

### Title
Integrated proteomics and network analysis identifies protein hubs and network alterations in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
We performed a systems-level study of disease-associated proteome changes in human frontal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients using an integrated approach that combines mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, differential expression analysis, and co-expression network analysis. Our analyses of 16 human brain tissues from AD patients and age-matched controls showed organization of the cortical proteome into a network of 24 biologically meaningful modules of co-expressed proteins. Of these, 5 modules are positively correlated to AD phenotypes with hub proteins that are up-regulated in AD, and 6 modules are negatively correlated to AD phenotypes with hub proteins that are down-regulated in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 25 mg of human frontal cortex tissue from each AD or control case was homogenized as described in 150 μl of lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, followed by incubation at 95 °C for 5 min.. Human brain protein extracts were processed by using the FASP protocol. The collected peptides were further purified by using a self-packed C18 ZipTip micro-column. 2 μg peptide from each sample were separated by online reversed phase (RP)-HPLC fractionation on an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column (length, 50 cm; particle size, 2 μm; pore size, 100 Å; ThermoFisher), using a 240-min gradient from 2% to 50% solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile phase A, 1.95% acetonitrile, 97.95% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 79.95% acetonitrile, 19.95% H2O, 0.1% formic acid). A full-scan survey MS experiment (m/z range from 375 to 1600; automatic gain control target, 1,000,000 ions; resolution at 400 m/z, 60,000; maximum ion accumulation time, 50 ms) was performed using the Orbitrap mass analyzer. 

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher) to search against the human Uniprot TrEMBL database (2016_02 Release, 20,198 reviewed entries). The modifications were set as follows: static modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys, + 57.0214 Da); dynamic modification of deamination (Asn, + 0.9840 Da), oxidation (Met, + 15.9949 Da), and acetylation (Lys, + 42.0106 Da). Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%.
Label-free protein quantification was performed by using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 to quantify precursor ion peak area. In each sample, relative protein abundance for each protein was determined by normalizing the peak area of the protein to the total peak area of all proteins in the sample. To account for technical variability in sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analyses, each protein extract was spiked with bovine alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (fetuin) at 0.1% (μg/μg total protein) as an internal control. The relative protein abundances determined by normalizing each protein peak area to that of the spike-in fetuin protein were similar to the abundances determined by normalizing to the total protein peak area, confirming the validity of the ‘Total Protein Approach’-based protein quantification analysis. 



### Publication Abstract
Although the genetic causes for several rare, familial forms of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been identified, the etiology of the sporadic form of AD remains unclear. Here, we report a systems-level study of disease-associated proteome changes in human frontal cortex of sporadic AD patients using an integrated approach that combines mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, differential expression analysis, and co-expression network analysis. Our analyses of 16 human brain tissues from AD patients and age-matched controls showed organization of the cortical proteome into a network of 24 biologically meaningful modules of co-expressed proteins. Of these, 5 modules are positively correlated to AD phenotypes with hub proteins that are up-regulated in AD, and 6 modules are negatively correlated to AD phenotypes with hub proteins that are down-regulated in AD. Our study generated a molecular blueprint of altered protein networks in AD brain and uncovered the dysregulation of multiple pathways and processes in AD brain, including altered proteostasis, RNA homeostasis, immune response, neuroinflammation, synaptic transmission, vesicular transport, cell signaling, cellular metabolism, lipid homeostasis, mitochondrial dynamics and function, cytoskeleton organization, and myelin-axon interactions. Our findings provide new insights into AD pathogenesis and suggest novel candidates for future diagnostic and therapeutic development.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Fasp, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology Emory University
Emory University

### Submitter
QI ZHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Lian Li
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology Emory University


