### Accession
PXD018712

### Title
The Human Telomeric Proteome During Telomere Replication

### Description
Telomere shortening can cause detrimental diseases and contribute to aging. It occurs due to the end replication problem in cells lacking telomerase. In addition, recent evidence revealed that telomere shortening can be attributed to difficulties of the semi-conservative DNA replication machinery to replicate through the bulk of telomeric DNA repeats. To investigate telomere replication in a comprehensive manner, we developed QTIP-iPOND, which enables purification of the proteins that associate with telomeres during their replication. We identify in addition to the core replisome a large number of proteins that specifically associate with telomere replication forks and validate their importance.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestions and LC-MS/MS analysis in this paper were performed by the Proteomics Core Facility at EPFL which followed previously published protocol with minor modifications (Grolimund et al., 2013). In brief, the entire SDS-PAGE gel lanes were first sliced into 8 fractions, samples were washed twice in 50% ethanol; 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min. and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Reduction was then performed with 10 mM dithioerythritol (Merck-Millipore) for 1 h at 56oC. After washing-drying the samples as above described, an alkylation step was performed with 55 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min at 37oC in the dark. Samples were washed-dried again and digested overnight at 37oC using modified mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at a concentration of 12.5 ng/µl in 50 mM AB; 10 mM CaCl2. Resulting peptides were extracted in 70% ethanol; 5% formic acid (FA, Merck-Millipore) twice for 20 min with permanent shaking. Samples were further dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 oC.  Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried by vacuum centrifugation prior to LC-MS/MS injections. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (Biosolve); 0.1% FA and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) on-line connected with a Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 μm-100Å, 2 cm x 75μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were then performed on a 50cm long capillary column (75 μm ID; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch) at 250 nl/min over a 90 min. biphasic gradients. Data Dependent mode was used for MS acquisitions where parent ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 240’000 while daughter ions were detected on the Linear Ion Trap after HCD fragmentations. Identifications were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011a) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011b) against the UniProt human database containing 73,920 sequences (Release 2019_01) (www.uniprot.org) manually supplemented with Streptavidin sequence. A concatenated decoy database of common contaminant sequences generated by MaxQuant was used to determine the false discovery rate and exclude false positive hits. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against the decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was seven amino acids, at least two peptides were required for protein identification and a minimum of two ratio counts was required to quantify proteins. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. LFQ intensities generated by MaxQuant were used for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant output tables “proteinGroups.txt” were processed to assess the significance of outlier ratios using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) and home-made programs written in Perl (v5.18.2) and RStudio (Version 1.2.1335). 1,732 nuclear proteins were first extracted according to annotations from Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) and The Human Protein Altas (Uhlen et al., 2015), which contained 22,481 proteins that has been shown to localize at nucleus and nucleolus. The ratio between two datasets was normalized to the LFQ intensity value of TRF1 and was then calculated by dividing the number of LFQ intensity values. Only proteins identified in at least 3 of the 4 datasets were included in the statistical analysis in Perseus using a two-tailed t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) which thresholds of 0.05, 0.01, 0.005 and 0.001 on the adjusted p-value and a minimal fold change of 3. Graphical display was made by RStudio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomere fragility, Telomeres, Ipond, Dna replication, Pot1, Histone h1, Qtip

### Affiliations
EPFL
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Chih-Yi Gabriela Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Lingner
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


