### Accession
PXD022268

### Title
Fat1 deletion promotes hybrid EMT state, tumor stemness, and metastasis

### Description
FAT1, a protocadherin, is among the most frequently mutated genes in human cancers1-5. However, the role and the molecular mechanisms by which FAT1 mutations control tumour initiation and progression are poorly understood. In the present study we used different mouse cancer models including skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and lung tumours we found that Fat1 deletion accelerated tumour initiation and malignant progression and promoted hybrid epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype. This hybrid EMT state was also found in FAT1 mutated human SCCs. Fat1 deleted skin SCCs presented increased tumour stemness and spontaneous metastasis. Transcriptional and chromatin profiling revealed that Yap1 and Sox2 are involved in promoting and stabilizing hybrid EMT state. To unravel the molecular mechanisms by which FAT1 (a protein located on the plasma membrane), lead to the transcriptional changes, we performed phosphor-proteomic analysis of A388 FAT1 WT human SCC cell lines and A388 FAR1 CRISPR KO. This analysis revealed that FAT1 loss of function activates a CAMK2/CD44/SRC axis that promotes YAP/ZEB1 nuclear translocation and stimulates the mesenchymal state, as well as a CAMK2-EZH2 axis that promotes activation of SOX2, which sustains the epithelial state. This comprehensive analysis also identified drug resistance and vulnerabilities in FAT1 deficient tumours with important implications for cancer therapy. Altogether, our studies revealed that Fat1 loss of function promotes tumour initiation, progression, invasiveness, stemness and metastasis through the induction of a hybrid EMT state.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (5 million cells per pellet) were lysed in a urea lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 1 tablet/10 ml buffer). The samples were sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 1 mg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg LysC (Wako) (1/200, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/200, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 700 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)). Phosphopeptides were enriched with MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads following the protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, 100 µl MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads (per sample) were washed twice with 70% EtOH, once with 1% NH4OH and three times with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (14:80:6, v/v/v). Next, the digested sample was incubated with the washed beads for 30 min at room temperature, the beads were washed once with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (14:80:6, v/v/v) and three times with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (19:80:1, v/v/v). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by adding three times 80 µl 1% NH4OH. 60 µl 10% formic acid (FA) was added to the combined eluate and the samples were dried completely in a a speedvac vacuum concentrator. Peptides resulting from phosphopeptide enrichment were re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A and 15 µl were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 116 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 14-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 8 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 8 most intense ions above a threshold value of 8,300 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 120 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and >7 charge states from fragmentation selection. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the phosphoproteomics data was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot Reference Proteome database (database release version of June 2019 containing 20,960 human protein sequences, (http://www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 7,856 phosphorylated sites. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification.   For the analysis of the phosphoproteomics data, the phospho(STY)sites file was loaded in the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1). Reverse hits were removed, the site table was expanded, the intensity values were log2 transformed and the median was subtracted. Replicate samples were grouped, phosphosites with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 3311 quantified phosphopeptides that was used for further data analysis. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and s0=1) to compare control and KO samples and a volcano plot was generated. 288 phosphopeptides were significantly upregulated in FAT1 KO samples and 335 phosphopeptides were significantly upregulated in FAT1 WT samples, and plotted in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
FAT1, which encodes a protocadherin, is one of the most frequently mutated genes in human cancers<sup>1-5</sup>. However, the role and the molecular mechanisms by which FAT1 mutations control tumour initiation and progression are poorly understood. Here, using mouse models of skin squamous cell carcinoma and lung tumours, we found that deletion of Fat1 accelerates tumour initiation and malignant progression and promotes a hybrid epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype. We also found this hybrid EMT state in FAT1-mutated human squamous cell carcinomas. Skin squamous cell carcinomas in which Fat1 was deleted presented increased tumour stemness and spontaneous metastasis. We performed transcriptional and chromatin profiling combined with proteomic analyses and mechanistic studies, which revealed that loss of function of FAT1 activates a CAMK2-CD44-SRC axis that promotes YAP1 nuclear translocation and ZEB1 expression that stimulates the mesenchymal state. This loss of function also inactivates EZH2, promoting SOX2 expression, which sustains the epithelial state. Our comprehensive analysis identified drug resistance and vulnerabilities in FAT1-deficient tumours, which have important implications for cancer therapy. Our studies reveal that, in mouse and human squamous cell carcinoma, loss of function of FAT1 promotes tumour initiation, progression, invasiveness, stemness and metastasis through the induction of a hybrid EMT state.

### Keywords
Stemness, Fat1, Metastasis, Hybrid emt

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Bruxelles, Belgium

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Cedric Blanpain
Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Bruxelles, Belgium


