### Accession
PXD012317

### Title
Platform independent protein-based cell-of-origin subtyping of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue

### Description
10 µm  formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections were deparaffinized with xylene; homogenization was performed in lysis-buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 200 mM glycine, 200 mM DTT, 4% SDS)in an ultrasonic bath; samples were incubated under continuous agitation first at 99 °C for 30 min, then at 80 °C for 60 min, afterwards centrifuged at 12,000xg for 10 min.     50 µg of protein lysate were further processed according the GASP (Gel-assisted sample preparation) protocol; peptide identification (IDA, information dependent acquisition) and SWATH measurements by LC-MS/MS on TripleTOF5600 (AB Sciex)

### Sample Protocol
data searched ProteinPilotTM 4.5 and 5.0 (AB Sciex) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (December 2016) database with the following adjustments: sample type “Identification”, Cys alkylation “Acrylamide”, digestion “Trypsin”, taxonomy “Homo sapiens”, search effort “RapidID”, special factors “Gel-based ID” and detected protein threshold “0.05 (10%)” with false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. SWATH data processed using PeakView 2.2 software (AB Sciex)

### Data Protocol
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is commonly classified by gene expression profiling according to its cell of origin (COO) into activated B-cell (ABC)-like and germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like subgroups. Here we report the application of label-free nano-LC-SWATH-MS to the COO classification of DLBCL in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. The specimens were divided into Training set (42 DLBCL cases) and validation set (two independent cohorts of 42 and 31 DLBCL cases). In conclusion, label-free LC-SWATH-MS in combination with zero-sum elastic net regression allowed the identification of an eight-protein signature for the molecular classification of DLBCL.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is commonly classified by gene expression profiling according to its cell of origin (COO) into activated B-cell (ABC)-like and germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like subgroups. Here we report the application of label-free nano-liquid chromatography - Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra - mass spectrometry (nanoLC-SWATH-MS) to the COO classification of DLBCL in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. To generate a protein signature capable of predicting Affymetrix-based GCB scores, the summed log<sub>2</sub>-transformed fragment ion intensities of 780 proteins quantified in a training set of 42 DLBCL cases were used as independent variables in a penalized zero-sum elastic net regression model with variable selection. The eight-protein signature obtained showed an excellent correlation (r&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.873) between predicted and true GCB scores and yielded only 9 (21.4%) minor discrepancies between the three classifications: ABC, GCB, and unclassified. The robustness of the model was validated successfully in two independent cohorts of 42 and 31 DLBCL cases, the latter cohort comprising only patients aged &gt;75 years, with Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.846 and 0.815, respectively, between predicted and NanoString nCounter based GCB scores. We further show that the 8-protein signature is directly transferable to both a triple quadrupole and a Q Exactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, thus obviating the need for proprietary instrumentation and reagents. This method may therefore be used for robust and competitive classification of DLBCLs on the protein level.

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Cell of origin, Proteomics, Lymphoma, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Genomics, University Regensburg
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Am Biopark 9, 93053 Regensburg, Germany ( lab head )

### Submitter
Katharina Limm

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Peter Oefner
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Am Biopark 9, 93053 Regensburg, Germany ( lab head )


