### Accession
PXD026352

### Title
DNA-PKcs kinase activity stabilizes the transcription factor Egr1 in activated immune cells

### Description
To gain insight into the function of DNA-PKcs within immune cells, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic screen in T cells to identify first order phosphorylation targets of DNA-PKcs. Results indicate that DNA-PKcs phosphorylates the transcription factor Egr1 (early growth response protein 1) at S301. Expression of Egr1 is induced early upon T cell activation and dictates T cell response by modulating expression of cytokines and key costimulatory molecules. Mutation of serine 301 to alanine via CRISPR-Cas9 resulted in increased proteasomal degradation of Egr1 and a decrease in Egr1-dependent transcription of IL2 (interleukin-2) in activated T cells. Our findings identify DNA-PKcs as a critical intermediary link between T cell activation and T cell fate and a novel phosphosite involved in regulating Egr1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to analysis, two Jurkat cell samples were treated with PMA and PHA for 6 hours and one sample treated at 5 µM concentration with NU7441. Samples were harvested and lysed. Proteins were  reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade trypsin and LysC (Promega). The resulting peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo) and enriched using High-Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Both enriched and un-enriched labeled peptides were separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 31.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 55.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z. Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile, Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile. Both buffers adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide for offline separation.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and reporter ions quantified by searching the UniprotKB Homo sapiens database using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.003 Da, trypsin/P enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, acetyl on protein N-term, and phosphorylation on STY, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on C. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery. Proteins identified only by modified peptides were removed. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 4646–4658].  TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values were analyzed for changes in total protein using the un-enriched lysate sample. Phospho(STY) modifications were identified using the samples enriched for phosphorylated peptides. The enriched and un-enriched samples were multiplexed using two TMT10-plex batches, one for the enriched and one for the un-enriched samples.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) is known primarily for its function in DNA double-stranded break repair and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). However, DNA-PKcs also has a critical yet undefined role in immunity impacting both myeloid and lymphoid cell lineages spurring interest in targeting DNA-PKcs for therapeutic strategies in immune-related diseases. To gain insight into the function of DNA-PKcs within immune cells, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic screen in T cells to identify phosphorylation targets of DNA-PKcs. Our results indicate that DNA-PKcs phosphorylates the transcription factor Egr1 (early growth response protein 1) at serine 301. Expression of Egr1 is induced early upon T cell activation and dictates T cell response by modulating expression of cytokines and key costimulatory molecules such as IL (interleukin) 2, IL6, IFN&#x3b3;, and NF&#x3ba;B. Inhibition of DNA-PKcs by treatment with a DNA-PKcs specific inhibitor NU7441 or shRNA knockdown increased proteasomal degradation of Egr1. Mutation of serine 301 to alanine via CRISPR-Cas9 reduced EGR1 protein expression and decreased Egr1-dependent transcription of IL2 in activated T cells. Our findings identify DNA-PKcs as a critical intermediary link between T cell activation and T cell fate and a novel phosphosite involved in regulating Egr1 activity.

### Keywords
Phospo, Tmt, Ms3

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Burdine
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR


