### Accession
PXD044413

### Title
Proteomic changes to immune and inflammatory processes underlie lung preservation using ex vivo cytokine adsorption

### Description
The field of graft preservation has made considerable strides in recent years improving outcomes related to solid organ restoration and regeneration. In lungs, the use of ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP) in line with devices and treatments has shown promising results within preclinical and clinical studies with the potential to improve graft quality. The benefit of the therapy would be to render marginal and declined donor lungs suitable for transplantation, ultimately increasing the donor pool available for transplantation. Additionally, such therapies used in machine perfusion could also increase preservation time, facilitating logistical planning. Cytokine adsorption has been demonstrated as a potentially safe and effective therapy when applied to the EVLP circuit and post transplantation. The mechanism by which this treatment improves the donor lung on a molecular basis is not yet fully elucidated. We hypothesized that there were characteristic inflammatory and immunomodulatory differences between lungs treated with and without cytokine adsorption, reflecting in proteomic changes in gene ontology pathways and across inflammation-related proteins. In the current study we investigate the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways of how cytokine adsorption impacts the lung function when used during EVLP and when used post transplantation as hemoperfusion in a porcine model. Lung tissue from EVLP and post lung transplantation were analyzed for their proteomic profile using mass spectrometry. The inflammatory and immune processes were compared between the treated and the non-treated groups to show the differences occurring between the forms of graft preservation.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsies were taken from the right lung following intubation as baseline samples with random selection from both the treated and non-treated groups (n = 6 baseline samples). Biopsies were also obtained from the right lung after 4 hours of EVLP, and from the left lung post-transplantation on day three of observation from both the treated and non-treated groups (n = 6 per baseline, treated EVLP, non-treated EVLP, and non-treated post-transplant groups and n=5 for treated post-transplant group following analysis). Proteins were extracted from homogenized tissue. Proteins were solubilized in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and a BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was performed to determine protein concentration. Subsequently, 30 µg of protein were digested using an S-TRAP digestion protocol. Samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 56° C and then incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were acidified with 2.5% phosphoric acid and washed with buffer before binding to an S-Trap CO2-micro-80 column (ProTifi, Fairport, New York, USA). Samples were double digested overnight at 37°C with lysine-C (Promega Mass spec grade at a 1:50 ratio of enzyme to protein by ng, Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) and trypsin (Promega sequence grade, at a 1:50 ratio of enzyme to protein by ng).  Biopsies were taken from the right lung following intubation as baseline samples with random selection from both the treated and non-treated groups (n = 6 baseline samples). Biopsies were also obtained from the right lung after 4 hours of EVLP, and from the left lung post-transplantation on day three of observation from both the treated and non-treated groups (n = 6 per baseline, treated EVLP, non-treated EVLP, and non-treated post-transplant groups and n=5 for treated post-transplant group following analysis). Proteins were extracted from homogenized tissue. Proteins were solubilized in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and a BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was performed to determine protein concentration. Subsequently, 30 µg of protein were digested using an S-TRAP digestion protocol. Samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 56° C and then incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were acidified with 2.5% phosphoric acid and washed with buffer before binding to an S-Trap CO2-micro-80 column (ProTifi, Fairport, New York, USA). Samples were double digested overnight at 37°C with lysine-C (Promega Mass spec grade at a 1:50 ratio of enzyme to protein by ng, Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) and trypsin (Promega sequence grade, at a 1:50 ratio of enzyme to protein by ng). Samples were loaded onto Evosep tips (Evosep Biosystems) and separated with the same gradient as for DDA data acquisition. MS data were acquired using the diaPASEF method. The accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms. DIA scans were acquired with 25 m/z isolation windows spanning 247-1350 m/z and 0.60-1.60 1/K0 ion mobility ranges and an estimated cycle time of 2.76s. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
Samples were loaded onto Evosep tips (Evosep Biosystems) and separated with the same gradient as for DDA data acquisition. MS data were acquired using the diaPASEF method. The accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms. DIA scans were acquired with 25 m/z isolation windows spanning 247-1350 m/z and 0.60-1.60 1/K0 ion mobility ranges and an estimated cycle time of 2.76s. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Evlp, Lung transplantation, Cytokine adsorption

### Affiliations
Clinical and Experimental Lung Transplantation, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Gabriel Hirdman

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Lindstedt
Clinical and Experimental Lung Transplantation, Lund University, Sweden


