### Accession
PXD036538

### Title
Human TRMT2A methylates different components of the translation machinery and contributes to translation fidelity

### Description
Methyl-5-uridine (m5U) is one of the most abundant RNA modifications found in cytosolic tRNA. tRNA methyltransferase 2 homolog A (hTRMT2A) is the dedicated mammalian enzyme of m5U conversion at tRNA position 54. However, its RNA binding specificity and functional role in the cell are not well understood. Here we dissected structural and sequence requirements for binding and methylation of its RNA targets. Specificity of tRNA modification by TRMT2A is achieved by a combination of modest binding preference and presence of a uridine in position 54 of tRNAs. Mutational analysis together with crosslinking experiments identified a large hTRMT2A-tRNA binding surface. Furthermore, complementing hTRMT2A interactome studies revealed that TRMT2A interacts with proteins involved in both tRNA and rRNA biogenesis. Consistent with this finding, we observed that TRMT2A not only methylates tRNA, but also rRNA. Finally, we addressed the question of the importance of TRMT2A function by showing that its knockdown reduces translational fidelity. These findings extend the role of hTRMT2A beyond tRNA modification towards rRNA biogenesis and translational fidelity.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity-dependent biotinylation (WIT13996). BioID experiments were conducted to identify the hTRMT2A proximity interactome in HEK cells as described (Roux et al., 2013) with 5 replicates per condition. At 70 % cell confluency protein expression of BirA*-tagged protein of interest or BirA* tag alone was induced by addition of doxycycline. 6 h later 1 mL steril-filtered 20x DMEM/biotin was added to the cells to reach a final concentration of 50 µM biotin. Cells were incubated for 16-18 h. Prior to trypsination, cells were washed three times with PBS. Detached cells (8x107 to 1x108 per replicate) were centrifuged for 5 min at 4 °C with 300 x g. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2 % SDS) supplemented with 1:1000 benzonase, 1 mM DTT and Pierce® Protease Inhibitor. After 500 µL of 20 % Triton X-100 was added, the samples were sonicated and cetriguged for 10 min at 4 °C with 16,100 x g. 500 µL Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T7 magnetic beads (Thermo) per condition were equilibrated in 1.5 mL lysis buffer and 1.5 mL 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 and incubated with the lysate overnight at 4 °C. Next, beads were washed with wash buffers 1 (2% SDS in MilliQ-H2O),  2 (0.1 sodium deoxycholate, 1 % Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5) and wash buffer 3 (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate, 0.5 % NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4) and three times with wash buffer 4 (1 mM EDTA, 20 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4). For elution 50 µL 1x sample buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 12 % sucrose, 1 % SDS, 0.004 % bromophenol blue, 20 mM DTT) supplemented with 3 mM biotin was added to beads, mixed and incubated at 98 °C for 7 min. Subsequently, samples were placed in magnetic stand and supernatant subjected to mass spectrometry.  Co-Immunoprecipitation (WIT14064). Co-IP experiments were performed to identify the hTRMT2A proteome in HEK cells with 5 replicates per condition. At 70 % cell confluence protein expression of protein of interest or FLAG tag alone was induced with doxycycline. 16-18 h later GFP expression was inspected with fluorescence microscopy and cells were washed twice with PBS. For cell harvest, 10 mL ice-cold PBS was added and cells scraped off the plate. Cell suspension was centrifuged for 5 min at 4 °C with 300 x g. Pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen to ensure equal sample time point.  Cell pellets were thawed and resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % Triton X-100) supplemented with one tablet Pierce® Protease Inhibitor (per 100 mL lysis buffer). Suspension was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C with 16,100 x g. Meanwhile, 50 µL Anti-FLAG® M2 Magnetic Beads were equilibrated two times with 900 µL TBS (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 150 mM Nacl) and three times with 900 µL lysis buffer. Then, 3.5 mg protein from the supernatant of the centrifugation step were added to the equlibrated beads. Beads were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C in the shaking mode on a rotator wheel. Therafter, unbound protein was removed by washing three times with 900 µL high salt wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1x Triton X-100). The third wash step was incubated for 5 min at 4 °C in shaking mode on a rotator wheel. To remove detergent, beads were washed three times with 900 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8. Elution was performed by addition of 20 µL 2x Laemmli buffer (4 % (w/v) SDS, 20 % glucose, 0.004 % bromophenol blue, 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8) and incubation for 10 min at 98 °C. Finally, tubes were placed into the magnetic stand and the supernatant transferred to a new tube for mass spectrometry.  LC-MS/MS analysis of BioID and Co-IP samples. Proteins were proteolysed with LysC and trypsin with filter-aided sample preparation procedure (FASP) as described (Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Grosche et al., 2016). Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap cartridge and after 5 min eluted and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm; Waters) by a 95 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 with a AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and >8 were excluded from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were imported into Progenesis QI software (version 4.1). After feature alignment and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and searched against the human UniProt database (20,434 sequences) with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2) with the following search parameters: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of <1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software and the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of fold-changes of protein ratios between conditions. Proteins with a sample/control ratio of at least 4 were considered differentially abundant. Statistical analysis was performed on log2 transformed normalized abundance values using Student's t-test. Changes in protein expression between conditions were considered significant at p < 0.05. Principal component analysis was performed in Progenesis QI software

### Publication Abstract
5-Methyluridine (m5U) is one of the most abundant RNA modifications found in cytosolic tRNA. tRNA methyltransferase 2 homolog A (hTRMT2A) is the dedicated mammalian enzyme for m5U formation at tRNA position 54. However, its RNA binding specificity and functional role in the cell are not well understood. Here we dissected structural and sequence requirements for binding and methylation of its RNA targets. Specificity of tRNA modification by hTRMT2A is achieved by a combination of modest binding preference and presence of a uridine in position 54 of tRNAs. Mutational analysis together with cross-linking experiments identified a large hTRMT2A-tRNA binding surface. Furthermore, complementing hTRMT2A interactome studies revealed that hTRMT2A interacts with proteins involved in RNA biogenesis. Finally, we addressed the question of the importance of hTRMT2A function by showing that its knockdown reduces translation fidelity. These findings extend the role of hTRMT2A beyond tRNA modification towards a role in translation.

### Keywords
Mammalia, Rna methylation, Interactome, Methyl-5-uridine (m5u), Rna biogenesis, Trna methyltransferase 2 homolog a (htrmt2a), Translational fidelity

### Affiliations
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Center for Environmental Health
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Center for Environmental Health


