### Accession
PXD022070

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of CRISPRi-knockdowns identifies mechanisms that buffer decreases of enzymes in E. coli metabolism

### Description
Enzymes maintain metabolism and their concentration affects cellular fitness. High enzyme-levels are costly, but low enzyme-levels can limit metabolic flux. Here, we used CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) to study the consequences of decreasing metabolic enzymes in E. coli below wild-type levels. A time-resolved competition assay with a metabolism-wide CRISPRi library showed that fitness defects appeared late after induction of knockdowns. This suggested that metabolism is robust against decreases of enzymes. The metabolome and proteome of 30 CRISPRi strains revealed the mechanisms that enabled this robustness. First, substrates and allosteric effectors buffered knockdowns by increasing the activity of target-enzymes. Later, metabolite-transcription interactions compensated knockdowns by upregulating the target-pathway or bypass-pathways. For example, we found a new regulation strategy in which 6-phosphogluconate is responsible for bypassing bottlenecks in the pentose-p pathway via the Entner-Doudoroff-pathway. Thus, regulatory metabolites buffer decreases of enzyme-levels, which can occur in nature due to expression noise, mutations or environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivations were performed as described above. Culture aliquots were transferred into 2 mL reaction tubes and washed two times with PBS buffer (0.14 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1.5 KH2PO4, 8.1 Na2HPO4). Cell pellets were resuspended in 300 μL lysis buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.5 % sodium laroyl sarcosinate (SLS). Cells were lysed by 5 minutes incubation at 95 °C and ultra-sonication for 10 seconds (Vial Tweeter, Hielscher). Cells were again incubated for 15 minutes with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 90°C followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at 25 °C. To clear the cell lysate, samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15,000 rpm and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Protein samples were quantified using a BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 50 μg of proteins was aliquoted to new tubes, volumes were adjusted and cell lysates were digested with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 30°C. SLS was removed by precipitation. Therefore, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 1.5 % and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. After centrifugation (10 minutes at 10,000 rpm), the supernatant was used for C18 purification of peptides using Micro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus). The purified peptide solutions were dried and resuspended in 0.1 % TFA.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) of the data was performed using Progenesis QIP (Waters), and for MS/MS searches of aligned peptide features MASCOT (v2.5, Matrix Science) was used. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic search with two missed cleavage sites, 10ppm MS1 and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance. Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modification. Progenesis outputs were further processed with SafeQuant. The data was further processed with custom MATLAB scripts

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E.coli, Metabolome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


