### Accession
PXD027719

### Title
LC-MS and gel-based comparison of DPSCs and PDLSCs

### Description
Tooth pulp contains various types of cells such as endothelial cells, neurons, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and odontoblasts. As well as cells that are called "postnatal dental pulp stem cells" (DPSCs). Also, four more types of dental MSC-like populations were identified and characterized: stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED), periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs), stem cells from the apical papilla (SCAP) and population of dental follicle-derived progenitor cells called "dental follicle progenitor cells" (DFPCs). Most of them might be used in wide range of biomedical applications. Nevertheless, they have systematic differences in their physiology, e.g. differences in proliferative and differentiation potential. These differences are not clearly defined on molecular level yet; therefore, we performed proteomics comparison of DPSCs and PDLSCs in control and osteogenic differentiation. Donor matched DPSCs and PDLSCs were isolated from two donors by standard protocol. Then, DPSCs and PDLSCs at passage 3 were seeded into 90 mm Petri dishes (Eppendorf) and cultured in standard conditions with DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 37°C, 5% CO2. When cells reached 90-100% confluency, the medium was changed to osteogenic medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% penicillin/streptomycin (HyClone), 50 mg/ml ascorbic acid (Sigma Aldrich), 0.1 mM dexamethasone (Sigma Aldrich) and 10 mM b–glycerophosphate (Sigma Aldrich).

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomics Control and differentiated cells were lysed in a Petri dish by RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) then the lysates were collected to microcentrifuge tubes, frozen, sonicated and centrifuged (15 min, 16 000 g, +4o C). Protein was cleaned by acetone precipitation: 4 volumes of cold (-20o C) acetone (EM grade) were adde to each sample, then the samples were incubated overnight, centrifuged (15 min, 16 000 g, +4o C), washed two times by cold acetone and dried up. The dried pellet was resuspended in 8M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Then the protein concentration was measured by Qubit 4.0 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit (Lumiprobe). Protein quantification was verified by protein electrophoresis.  20 ug of each sample were used for in-solution digestion. The samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37o C with DTT (5 mM final concentration; Sigma Aldrich) with subsequent incubation for 30 minutes in the dark at RT with iodoacetamide (15 mM final concentration; Sigma Aldrich). Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37o C with 400 ng of Trypsin Gold (ration 1:50; Promega). After tryptic digestion, half of each sample was evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator (Labconco) and the quality of digestion was verified by protein electrophoresis. The other half of the samples were mixed with formic acid (Sigma Aldrich) to 1% final concentration, evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator and desalted with C18 ZipTip (Millipore) according to manufacturer recommendations. Desalted peptides were evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator and dissolved in 20 ul of water/0.1% formic acid.  Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by UHPLC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). UHPLC was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150x0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120A; Bruker Daltonics) in gradient mode with 400 nl/min flow rate. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 35% phase B for 30 minutes, then to 95% of phase B for 1 minute. The column was washed with 95% phase B for 5 minutes and equilibrated with 4 column volumes before each sample. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow and 180o C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in automatic MS/MS DDA PASEF mode in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700.  Gel-based proteomics Two-Dimensional Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D DIGE) was performed as described earlier (Lobov et al., 2020). Prior to electrophoresis 35 ug of each sample were conjugated with 400 pM of Cy2, Cy3 or Cy5 fluorophores for 2D electrophoresis according to manufacturer recommendations (Lumiprobe). Then three samples were mixed together and loaded to ready IPG-strip for two-dimensional electrophoresis (pH 3-10, 7 cm, BioRad Laboratories) by passive rehydration for overnight at RT in the dark. Separation in the first direction was carried out in a Protean IEF Cell (BioRad Laboratories, USA) using the method recommended by the IPG-strip manufacturer: 10 000 Vh, end voltage 4000 V, rapid ramp, 20°C.  After isoelectric focusing, IPG-strips were incubated in two equilibration buffers (6 M urea, 2% SDS, 20% glycerin, 0.375 M tris, pH 8.8) for 10 min in each. The first with 2% dithiothreitol and the second with 2.5% iodoacetamide. The second direction of 2D-electrophoresis was performed in a MiniProtean TetraCell (BioRad Laboratories) in 12% PAAG in tris/glycine/SDS buffer according to Laemmli (1970). Multiplex visualization of different Cy fluorophores was performed in Typhoon FLA 9500 laser scanner (GE Healthcare). Each sample were analysed at least in two technical replicates with different Cy fluorophores. For protein identification, 2D-electrophoresis was repeated similar to 2D DIGE, but with one sample per gel without Cy fluorophores. After excision, proteins were digested by standard protocol of “in-gel” digestion described earlier (Lobov et al., 2020). LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was similar to shotgun proteomics except chromatographic separation method: UHPLC was performed with Bruker Ten separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 100x0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics) with similar, but shorter gradient (17.1 min).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software using human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; organism: Human [9606]; uploaded 02.03.2021; 20394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP; version of 2019-03-04). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 15 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with at least two unique peptides were included for further analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mscs, Timstof pro, Ion mobility, Dpscs, Pdlscs, Osteogenic differentiation, 2d dige

### Affiliations
Head of the Laboratory of non-coding DNA, Institute of Cytology RAS, St. Petersburg, Russia
Loboratory of Regenerative Biomedicine, Institute of Cytololgy of the Russian Academy of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Natella Enukashvily
Head of the Laboratory of non-coding DNA, Institute of Cytology RAS, St. Petersburg, Russia


