### Accession
PXD015070

### Title
Acetylation changes in NQO1 overexpression in Mouse Skeletal Mucscle

### Description
In this manuscript we have explored the role of both Nrf2 and NQO1 in protection against diet-induced metabolic syndrome and demonstrate that both Nrf2 and NQO1 provide protection against HFD-induced adverse phenotypes in a mouse model

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from skeletal muscle (1.5 mg) were trypsin-digested overnight, acidified using TFA, purified via Sep-Pak® C18 Classic Cartridges (Waters, #WAT051910), frozen at -80°C for 4 hours, and lyophilized for 48 hours. Samples were spiked with 50 ng of acetylated BSA as an internal standard. Samples were incubated 2 hours at 4 °C with immunoaffinity beads conjugated to acetyl-Lys antibody or immunoaffinity beads conjugated to acetyl-Lys antibody (PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Immunoaffinity Beads). After incubation, supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with IAP buffer (PTM Scan® IAP Buffer (10X) 9993, Cell Signaling, Boston, MA) and 3 times with Burdick and Jackson LC-MS grade water (Honeywell). Peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA 3 times, pooled, cleaned on Pierce® C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, #84850), evaporated to dryness, and frozen at -80°C. Dried samples were re-suspended in 10 fmol/uL of Procal Retention Time Standards (JPT Peptide Technologies, Berlin, Germany, RTK-10pmol) in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water for LC–MS/MS analysis. Enriched acetyl-Lys peptides were pooled by sample group and loaded onto a 2 cm PepMap 100, nanoviper trapping column and chromatographically resolved on-line using a 0.075 x 500 mm, 2.0µm Acclaim PepMap RSLC reverse phase nano column (Thermo Scientific) using a 1290 Infinity II LC system equipped with a nanoadapter (Agilent). Mobile phases consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% aq. acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were loaded onto the trapping column at 3.2 μL/min for 3.2 minutes at initial condition before being chromatographically separated at an effective flow rate of 330 nl/min using a gradient of 3-8% B over 2 minutes, 8-26% B over 26 minutes, and 26-40% B over 2 minutes  for a total 30 minute gradient at 60⁰C. The gradient method was followed by a column wash at 75% B for 5 minutes. Data was collected on a 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a nano source (Agilent) operated using intensity dependent CID MS/MS to generate peptide identifications. The capillary voltage, drying gas flow, and drying gas temperature were set to 1300 V, 11.0 L/min and 175 °C, respectively. MS/MS data was collected in positive ion polarity over mass ranges 260– 1700 m/z at a scan rate of 8 spectra/second for MS scans and mass ranges 50-1700 m/z at a scan rate of 3 spectra/second for MS/MS scans. All charge states, except singly charged species, were allowed during MS/MS acquisition, and charge states 2 and 3 were given preference. SpectrumMill software (Agilent) was used to extract, search, and summarize peptide identity results. Spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database allowing up to 4 missed tryptic cleavages with fixed carbamidomethyl (C) and variable deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M), and acetyl (K) modification. The monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance allowed was ± 20.0 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was ± 50 ppm. A minimum peptide score of 8 and scored peak intensity of 50% were used for the generation of the AMRT library.  For MS-only quantitation, data was collected in positive ion polarity over mass ranges 260– 1700 m/z at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra/second on a 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a nano source (Agilent) operated in MS-only mode. Enriched acetyl-Lys peptide samples were acquired using the same LC method and source parameters as the pooled samples for AMRT library generation.

### Data Protocol
Overall, data analysis for MS quantitation was extracted and aligned using Profinder V.B.10.00 software (Agilent). Quantitative MS-only data files were warped or retention times pre-aligned to the WT-HFD pooled MS/MS data file as a reference using the polynomial interpolation method in profinder. Retention times, neutral masses, and chemical formulas generated from identified acetyl peptides in the AMRT library were used to perform a batch targeted feature extraction. Samples were extracted with an ion count threshold set to two or more ions and 6000 counts and a score threshold of 50. The score was based on how the quality of the mass, isotope abundances and isotope spacing of compounds found in each sample matched to a targeted chemical formula within a specified retention time window generated from the AMRT library. Charge states 2-6 were allowed with H+ and Na+ adducts using the peptide isotope model. Retention time window and mass window alignment setting tolerances were set to 0.5 min and 10 ppm, respectively. Acetyl-Lys final extraction and alignment results were exported to Mass Profiler Professional V.14.8 (Agilent) for quantitation. Each sample was normalized by external scalar to the Procal retention time standards summed extracted areas found across all samples to control for technical variance due to the mass spectrometer.  Statistical analysis was performed at the peptide level. Compounds were filtered to those found in 100% of 1 of 2 conditions for group-to-group comparisons. Acetyl peptides were filtered on volcano plots using a moderated t-test and peptides that had a fold change ≤ or ≥ 1.5 and p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Both Benjamini Hochberg multiple-testing correction (MTC) and no MTC wawere applied to generate a list of acetyl site candidates that were differentially expressed with high confidence that could be used to probe the effects of acetylation modifications in individual proteins. A two-way ANOVA between diets and genotypes was performed to determine the overall effects of genetic differences vs dietary differences at various lysine acetylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic nutrient excess leads to metabolic disorders and insulin resistance. Activation of stress-responsive pathways via Nrf2 activation contributes to energy metabolism regulation. Here, inducible activation of Nrf2 in mice and transgenesis of the Nrf2 target, NQO1, conferred protection from diet-induced metabolic defects through preservation of glucose homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, and lipid handling with improved physiological outcomes. NQO1-RNA interaction mediated the association with and inhibition of the translational machinery in skeletal muscle of NQO1 transgenic mice. NQO1-Tg mice on high-fat diet had lower adipose tissue macrophages and enhanced expression of lipogenic enzymes coincident with reduction in circulating and hepatic lipids. Metabolomics data revealed a systemic metabolic signature of improved glucose handling, cellular redox, and NAD<sup>+</sup> metabolism while label-free quantitative mass spectrometry in skeletal muscle uncovered a distinct diet- and genotype-dependent acetylation pattern of SIRT3 targets across the core of intermediary metabolism. Thus, under nutritional excess, NQO1 transgenesis preserves healthful benefits.

### Keywords
Nqo1, Mouse, Quantitation, Acetylomics, Metabolic syndrome, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy at the University of Colorado - Anschutz medical Cammpus.
University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Cole Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Kristofer Fritz
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy at the University of Colorado - Anschutz medical Cammpus.


