### Accession
PXD010773

### Title
An interaction network of the human SEPT9 established by quantitative mass spectrometry reveals an interplay with myosin motors

### Description
Experimentally deciphering and understanding the interaction network of a particular protein provides often evidence for so far unknown functions. For the septins, a class of cytoskeletal proteins, targeted high-throughput approaches that aim at systematically deciphering interaction partners have not yet been performed. Septins regulate the organization of the acin cytoskeleton, vesicle transport and fusion, chromosome alignment- and segregation, and cytokinesis. SEPT9 is part of the core septin hetero-octamer in human cells which is composed of SEPT2, SEPT6, SEPT7, and SEPT9. SEPT9 has been linked to a variety of intracellular functions as well as to diseases and diverse types of cancer. We applied a quantitative proteomics approach to establish an interactome of SEPT9 in human fibroblast cells. We identified among others so far unknown interaction partners from the myosin familiy and could provide evidence that SEPT9 participates in vesicle transport from and to the plasma membrane as well as in the attachment of actin stress fibers to cellular adhesions.

### Sample Protocol
Employing SILAC media, affinity purification of SEPT9 complexes was performed separately for TAP-SEPT9 and GFP-SEPT9 in a "mixing after purification" (MAP) approach from immortalized 1306 skin fibroblast cells. After cell lysis and determination of the protein concentration, the extract was adjusted to 10 % Glycerol and the concentrations of the extracts were balanced by dilution of the higher concentrated extract with buffer. CNBr activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare) was coupled with human IgG (MP Biomedicals) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The resulting hsIgG-Sepharose was equilibrated with lysis buffer and added to the cell lysates (15 µl slurry per mg of protein). Incubation was performed by rotating with 5 rpm overnight at 4 °C in an overhead shaker. The following day, an equivalent volume of hsIgG-Sepharose was added and incubated for additional 2 h at 4 °C while rotating at 5 rpm. The sepharose was pelleted at 100 x g for 3 min at 4 °C and transferred into Mobicol “F” columns (Mobitec) equipped with a 35 µm filter. After washing the slurry with 50-fold volume TAP buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 80 mM NaCl, 10 % Glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 8.3 μM Antipain, 1 μM Bestatin, 10 μM Chymostatin, 1.5 μM Pepstatin A, 5 μM Leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM β-Glycerophosphate, 1 mM Sodium Orthovanadate), the columns were locked and two slurry volumes of TAP buffer was added. Proteins were eluted from the matrix by boiling in 2x Laemmli-buffer for 2 min at 95 °C and equal volumes of both sample and control were mixed for the MAP approach. The samples were jointly separated by SDS-PAGE on 6-12 % BOLT Bis-Tris gradient gels (Thermo Scientific). Each lane was cut into 14 pieces. Individual pieces were washed, reduced and alkylated before overnight tryptic digest was carried out. Following peptide extraction, samples were measured using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to an U3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant Vers. 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org). For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were correlated with the UniProt human reference proteome set (www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the sequence of the TAP-SEPT9 construct, employing the build-in Andromeda search engine. The respective SILAC amino acids were selected, while Carbamidomethylated cysteine was considered as a fixed modification along with oxidation (M), and acetylated protein N-termini as variable modifications. False discovery rates were set on both, peptide and protein level, to 0.01. MaxQuant normalized ratios were used for statistical evaluation. If no ratio was calculated by MaxQuant, ratios were calculated manually in case overall intensity exceeded 1E6 to allow for quantitation of IP-specific proteins. For statistical evaluation, Significance B was calculated using Perseus 1.5.0.15 (www.maxquant.org) with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Septins regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton, vesicle transport and fusion, chromosome alignment and segregation, and cytokinesis in mammalian cells. SEPT9 is part of the core septin hetero-octamer in human cells which is composed of SEPT2, SEPT6, SEPT7, and SEPT9. SEPT9 has been linked to a variety of intracellular functions as well as to diseases and diverse types of cancer. A targeted high-throughput approach to systematically identify the interaction partners of SEPT9 has not yet been performed. We applied a quantitative proteomics approach to establish an interactome of SEPT9 in human fibroblast cells. Among the newly identified interaction partners were members of the myosin family and LIM domain containing proteins. Fluorescence microscopy of SEPT9 and its interaction partners provides additional evidence that SEPT9 might participate in vesicle transport from and to the plasma membrane as well as in the attachment of actin stress fibers to cellular adhesions.

### Keywords
Human, Ap-ms, Myosin, Septin

### Affiliations
Core Unit Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Medical faculty Ulm University Germany
Universität Ulm

### Submitter
Sebastian Wiese

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Wiese
Core Unit Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Medical faculty Ulm University Germany


