### Accession
PXD012793

### Title
Proteomics identification for toxicological pathways screening: A partial difference between low concentration ionic and nanoparticulate silver

### Description
LC-MS/MS based proteomics coupled with online bioinformatics platform was under evaluation for the better understanding of toxicological pathways induced by silver nanoparticle (AgNP), and to distinguish the difference of such pathways induced by ionic silver. This approach was appraised using AgNP as a model to develop a platform technology for toxicological screening of nanoparticles (NPs), which is currently incorporated into various consumer products. Proteomic study was conducted by exposing human carcinoma cell line to AgNP or AgNO3 for 48 hours at low cytotoxic concentration (LC10). The comparison of proteins expressed in each treatment group was performed using One-way ANOVA (p < 0.05). Proteins with more than 4-fold differentially-expressed were subjected to functional pathway analysis by STITCH.  Principal component analysis (PCA) showed the significant variation of proteins identified in each treatment group. Most identified proteins were functioned in cellular process. SOTA clustering indicated the similarity of protein expression between AgNP and control group. We established the resemblance of proteins in cell cycle pathway affected by both Ag substances. While the difference in toxicological pathways from AgNO3 were involved in cellular organization and regulation of metabolic process of macromolecule, and nucleic acid metabolic process were altered by AgNP.  The present study supported the practicability of LC-MS/MS based proteomics coupled with STITCH bioinformatics platform, for the identification of toxicological pathways from ionic and AgNP, which were discovered to be partially different. We appraised this platform technology to be promising and powerful for toxicological screening of other new substances.

### Sample Protocol
The precipitated protein were solubilized with detergent lysis buffer (0.1% RapidGest SF (Waters, USA) in 20mM ammonium bicarbonate). The samples were sonicated (at 75% Amplitude) by probe sonicator for 3 cycles of 2 seconds each. The protein concentration was determined with Lowry protein assay [2]. The solution containing 3 µg total protein was aliquoted and subjected to carbamidomethy-lation.  Reduction sulfhydryl bonds by using 10 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 90 C for 20 min, after cooling down the samples, alkylation of sulfhydryl groups by using 100 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 45 mins in the dark. To perform digestion, 60 ng. of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Germany) was added to the solution and incubated the reaction 37C for 6 hours.  The samples were clean-up by C18 zip-tip (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The eluted tryptic peptides were dried at 44C under Vacuum

### Data Protocol
Protein was quantified by Progenesis® QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Raw MS spectra were imported into the software using lock mass calibration, and identified against Uniprot/Swissprot human databases (UniprotKB released in August 2018) with following parameters; peptide tolerance, 50 ppm; fragment tolerance, 20 ppm; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimum fragment ion matches per protein, 3; minimum peptide ion matches per protein, 1; fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamination.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanoparticles pathway analysis, Silver, Stitch, Proteomics, Toxicological pathways

### Affiliations
NANOTEC, National Science and Technology Development Agency
Nanometrology and Characterizations and Engineering Unit, NANOTEC, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand

### Submitter
Pawitrabhorn Samutrtai

### Lab Head
Dr Pawitrabhorn Samutrtai
Nanometrology and Characterizations and Engineering Unit, NANOTEC, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand


