### Accession
PXD030343

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome signatures of recurrence for HPV+ head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common cancer worldwide and the human papillomavirus (HPVP+P)-driven subtype is the fastest rising in North America. Although most cases of HPV+ HNSCC respond to radiation and chemotherapy in combination with surgery, up to 20% of patients recur after primary treatment with poor prognosis. To gain insights into the mechanism of recurrence to inform patient stratification and precision treatment, we carried out RNA-seq analysis on 43 HPV+ HNSCC specimens, of which 15, including 7 recurrent tumors, were analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. The proteome and phosphoproteome, but not the transcriptome, were found to be distinct between the recurrent and non-recurrent tumors. Specifically, recurrent tumors featured a pro-fibrotic and immune suppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) characterized with more abundant cancer associated fibroblasts, extracellular matrix (ECM), neutrophils and suppressive myeloid cells, increased potential for epithelial-mesenchymal transition and defective T cell function, accompanied by aberrant changes in the corresponding signaling pathways. Mechanistically, kinome reprogramming played a pivotal role in mediating recurrence through regulating TME remodelling, cytoskeletal reorganization, cell adhesion, neutrophil function, and coagulation.  Besides providing systems-level insights into the molecular basis of recurrence, our work led to the identification of numerous mechanism-based biomarkers and therapeutic targets that may aid future endeavours of developing prognostic biomarkers and precision medicine for recurrent HPV+ HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue processing  The frozen tissues were first washed with ice-cold PBS buffer once and homogenized in pre-cooled mortar and pestle, then were resuspended in 1 ml cold buffer containing 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.6), 2% (v/v) proteinase inhibitor (Sigma, P8340) and 1 mM NaF. The mixture was rotated at 4 degrees for 20 minutes to promote dissolving the protein. Tissue debris was removed by centrifugation, then the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and mixed with 5-fold volume of cold precipitation mixture (50% acetone, 50% ethanol and 0.1% acetic acid), and left overnight at -20 °C.  Protein processing and digestion The protein precipitate was collected by centrifugation and washed with 75% ethanol, then was dissolved in 200 µl 9 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT and was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were alkylated with 28 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min in the dark and the reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. The samples were diluted by adding 700 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and were digested by LysC (1 mAU per 25 µg protein) for 2 hours at 28 ºC, followed by adding trypsin at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, for overnight digestion at 28 ºC. The samples were acidified by adding TFA to 0.5%, and were desalted on C18 SPE columns (Waters WAT054955) using 70% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were dried by Speedvac. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling For mass spectrometry analysis, we labelled 15 patient and 5 healthy control samples with the 11-plex TMT isobaric labelling reagent (Thermo A37725) for sample identities with TMT set/channel numbers). In addition, we employed the pervanadate BOOST channel approach (Chua et al., 2020) by including the pervanadate-treated human PBMC sample as the reference channel (channel 1 of each 11-plex sample). Three sets of 11-plex reagents were used to label all samples.  Phosphopeptide enrichment We previously reported that engineered Src SH2 domains called the SH2 superbinder (SH2S) could be used to enrich pTyr peptides for mass spectrometry analysis (Bian et al., 2016a). We constructed the Src SH2 domains that consisted of three or four affinity-enhancing mutations (triple and quadruple mutant) and a C-terminal linker with cysteine. The His6-tagged superbinder SH2 domains were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3), 18 ºC, overnight, with 0.5 mM IPTG induction, and purified by the nickel affinity column.  The purified superbinders were conjugated to the Sulfolink agarose resin (3 mg protein per 1 ml resin) by following the product manual (Thermo 20402). A 1:1 mixture of the triple and quadruple mutant beads was used for phosphotyrosine enrichment. The TMT-labelled peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with 100 µl SH2 superbinder beads for 30 min at room temperature with rotation. The flow-through fraction was saved for pSer/Thr enrichment by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). The beads were washed twice with 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate, followed by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate twice. The bound pTyr peptides were eluted by 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  The eluted pTyr peptides in TFA directly were loaded on the fractionation columns.   The flow-through fraction contains peptides not captured by the superbinder SH2 domain. Serine/threonine-phosphorylated peptides were enriched by Ti4+-IMAC resin following the instruction (Zhou et al., 2013). A 500 µg portion of the flow-through fraction from the superbinder enrichment was mixed 1:1 (v/v) with 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA solution and was loaded to the IMAC resin. After incubation and wash steps (wash-1 solution: 50% acetonitrile, 6% TFA, 200 mM NaCl, wash-2 solution: 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA), the peptides were eluted by 10% ammonia, and were dried by Speedvac. The peptides were separated by Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo 84868).   LC-MS/MS experiments The fractionated peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (FA). The peptides were analyzed by the data-dependent acquisition method on the EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (20 mm long, diameter 75 µm, Thermo 164946), and were separated on an EASY-Spray ES803A analytical column (Thermo Scientific) applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a linear gradient from 3 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient length was 2 hours for pTyr phosphoproteome fractions, 4 hours for proteome and IMAC phosphoproteome fractions.

### Data Protocol
FragPipe version 16.0 (PMID 28394336) was used for data processing. For proteome and IMAC datasets, the pool channel was used as the reference channel for batch correction. Due to the strong reporter ion interference from the phosphotyrosine boost channel (channel 1) to the pool channel (channel 3) caused by isotopic impurities of the TMT reagents, the pool channel was not usable for TMT batch correction for the superbinder-enriched pTyr datasets. Therefore, the technical triplicate sample (the tonsil control C2 in all three TMT batches, see Table S2) was used as the reference channels for batch correction. The human protein sequences were obtained from UniProt (20367 reviewed entries, February 2020) and were used for the database search. For the proteome data processing, the TMT10-bridge workflow was used for proteome search (by changing to the plex to TMT11). For the phosphoproteome data, the TMT10-phospho-bridge workflow was loaded, changed the plex to TMT11 and changed the minimal peptide length to 6. The median centering normalization by FragPipe was applied to the log2 intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Recurrence, Human papillomavirus, Phosphoproteomics, Tumor microenvironment, Immune landscape, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Western University
Department of Biochemistry, Western University, Canada

### Submitter
Tomonori Kaneko

### Lab Head
Dr Shawn SC Li
Department of Biochemistry, Western University, Canada


