### Accession
PXD028947

### Title
iTRAQ paroxetine response in major depressive disorder

### Description
Identify blood proteins relevant to paroxetine response in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD)

### Sample Protocol
2.2. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling Equal amounts of samples at baseline were pooled, and equal amounts of the samples after treatment were pooled, to minimize the effect of individual variation. 100 micrograms of protein was reduced, blocked on cysteine, alkylated, and subsequently digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting products were than labeled with isobaric tags using a 4-plex iTRAQ kit. Isobaric tags 114 and 115 were used to label lithium responsive groups before and after treatment, respectively, and isobaric tags 116 and 117 were used to label lithium responsive groups before and after treatment, respectively.   2.3. Peptide fractionation  The peptides labeled with different channels of isobaric tags were pooled and desalted by using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). The desalted peptides were dried under vacuum and then re-suspended in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for further fractionized by reversed phase C18 under high pH condition (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as  manufacturer’s suggested protocol. The resulting bound peptides were eluted in 1% ammonia solution with various amounts of acetonitrile (5-50 %) resulting in about ten fractions. Each eluted fraction was then dried under vacuum and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid solution for the liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.4. Tandem mass spectrometry-based protein identification  Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, California, USA) in combination with a Thermo ScientificTM UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. The peptide mixtures were directly loaded onto a 50-cm analytic column (EASY-Spray™ C18 Column), and separated by a gradient with gradually increased of buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over about 165 minutes.  The peptide spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode with a data-dependent acquisition. The top abundant fifteen precursor ions within 375-1400 m/z scan range were then dynamically selected for further fragmented in high collision dissociation (HCD) mode with normalized collision energy set to 33±1. In Full MS scan, the resolution was set to 60000 at m/z 200, AGC target to 3e6, maximum inject time to 50 ms. In MS/MS scan, the resolution was set to 15000, with AGC target to 5e4, and maximum inject time set to 100 ms. The release of dynamic exclusion of the selected precursor ions was set to 20 sec.  2.5. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics data analysis by Proteome Discoverer software and Mascot search engine  The MS files were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) to generate peak list for protein identification using Mascot search  algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science) against Swiss-Prot human protein database.  For protein identification, the following parameters were used for database search: carbamidomethylation at Cys as the fixed modification, oxidation at Met, acetylation at protein N-terminus, iTRAQ-labeled at peptide N-terminus and K residue as dynamic modifications, maximum missing cleavage sites with 2, 10 ppm for MS tolerance, and 0.02 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The acceptable false discovery rate of peptide and protein identifications was set to less than 1%. A minimum of two unique  peptides and quantification with two spectrum ratio counts from the unique peptides  were required to improve the confidence of the protein identification. The median value of the spectrum ratios was calculated as protein abundance. The global median normalization was applied to recalculate the protein abundance to generate the normalized protein ratios to reduce the system error from sample preparation in each experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human; pbmc; itraq; mdd; paroxetine

### Affiliations
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital
Clinical Proteomics Lab, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan.

### Submitter
Chin-Chuen Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Jia-Wei Chen
Clinical Proteomics Lab, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan.


