### Accession
PXD003405

### Title
Dinosaur: refined open source peptide MS feature detector

### Description
In order to test the usability of the new MS feature detection algorithm Dinosaur, 8 samples were analyzed. These were selected to represent different proteomics experiments and cover the full range of sample different complexities, from synthetic peptides to whole tissue lysate. This project evolves around the development of a new MS1 feature detection tool, and the files were only used for MS1 feature detection and analysis. Therefore, no identification files exist and there is no scientific interest in generating these.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared in-lab using standard protocols. In short, they were digested using trypsin followed by C18 cleanup. Samples were measured using online nano-flow HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000) coupled to and ESI-interfaced Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Gradient lengths were 30, 60, 90 or 120 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The raw-files were converted to mzML using msconvert, using ms-numpress and gzip compression but no data transformations. This was followed by feature detection using the new tool Dinosaur.

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, peptide isotopic and chromatographic traces (features) are frequently used for label-free quantification in data-dependent acquisition MS but can also be used for the improved identification of chimeric spectra or sample complexity characterization. Feature detection is difficult because of the high complexity of MS proteomics data from biological samples, which frequently causes features to intermingle. In addition, existing feature detection algorithms commonly suffer from compatibility issues, long computation times, or poor performance on high-resolution data. Because of these limitations, we developed a new tool, Dinosaur, with increased speed and versatility. Dinosaur has the functionality to sample algorithm computations through quality-control plots, which we call a plot trail. From the evaluation of this plot trail, we introduce several algorithmic improvements to further improve the robustness and performance of Dinosaur, with the detection of features for 98% of MS/MS identifications in a benchmark data set, and no other algorithm tested in this study passed 96% feature detection. We finally used Dinosaur to reimplement a published workflow for peptide identification in chimeric spectra, increasing chimeric identification from 26% to 32% over the standard workflow. Dinosaur is operating-system-independent and is freely available as open source on https://github.com/fickludd/dinosaur .

### Keywords
Dinosaur, Feature detection, Plot trail

### Affiliations
Dept. of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Johan Teleman

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Dept. of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Sweden


