### Accession
PXD012896

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and Real-Time PCR reveal downregulation of CXCR4 as a downstream effect of angiotensin-(1-7) treatment after experimental myocardial infarction

### Description
Angiotensin-(1-7) (Ang-(1-7)) is an endogenous heptapeptide from the renin-angiotensin system. The cardioprotective role of Ang-(1-7) has been described due to its anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic activities. In this context, we investigated the impact of the oral formulation of Ang-(1-7) vehiculized in hydroxypropyl β-cyclodextrin (HPβCD) on cardiac proteome remodeling after experimental myocardial infarction. For this, Wistar male rats were submitted to short- (7 days) or long-term (60 days) oral treatment with HPβCD/Ang-(1-7) after induction of experimental myocardial infarction (MI)

### Sample Protocol
Sham animals were used as negative control, and animals with experimental myocardial infarction (MI) but treated only with HPβCD were the positive control. In this study we performed a quantitative comparison of the left ventricle proteome of six experimental groups:  (1) Sham 7 days (S_7) – animals  subjected to surgery without induction of MI and treated with a daily oral administration of the vehicle HPβCD for 7 days; (2) Myocardial Infarction 7 days (MI_7) – induction of MI and short-term daily oral treatment with the vehicle HPβCD for 7 days; (3) Treatment 7 days (T_7) – induction of MI and short-term daily oral treatment with the inclusion compound HPβCD/Ang-(1-7) for 7 days; (4) Sham 60 days (S_60) – animals  subjected to surgery without induction of MI and treated with a daily oral administration of the vehicle HPβCD for 60 days; (5) Myocardial Infarction 60 days (MI_60) – induction of MI and long-term daily oral treatment with the vehicle HPβCD for 60 days; and (6) Treatment 60 days (T_ 60) – induction of MI and long-term daily oral treatment with the inclusion compound HPβCD/Ang-(1-7) for 60 days

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were  processed using MaxQuant software (v.1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine [20] and searched against the Rattus novergicus reviewed Uniprot database (downloaded on august 2018; 8,133 entries) concatenated with a reverse and common contaminant databases. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Quantification type was set as reporter ion MS2 with 6plex TMT on the N-terminus and lysine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate for peptide and protein were specified at 1%.  All other parameters were set as default values specified by MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Myocardial infarction, Angiotensin-(1-7), Proteomics, Inflammation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte – MG, CEP: 31270-901, Brazil.

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano Braga
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte – MG, CEP: 31270-901, Brazil.


