### Accession
PXD040141

### Title
Dopamine transporter and synaptic vesicle sorting defects underlie auxilin-associated Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Auxilin participates in the uncoating of clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs), thereby facilitating synaptic vesicle (SV) regeneration at presynaptic sites. Auxilin (DNAJC6/PARK19) loss-of-function mutations cause early-onset Parkinson’s disease (PD). Here, we utilized auxilin-knockout (KO) mice to elucidate the mechanisms through which auxilin deficiency and clathrin-uncoating deficits lead to PD. Auxilin KO mice display cardinal features of PD, including progressive motor deficits, α-synuclein pathology, nigral dopaminergic loss, and neuroinflammation. Significantly, treatment with L-DOPA ameliorated motor deficits. Unbiased proteomic and neurochemical analyses of auxilin KO brains indicated dopamine dys-homeostasis. We validated these findings by demonstrating slower dopamine reuptake kinetics in vivo, an effect associated with dopamine transporter misrouting into axonal membrane deformities in the dorsal striatum. Defective SV protein sorting and elevated synaptic autophagy also contribute to ineffective dopamine sequestration and compartmentalization, ultimately leading to neurodegeneration. This study advances our knowledge of how presynaptic endocytosis deficits lead to dopaminergic vulnerability and pathogenesis of PD.

### Sample Protocol
Whole brain, whole brain synaptosomes and clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) samples were prepared from 3-month-old wildtype (WT) and auxilin knock-out (KO) mice. Brains from 3-month-old WT and auxilin KO mice (n=3/genotype) were homogenized in homogenization buffer (detergent-free 320 mM sucrose in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors cocktail). Part of the homogenate was snap-frozen for whole brain proteomics. Rest of the homogenate was used to prepare synaptosomes as per our established protocol (Massaro Tieze et al., 2022). Synaptosomes integrity was confirmed by electron microscopy (EM) and enrichment of synaptosome fractions were confirmed as per Gorenberg et al. (2022) before performing LFQ-MS. For CCVs sample preparation, brains from 14 pairs of WT and auxilin KO mice were pooled to obtain a single CCV fraction (Blondeau et al., 2004) as we have published previously (Vargas et al., 2014). Three independent purifications were performed and the resulting CCVs fractions were subjected to LFQ-MS. The purity of CCVs was confirmed by EM. LFQ sample preparation was carried out similar to that described in Henderson et al., 2015, but with slight updated modification. Samples were first dissolved in 400μL RIPA buffer containing protease + Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and sonicated at 10% amplitude for 15 seconds with one second burst.  Sonicated samples were then centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 minutes at 14.6K RPM on a bench top centrifuge.  100μL of supernatant was transferred to a new tube for protein extraction with Chloroform:Methanol:Water method as described elsewhere (REF).  Protein pellet was air dried, dissolved in 80-μl 8 M urea containing 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate.  Protein amount was determined by NanoDrop and 50μg total protein amount was aliquoted and brought up to 80ul with 8 M urea containing 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate.  Samples were then reduced with DTT for 10 minutes at 37 °C, and Cysteine were alkylated with iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark.  10μL of 0.1μg/μL LysC was then added for enzymatic digestion overnight at 37 °C; followed by that addition of 2μL of 0.5μg/μL trypsin with incubation at 37 °C for 6 hours.    The digestion was quenched with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) then desalted utilizing a C18 UltraMicro Spin column (The Nest Group).  The effluents from the de-salting step were dried and re-dissolved in 5 μL 70 % FA and 35 μL 0.1 % TFA. An aliquot was taken to obtain total digested protein amount. A 1:10 dilution of Pierce Retention Time CalibrationMixture (Cat# 88321) was added to each sample prior to injecting onto the UPLC coupled Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer system  for normalization of the LFQ data.  Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) LC MS/MS data collection for LFQ was performed on either a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion or a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system equipped with a Waters Symmetry® C18 180 μm × 20 mm trap column and a 1.7-μm, 75 μm × 250 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC column (35 °C). The digests were diluted to 0.05 μg/μL with 0.1 % TFA prior to injecting 5 μL of each triplicate analysis in block randomized order. To ensure a high level of identification and quantitation integrity, a resolution of 120,000 and 30,000 was utilized for MS and MS/MS data collection, respectively. MS and MS/MS (from Higher-energy C-Trap Dissociation (HCD)) spectra were acquired using a three second cycle time with Dynamic Exclusion on. All MS (Profile) and MS/MS (centroid) peaks were detected in the Orbitrap. Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 μl/min in 99 % Buffer A (0.1 % FA in water) and 1 % Buffer B [(0.075 % FA in acetonitrile (ACN)] prior to eluting with linear gradients that reach 25 % B at 150 min, 50 % B at 170 min, and 85 % B at 175 min; then back down to 3% at 182 min. Two blanks (1st 100 % ACN, 2nd Buffer A) followed each injection to ensure there was no sample carry over.

### Data Protocol
The LC–MS/MS LFQ data was processed with Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version.4.2) with protein identification carried out using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, v. 2.7). The Progenesis QI software performs feature/peptide extraction, chromatographic/spectral alignment (one run was chosen as a reference for alignment), data filtering, and quantitation of peptides and proteins. A normalization factor for each run was calculated to account for differences in sample load between injections as well as differences in ionization. The normalization factor was determined by comparing the abundance of the spike in Pierce Retention Time Calibration mixture among all the samples. The experimental design was set up to group multiple injections from each run. The algorithm then tabulated raw and normalized abundances, and maximum fold change for each feature in the data set. The combined MS/MS spectra were exported as .mgf (Mascot generic files) for database searching. The Mascot search results were exported as .xml files using a significance cutoff of p < 0.05 and FDR of 1 % and then imported into the Progenesis QI software, where search hits were assigned to corresponding aligned spectral features. Relative protein-level fold changes were calculated from the sum of all unique and non-conflicting, normalized peptide ion abundances for each protein on each run. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates. The data was normalized to internal controls and total spectral counts. Proteins with two or more unique peptide counts were listed using UniProt nomenclature and included for further analysis. A 1.5-fold change and a p-value difference of <0.05 between WT and auxilin KO are considered as significant. Heat maps for significantly changed proteins were produced using Qlucore Omics Explorer. IPA (Qiagen) was used to determine the most significantly affected canonical pathways and their overlap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dopamine, L-dopa, Endolysosomal system, Substantia nigra, Α-synuclein, Clathrin mediated endocytosis, Synaptic autophagy, Clathrin coated vesicles, Dorsal striatum, Axonal deformity, Lewy bodies

### Affiliations
Yale University
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine


