### Accession
PXD014383

### Title
Proteomic analysis of isolated mouse distal convoluted tubules following high potassium or low sodium diet

### Description
The “aldosterone paradox” is a poorly understood physiological mechanism in which increases in the hormone aldosterone either serve to stabilize blood pressure by increasing sodium-chloride (NaCl) reabsorption or to excrete potassium (K+). Under low NaCl intake, abundance and activity of the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter NCC, expressed in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), is high, whereas it is low during high K+ intake - leading to increased delivery of NaCl to downstream segments and increased electrogenic K+ secretion. Despite a critical role in blood pressure and K+ homeostasis, little is known about the molecular alterations in the DCT during the aldosterone paradox, and how they control NCC levels. The objective of this study was to define the proteome of the DCT and how it is modified by increased circulating aldosterone levels subsequent to long-term low dietary NaCl or high K+ intake.

### Sample Protocol
Transgenic mice with expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) under the control of the parvalbumin promoter were used, resulting in specific eGFP labeling of the DCT. Mice were maintained on low NaCl or high K+ diets for 4 days, which resulted in increased aldosterone levels. DCT cells were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Of the same kidney, an unsorted sample was prepared, representing the total kidney. Equal amounts of proteins were digested by trypsin, and labeled using TMT10plex isobaric labeling reagent. In total, 6 animals per diet were used for analysis. After labeling, 3 samples of each diet were combined together with a mix of all samples used as a reference. Samples were subjected to high-pH reversed phase HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis (Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against a mouse protein database (Uniprot database downloaded March 2017 containing 85,832 sequences) using the Mascot and SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome software. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and TMT labeling at N-terminus or lysine were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator. Only rank 1 and high confidence (with a target FDR q-value below 0.01) peptides were included in the final results. The quantification of each unique protein was obtained from the sum of raw values from different peptides and from different fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Sodium, Aldosterone, Distal convoluted tubule, Potassium, Kidney

### Affiliations
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark


