### Accession
PXD001370

### Title
Aging Mouse Brain Mitochondria LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study investigates the proteomic alterations in brain mitochondria isolated from 5- (mature), 12- (old), and 24-month-old (aged) mice to examine normal "healthy" aging. Using quantitative mass-spectrometry based super-SILAC, our findings revealed global proteomic changes in brain mitochondria identifying several metabolic pathways including glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Overall, we found that the bioenergetic function of these mitochondria was preserved suggesting the proteomic alterations potentially allow for compensatory mechanisms to combat aging.

### Sample Protocol
Brain mitochondria were isolated using differential centrifugation followed by anti-TOM22 immunopurification. The unlabeled brain mitochondrial protein lysates were mixed in a 1:1 protein ratio with our mitochondrial super-SILAC mix (mitochondria isolated from four mouse cell lines grown in the presence of heavy arginine and lysine) as internal standards. Filter-aided sample preparation was performed and the resultant peptides were cleaned using an Oasis MCX cartridge. Samples were dehydrated and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using an TTOF 5600 (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot version 4.5 (Paragon Algorithm: 4.5.0.0, 1654) software was used to generate peptide and protein lists as well as ratios of the amount of heavy-to-light (H:L) peptide. The search parameters were set as a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, N-acetyl (protein) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications, top 6 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, and MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Exclusion criteria to remove proteins from analysis were as follows: FDR of 0.05 for both peptides and proteins, peptides must contain at least 6 amino acids, contaminants as identified through the database search and proteins identified as being in the reverse database.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are the main cellular source of reactive oxygen species and are recognized as key players in several age-associated disorders and neurodegeneration. Their dysfunction has also been linked to cellular aging. Additionally, mechanisms leading to the preservation of mitochondrial function promote longevity. In this study we investigated the proteomic and functional alterations in brain mitochondria isolated from mature (5 months old), old (12 months old), and aged (24 months old) mice as determinants of normal "healthy" aging. Here the global changes concomitant with aging in the mitochondrial proteome of mouse brain analyzed by quantitative mass-spectrometry based super-SILAC identified differentially expressed proteins involved in several metabolic pathways including glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Despite these changes, the bioenergetic function of these mitochondria was preserved. Overall, this data indicates that proteomic changes during aging may compensate for functional defects aiding in preservation of mitochondrial function. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD001370 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001370).

### Keywords
Ttof 5600, Mitochondria, Mouse

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Kelly Stauch

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Fox
University of Nebraska Medical Center


