### Accession
PXD019439

### Title
Selective TiO2-based enrichment methods for analyzing phosphopeptide content of small-size complex samples

### Description
Comparison of several TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment methods

### Sample Protocol
The loading buffer dependence of TiO2 spin tip setup was tested using Pierce™ TiO2 Spin Tips (ST).Centrifugation: 1000g, 10 min for loading; 1000g, 5 min for elution; 2000g, 2 min for all the other steps. The impact of lactic acid on phosphopeptide enrichment was tested using the slightly modified version of the manufacturer’s protocol (ST-LA). The spin tips were first conditioned with 20 µL of Loading Buffer A (LBA; 80% ACN, 20% H2O, 2% TFA), followed by equilibration with 20 µL of Loading Buffer B (LBB; 26% lactic acid in LBA). The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 150 µL LBB, then washed with 20 µL LBB and 3 x 20 µL LBA. The first elution step was performed using 50 µL of 1.5% ammonia (in 100% H2O), followed by 50 µL 5% pyrrolidine (in 100% H2O).The impact of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid and citric acid (ST-DHB, ST-50CA, and ST-1000CA) was tested as follows. The STs were conditioned with 2 x 50 µL washing buffer (WB; 40% ACN, 60% H2O, 0.1% TFA), then they were equilibrated with 2 x 50 µL sample loading buffer. The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 150 µL loading buffer consisting of 80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA and the displacing agent. The displacing agents were as follows: 250 mg/mL DHB, 50 mM citric acid, and 1000 mM citric acid. The columns were then washed with 2 x 50µL loading buffer and 2 x 50µL washing buffer. The first elution step was performed with 50 µL of 4% ammonia (in 80% ACN, 16% H2O), followed by 2 x 50 µL of 4% ammonia (in 100% H2O). The impact of acetic acid (ST-AA) was tested as follows. The spin tips were first conditioned with 2 x 50µL washing buffer (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA), then equilibrated with 2 x 50µL sample loading buffer (20% AA, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mg/mL DHB, 0.2% HFBA in H2O). The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 150 µL loading buffer. The columns were then washed with 2 x 50µL loading buffer, 2 x 50µL washing buffer. Elution was performed with 3 x 50 µL of 4% ammonia, 25 mM ADPH (in 50% ACN, 50% H2O).  The loading buffer dependence of CIM-OH-TiO2 setup was tested as follows. The monolithic column was operated off-line, solvents and samples were loaded on the column with a syringe pump at 100 µL/min for loading and elution, and 200 µL/min for all the other steps. The loading buffer dependence of the TiO2 functionalized monolithic column (MON) was tested with two different solvent setups, both comparable with the spin tip methods: one of the methods was a slightly modified version of a method previously optimized specifically for this column (same solvents as the acetic acid method for the spin tips), while the other was the most promising method (50 mM CA, 0.1% TFA) in the spin tip setup. The AA-based method (MON-AA) was the following. The column was equilibrated with 2 x 200 µL sample loading buffer (20% AA, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mg mL-1 DHB, 0.2% HFBA in H2O). The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 200 µL loading buffer. Then the column was washed with 200 µL loading buffer, then with 2 x 250 µL washing buffer (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA). The elution was performed using 2 x 200 µL of 4% ammonia, 25 mM ADPH (in 50% ACN, 50% H2O). The first 50 µL of the elution fraction was discarded since it was the washing buffer contained in the dead volume of the column. After the elution, the samples were lyophilized and prepared for the C18 clean-up. The 50 mM CA-based method (MON-50CA) was the following. The column was equilibrated with 2 x 200µL sample loading buffer (50 mM CA, 0.1% TFA in 80% ACN, 20% H2O). The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 200 µL loading buffer. Then the column was washed with 200 µL loading buffer, then with 2 x 250 µL washing buffer (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA). The elution was performed with 200 µL of 4% ammonia (in 80% ACN, 20% H2O) and followed by 200 µL of 4% ammonia (in 100% H2O). The first 50 µL of the elution fraction was discarded since it was the washing buffer contained in the dead volume of the column. After the elution, the samples were lyophilized and prepared for the C18 clean-up. For desalting and clean-up, Thermo Fisher Scientific PierceTM C18 spin columns were used. The column was conditioned with 2 x 200 µL of 50% MeOH, 50% H2O, then washed with 2 x 200 µL 0.5% TFA, 95% H2O, 5% ACN and equilibrated with 2 x 200 µL Loading Buffer (0.1% TFA in H2O). The samples were loaded and re-loaded onto the column in 50 µL loading buffer and washed twice with 100 µL loading buffer. Elution was performed with 2 x 50µL 0.1% TFA in 70% ACN, 30% H2O. After the elution, the samples were lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until reconstitution for injection.

### Data Protocol
For the integration of extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) peak areas, Compass Data Analysis v4.3 was used. For the database search, Byonic (v3.6.0, Protein Metrics Inc, USA) was used. First, a focused database was prepared with loose criteria (25 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 2% False Discovery Rate (FDR), other parameters same as the strict search), then the searches were performed against this focused database to maximize PTM identification performance. The parameters were the following: precursor mass tolerance 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 35 ppm, cleavage at lysine and arginine C terminal, maximum 2 missed cleavages, and 1% FDR limit. The set PTMs were the following: Carbamidomethyl / +57.021464 @ C | fixed; Oxidation / +15.994915 @ M | common2; Gln->pyro-Glu / -17.026549 @ NTerm Q | rare1; Glu->pyro-Glu / -18.010565 @ NTerm E | rare1; Ammonia-loss / -17.026549 @ NTerm C | rare1; Acetyl / +42.010565 @ Protein NTerm | rare1; Phospho / +79.966331 @ S, T, Y | common3; Deamidated / +0.984016 @ N, Q | rare1; Methyl / +14.015650 @ NTerm, H, K, N, R | rare1. The common modifications were maximized in 3 instances, and the rare modifications were limited to 2. The hits were then screened with the in-house developed ‘Protein Searcher’ software, and only peptides with AbsLogProb ≥ 1.3 were considered reliable hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Enrichment, Phosphopeptide, Tio2

### Affiliations
MS Proteomics Research Group, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungary
MS Proteomics Research Group, Research Centre for Natural Sciences

### Submitter
Gábor Tóth

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Drahos
MS Proteomics Research Group, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungary


