### Accession
PXD008574

### Title
Aspartyl Protease 5 matures virulence factors found at the host-parasite interface in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
N-terminome analysis of WT and ASP5 KO Toxoplasma parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics techniques (SILAC, Heavy Dimethylation and LFQ) in combination with TAILS and HYTANE strategies for N-termini enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with MaxQuant and an inhouse software tool (manuscript in publication).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> infects approximately 30% of the world's population, causing disease primarily during pregnancy and in individuals with weakened immune systems. <i>Toxoplasma</i> secretes and exports effector proteins that modulate the host during infection, and several of these proteins are processed by the Golgi-associated aspartyl protease 5 (ASP5). Here, we identify ASP5 substrates by selectively enriching N-terminally derived peptides from wild-type and <i>&#x394;asp5</i> parasites. We reveal more than 2,000 unique <i>Toxoplasma</i> N-terminal peptides, mapping to both natural N termini and protease cleavage sites. Several of these peptides mapped directly downstream of the characterized ASP5 cleavage site, arginine-arginine-leucine (RRL). We validate candidates as true ASP5 substrates, revealing they are not processed in parasites lacking ASP5 or in wild-type parasites following mutation of the motif from RRL to ARL. All identified ASP5 substrates are dense granule proteins, and interestingly, none appear to be exported, thus differing from the analogous system in related <i>Plasmodium</i> spp. Instead we show that the majority of substrates reside within the parasitophorous vacuole (PV), and its membrane (the PVM), including two kinases and one phosphatase. We show that genetic deletion of WNG2 leads to attenuation in a mouse model, suggesting that this putative kinase is a new virulence factor in <i>Toxoplasma</i> Collectively, these data constitute the first in-depth analyses of ASP5 substrates and shed new light on the role of ASP5 as a maturase of dense granule proteins during the <i>Toxoplasma</i> lytic cycle.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is one of the most successful human parasites. Central to its success is the arsenal of virulence proteins introduced into the infected host cell. Several of these virulence proteins require direct maturation by the aspartyl protease ASP5, and all require ASP5 for translocation into the host cell, yet the true number of ASP5 substrates and complete repertoire of effectors is currently unknown. Here we selectively enrich N-terminally derived peptides using Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) and use quantitative proteomics to reveal novel ASP5 substrates. We identify, using two different enrichment techniques, new ASP5 substrates and their specific cleavage sites. ASP5 substrates include two kinases and one phosphatase that reside at the host-parasite interface, which are important for infection.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, N-terminome, Asp5, Effector, Tails

### Affiliations
WEHI
Division of Infection and Immunity The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J Tonkin
Division of Infection and Immunity The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia


