### Accession
PXD008194

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals new metabolic pathways responding to cold stress in two Winter Turnip Rape (Brassica rapa L.), part 1

### Description
Winter turnip rape (Brassica rapa L.) is a valuable ecologically beneficial oil crop that is produced mainly for its ability of conserving soil and water in winter and spring and its high quality edible oil in northwestern China. However, coldness and extremely low temperature negatively affects the growth and development of winter turnip rape, resulting in failure to overwinter and production in northwestern China. ‘Longyou 7’(Brassica rapa L.) and  ‘Tianyou 4’ (Brassica rapa L.) are closely related plant species, but their cold tolerances are different. ‘Longyou 7’ is a cold-tolerant cultivar, ‘Tianyou 4’is a cold-sensitive cultivar. In this study, we used iTRAQ-based proteomics to compare quantitative changes in the proteome of  two winter turnip rape leaves and roots in response to cold stress to elucidate the possible molecular mechanism underlying the ability of ‘Longyou 7’ to adapt to cold stress.

### Sample Protocol
Both Longyou7 and Tianyou 4 Plants were grown in plastic pots until six true leaves in a ventilated greenhouse (20 °C, 16 h light/8 h dark cycle), and then moved into growth chamber  for treatment. Cold treatment was started by gradually decreasing the temperature from 20 °C to −4 °C. The plants were grown at 20 °C for 48 h and then induced at 10 °C and 4 °C for 48 h, respectively. Finally, they were stressed at −4 °C for 8 h. The leaves and roots of plants grown at 20 °C (as control, CK) and −4 °C (as treatments, TR) were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomic analysis. Generally, eight samples were collected and named 4LCK (leaf of ‘Tianyou 4’ at 20 °C), 4LTR (leaf of ‘Tianyou 4’ treated at −4 °C), 4RCK (root of ‘Tianyou 4’ at 20 °C), 4RTR (root of ‘Tianyou 4’ treated at −4 °C), 7LCK (leaf of ‘Longyou 7’ at 20 °C), 7LTR (leaf of ‘Longyou 7’ treated at −4 °C), 7RCK (root of ‘Longyou 7’ at 20 °C), and 7RTR (root of ‘Longyou 7’ treated at −4 °C), respectively. Each sample were polled from three plants and two biological replicates were included.

### Data Protocol
protein identification and quantitation was processed by mascot

### Publication Abstract
The freezing tolerance of roots is crucial for winter turnip rape (<i>Brassica rapa</i> L.) survival in the winter in Northwest China. Cold acclimation (CA) can alleviate the root damage caused by freezing stress. To acknowledge the molecular mechanisms of freezing tolerance in winter turnip rape, two <i>Brassica rapa</i> genotypes, freezing stressed after the induction of cold acclimation, were used to compare the proteomic profiles of roots by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). Under freezing stress (-4 &#xb0;C) for 8 h, 139 and 96 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified in the roots of "Longyou7" (freezing-tolerant) and "Tianyou4" (freezing-sensitive), respectively. Among these DAPs, 91 and 48 proteins were up- and down-accumulated in "Longyou7", respectively, and 46 and 50 proteins were up- and down-accumulated in "Tianyou4", respectively. Under freezing stress, 174 DAPs of two varieties were identified, including 9 proteins related to ribosome, 19 DAPs related to the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites (e.g., phenylpropanoid and the lignin pathway), and 22 down-accumulated DAPs enriched in oxidative phosphorylation, the pentose phosphate pathway, fructose and mannose metabolism, alpha-linolenic acid metabolism, carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, ascorbate and aldarate metabolism. The expressional pattern of the genes encoding the 15 significant DAPs were consistent with the iTRAQ data. This work indicates that protein biosynthesis, lignin synthesis, the reduction of energy consumption and a higher linolenic acid content contribute to the freezing tolerance of winter turnip rape. Functional analyses of these DAPs would be helpful in dissecting the molecular mechanisms of the stress responses in <i>B. rapa</i>.

### Keywords
Cold stress, Proteomics, Winter turnip rape, Itraq

### Affiliations
HeXi University,No. 846, beicheng road, zhangye city, gansu province
HEXI UNIVERSITY

### Submitter
zeng xiucun

### Lab Head
Dr Zeng XiuCun
HeXi University,No. 846, beicheng road, zhangye city, gansu province


