### Accession
PXD036283

### Title
Repurposing of Amisulpride, a known antipsychotic drug, to target synovial fibroblasts activation in arthritis.

### Description
Synovial Fibroblasts (SFs) are key pathogenic drivers in arthritis and their in vivo activation by TNF is sufficient to orchestrate full arthritic pathogenesis in animal models. TNF blockade has been efficacious for a large percentage of Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients, although characterized by a plethora of side effects. Novel therapeutic discoveries remain however challenging, especially in optimizing drug safety, side effects, longer-term responses, costs and administration routes. Aiming to find new potent therapeutics, we applied the L1000CDS2 search engine, in order to identify compounds that could potentially reverse the pathogenic expression signature of arthritogenic SFs, derived from the human TNF transgenic mouse model (hTNFtg). We identified a neuroleptic drug, namely Amisulpride, which was validated to reduce SFs’ inflammatory potential while decreasing the clinical score of hTNFtg polyarthritis. Notably, we found that Amisulpride did not exert its biological activities through its known targets Dopamine receptors 2 and 3 and Serotonin Receptor 7, nor through TNFTNFRI binding inhibition. By applying a click chemistry approach, novel potential targets of Amisulpride were identified, which were further validated to repress hTNFtg SFs’ inflammatory potential in vitro (Ascc3 and Sec62), while phosphoproteomics analysis revealed important fibroblast activation pathways, such as adhesion, to be altered upon treatment. Our data support that Amisulpride could provide an additive beneficial effect to patients suffering from RA and comorbid dysthymia, as it may reduce SFs pathogenicity in parallel with its antidepressive activity. Importantly, Amisulpride may also serve as a “lead” compound for the development of novel, more potent therapeutics against chronic inflammatory diseases

### Sample Protocol
SP3 mediated digestion and peptide sample clean up The eluates were processed using the sensitive sp3 protocol 60 . The cysteine residues were reduced in 100 mM DTT and alkylated in iodoacetamide (I6125, Sigma-Aldrich). 20 ug of beads were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. The beads were washed two times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile. The captured proteins were digested overnight at 37 o C under vigorous shaking (Thermomixer) with 0.5 ug Trypsin/LysC (mixture MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. The supernatants were collected the next day, and were further cleaned using the Sp3 protocol. The cleaned peptide mixtures were dried using a vacuum centrifuge, solubilized in a mobile phase A, sonicated and peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280nm measurement.  LC-MS/MS Nano-liquid chromatography of 500 ng tryptic peptide mixture was carried out using a Ultimate3000 RSLC system configured with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on the trap column at 10uL/min for 4 min with 0.1% formic acid in water. The separation was achieved using a gradient of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) (mobile phase B). In more detail the flow rate was set at 0.3uL/min and the solvent ramped from 5% A to 27.5% over 23 min, 27.5% to 40% A in 4.5min, 40% to 99% in 0.5 min remaining constant for 4min. The column was equilibrated for 18min before the next injection. The data acquisition was performed in positive mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 12 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–1500). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3 × 10E6 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1x10E5 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200) using an NCE of 28. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20 sec after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis- Mass spectometry  The acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (1.6.14.0). Default parameters were used for protein identification and quantification. The Mus musculus proteome FASTA database was downloaded 9/3/2020 from Uniprot. Trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages was allowed and minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of five modifications per peptide was set. The false discovery rate both for peptide and protein were set to 1%. For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with both ‘second peptide’ and ‘match between run’ options enabled. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins identified as ‘contaminants’, ‘reverse’ and ‘only identified by site’ were filtered out. The three replicates of each condition were grouped (treated versus control condition of vehicle or competition condition). A two-sided Student’s t-test of the grouped proteins within each experimental set was performed using p value &lt;0.05 as a significance measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Synovial fibroblasts (SFs) are key pathogenic drivers in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Their in vivo activation by TNF is sufficient to orchestrate full arthritic pathogenesis in animal models, and TNF blockade proved efficacious for a high percentage of patients with RA albeit coinducing rare but serious side effects. Aiming to find new potent therapeutics, we applied the L1000CDS2 search engine, to repurpose drugs that could reverse the pathogenic expression signature of arthritogenic human TNF-transgenic (hTNFtg) SFs. We identified a neuroleptic drug, namely amisulpride, which reduced SFs' inflammatory potential while decreasing the clinical score of hTNFtg polyarthritis. Notably, we found that amisulpride function was neither through its known targets dopamine receptors D2 and D3 and serotonin receptor 7 nor through TNF-TNF receptor I binding inhibition. Through a click chemistry approach, potentially novel targets of amisulpride were identified, which were further validated to repress hTNFtg SFs' inflammatory potential ex vivo (Ascc3 and Sec62), while phosphoproteomics analysis revealed that treatment altered important fibroblast activation pathways, such as adhesion. Thus, amisulpride could prove beneficial to patients experiencing RA and the often-accompanying comorbid dysthymia, reducing SF pathogenicity along with its antidepressive activity, serving further as a "lead" compound for the development of novel therapeutics against fibroblast activation.

### Keywords
Synovial fibroblasts, Repurposing, Rheumatoid arthritis, Amisulpride, Click-chemistry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Institute for Bioinnovation, Biomedical Sciences Research Centre (B.S.R.C.) “Alexander Fleming”; Vari, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr George Kollias
Institute for Bioinnovation, Biomedical Sciences Research Centre (B.S.R.C.) “Alexander Fleming”; Vari, Greece


