### Accession
PXD042949

### Title
Targeted proteomics quantittation of NRF2 signaling and predictive biomarkers in HNSCC

### Description
The NFE2L2/NRF2 oncogene and transcription factor drives a gene expression program that promotes cancer progression, metabolic reprogramming, immune evasion and chemoradiation resistance. Patient stratification by NRF2 activity may guide treatment decisions to improve outcome. Here, we developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based targeted proteomics assay based on internal standard triggered parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM) to quantify 69 NRF2 pathway components and targets as well as 21 proteins of broad clinical significance in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We improved the existing IS-PRM acquisition algorithm, called SureQuantTM, to increase throughput, sensitivity, and precision. Testing the optimized platform on 27 lung and upper aerodigestive cancer cell models revealed 35 NRF2 responsive proteins. In formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) HNSCCs, NRF2 signaling intensity positively correlated with NRF2 activating mutations and with SOX2 protein expression. PD-L2/CD273 and protein markers of T-cell infiltration correlated positively with one another and with human papilloma virus (HPV) infection status. p16/CDKN2A protein expression positively correlated with the HPV oncogenic E7 protein, and confirmed the presence of translationally active virus. This work establishes a clinically actionable HNSCC protein biomarker assay capable of quantifying over 600 peptides from frozen or FFPE archived tissues in under 90 minutes.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed in 100 uL of 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), and 1 mM EDTA with addition of phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Halt, catalog no. 78429; 78420). Lysates were incubated on ice for 30 minutes with vortexing once every 5 minutes. Following high speed clearance protein was quantified by BCA (Thermo Scientific, catalog no. 23225). Samples were normalized to equal mass of protein and volume, and protein were sequentially reduced in 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 hour and then alkylated in 50 mM CAA at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. Samples were then diluted to 3 M urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) to prepare for digestion at 30°C for 2-4 hours with 20 mAU of Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, 12902541) per 1 mg of protein. After further dilution to <2 M urea, trypsin (Promega, PR-V5113) was added at a 1:49 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-substrate ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C. Following digestion samples were brought to 1% Formic Acid (FA) by volume, high speed cleared, and then desalted using 50-mg tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters Technologies, WAT054960). Clean peptide was frozen, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and then reconstituted in a mass-spectrometry compatible loading buffer. Final peptide quantitation was determined via BCA but using a peptide digest standard (Thermo Scientific, catalog no. 23295). Proteins were extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and then digested as follows using a protocol based on Coscia et al. and Kohale et al. [1, 2]. Surgical resections of HPV-subtyped oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas were obtained as 50- micron FFPE curls. Specimens were deparaffinized in 1.7 mL Eppendorf tubes with two sequential washes in 500uL Xylenes at 56°C and then rehydrated by washes in once each of 100, 95, 80, and 50% (v/v) ethanol in water. A lysis buffer of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 300 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0) at 50% (v/v) was added to each to each sample. Curls were then ground ~30 seconds each with a micro-pestle, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then heated to 95°C for 30 minutes. Subsequent probe sonication with a Model 120 Sonic Dismembrator (Fisher Scientific) at 70% amplitude in 10 cycles of 2 seconds on and 8 seconds off was followed by a second heating step at 95°C for 90 minutes with occasional vortexing. Samples were then high-speed cleared, reduced, and alkylated as with the cell pellets. Prior to digestion, each aliquot was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to ~50 uL and then brought to 500 uL with a 5% (v/v) TFE in water digestion buffer. Next, sequential Lysyl endopeptidase and tryptic digestions were carried out as with the cell pellets assuming a 500 ug protein yield per sample. Samples were desalted by SDB-RPS spin columns (Affinisep, Spin-RPS-M.T1.96). Equilibration was with 200 uL ACN followed by 200 uL 0.5% FA. Samples were loaded in 1% TFA and then washed with 200 uL 0.2% FA and then by 200 uL

### Data Protocol
Database searching and peptide identification For label free analysis of the A549 cell line (figure 1D) and HPV positive tumors (figure 5A) the .raw files were searched using MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 against the UniProt human proteome (Swiss-Prot + Trembl) with an FDR of 1%. Methionie oxidation and N-terminal Acetylation were searched as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was fixed. Lysine methylation and both N-terminal and lysine formylation have been reported as formalin fixation artifacts and were included as variable modifications for the FFPE-derived samples [3, 4]. Quantification was by MaxLFQ and without match between runs. Peak Area Ratio Estimation For both the standard SureQuantTM and IAPI directed methods, text files were generated from an active IAPI instance recording all centroided MS2 scans with retention time and precursor m/z annotations. Custom python scripts were used to estimate peak area ratios (PARs) from these data as follows. Transition intensities were extracted with a width of 80 ppm for watch scan MS2s and 20 ppm for quant scan MS2s. If multiple peaks fell within a single extraction window, the one nearest the center of the window was used. For each SIL/endogenous transition pair, two vectors of intensities from each watch/quant scan pair over the integration bounds were compiled, and if the angle between those vectors exceeded " # radians, that transition was excluded from further analysis. Among the remaining transitions, the subset of three transitions with the highest summed peak area, such that the spectral contrast angle between the SIL and endogenous peak areas did not exceed " $% radians, was used for quantification. The integration boundary was taken to be the longest streak of consecutive cycles that each contained both a watch and quant scan for the precursor. The longest streak could be broken by at most 3 consecutive cycles missing either or both of the watch and quant scans. The supplemental data report all chromatograms for each precursor and the subsets of transitions used for quantitation. Normalization We performed global extraction from PRM (GXPRM) as proposed by Chambers et al. to normalize observed peak area ratios based on the intensities of commonly identified peptides that are co-isolated with the targeted peptides [5]. Raw files were converted to an open format (.mzML) using the ProteoWizard MSConvert tool [6]. A python script removed linear ion trap noop scans from the IAPI method .mzML files, and the trimmed files were then searched using the MetaMorpheus software with match between runs [7]. “Deconvolute precursors” was enabled for the identification of co-isolated precursors. Background peptides commonly identified between all runs were then used to calculate the median normalization factors as described by Chambers and colleagues [5]. Peptides corresponding to targeted proteins were excluded from the analysis before normalization. Peptide Imputation and Summarization to Protein Peak area ratios for each peptide corresponding to a given protein were summarized to protein-level abundances by taking their geometric mean. We used the “mice” imputer proposed by Buuren and Groothius-Oudshoorn as implemented in scikit-learn to impute missing peptide values given the non-missing values for peptides corresponding to the same protein [8, 9]. We assume a linear relationship between abundances of peptides derived from the same protein. For a given experiment, a peptide was excluded from analysis if it was missing from greater than one-half of samples from which at least one other peptide from the same protein was quantified. When all peptides were missing for a given protein and injection, the protein was considered missing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Nathan Wamsleyu

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Major
Washington University in St. Louis


