### Accession
PXD032239

### Title
A selective and orally bioavailable VHL-recruiting PROTAC achieves SMARCA2 degradation in vivo

### Description
Targeted protein degradation offers an alternative modality to classical inhibition and holds the promise of addressing previously undruggable targets to provide novel therapeutic options for patients. Heterobifunctional  molecules co-recruit the target and an E3 ligase, resulting in ubiquitylation and proteosome-dependent  degradation of the target. The oral route of administration is the option of choice in the clinic, but has only been  achieved so far by CRBN- recruiting bifunctional degrader molecules. We aimed to achieve orally bioavailable  molecules that selectively degrade the BAF Chromatin Remodelling complex ATPase SMARCA2 over its closely related paralogue SMARCA4, to allow in vivo evaluation of the synthetic lethality concept of SMARCA2  dependency in SMARCA4 deficient cancers. Here we outline structure- and property-guided approaches that led to the first orally bioavailable VHL-recruiting degraders. Our tool compound, ACBI2, shows selective degradation of SMARCA2 over SMARCA4 in ex vivo human whole blood assays and in vivo efficacy in SMARCA4-deficient cancer  models. This study demonstrates the feasibility for broadening the E3 ligase and physicochemical space that can be utilised for achieving oral efficacy with bifunctional molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded at 5 × 106 cells on a 100 mm plate 24 hours before treatment. Cells were treated in triplicate by  addition of test compounds at 100 nM. After 4 h, the cells were washed twice with 10 ml cold PBS and lysed in  500 μL of 100 mM TEAB with 5% (w/v) SDS. The lysate was pulse sonicated briefly and then centrifuged at 15,000  × g for 10 min. Samples were quantified using a micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 300 μg of each sample was reduced with DTT, alkalised with iodoacetamide and double-digested with trypsin using the modified S-TRAP mini (ProtiFi) protocol. Peptide quantification was done using Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay and equal amount from each sample was labelled using TMTproTM 16plex Label Reagent Set  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer's instructions. The samples were then pooled and desalted  using a 7 mm, 3 mL C18 SPE cartridge column (Empore, 3M). The pooled and desalted sample was fractionated  using high pH reverse-phase chromatography on an XBridge peptide BEH column (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 × 150 mm, Waters) on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific/Dionex). Buffers A (10 mM ammonium formate in  water, pH 9) and B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 9) were used over a linear gradient of 2%  to 100% buffer B over 80 min at a flow rate of 200 μL/min. 80 fractions were collected using a WPS-3000 FC auto- sampler (Thermo Scientific) before concatenation into 20 fractions based on the UV signal of each fraction. All the  fractions were dried in a Genevac EZ-2 concentrator and resuspended in 1% formic acid for MS analysis. The  fractions were analysed sequentially on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). Buffers A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B  (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) were used over a linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B over 125 min and  then from 35% buffer B to 98% buffer B in 2 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column temperature was 50 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a single MS survey scan from 335- 1600 m/z followed by 15 sequential m/z dependent MS2 scans. The 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). The MS1 isolation window was set to  0.7 m/z and the resolution set at 120,000. MS2 resolution was set at 60,000. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2  were set at 3x106 ions and 1x105 ions, respectively. The normalised collision energy was set at 32%. The maximum  ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set at 50 ms and 200 ms respectively. The mass accuracy was checked  before the initiation of sample analysis. The raw MS data files for all 20 fractions were merged and searched  against the Uniprot-sprot-Human-Canonical database by Maxquant software 2.0.3.0 for protein identification and  TMT reporter ion quantitation.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files for all 20 fractions were merged and searched  against the Uniprot-sprot-Human-Canonical database by Maxquant software 2.0.3.0 for protein identification and  TMT reporter ion quantitation. The Maxquant parameters were set as follows: enzyme used Trypsin/P; maximum  number of missed cleavages equal to two; precursor mass tolerance equal to 10 p.p.m.; fragment mass tolerance  equal to 20 p.p.m.; variable modifications: oxidation (M), dioxidation (MW), acetyl (N-term), deamidation (NQ),  Gln -> pyro-Glu (Q N-term); fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C). The data was filtered by applying a 1% false  discovery rate followed by exclusion of proteins with less than two unique peptides. Quantified proteins were  filtered if the absolute fold-change difference between the three DMSO replicates was ≥ 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oral bioavailability, Protac, Tpd, Smarca

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Chemical Structural Biology Director, Centre for Targeted Protein Degradation  School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee JBC, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK

### Submitter
Vesna Vetma

### Lab Head
Dr Alessio Ciulli
Professor of Chemical Structural Biology Director, Centre for Targeted Protein Degradation  School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee JBC, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK


