### Accession
PXD023705

### Title
Tissue extracellular matrix hydrogels as alternative to Matrigel for culturing gastrointestinal organoid

### Description
Matrigel, a mouse tumor extracellular matrix (ECM) protein mixture, is an indispensable component of most organoid tissue culture. However, it has limited the utility of organoids for drug development and regenerative medicine due to its tumor-derived origin, batch-to22 batch variation, high cost, and safety issues. Here, we demonstrate that gastrointestinal (GI) tissue-derived ECM hydrogels are a suitable substitute for Matrigel in GI organoid culture. We found that the development and function of GI organoids grown in GI ECM hydrogels are comparable or often superior to those in Matrigel. In addition, GI ECM hydrogels enabled long-term subculture and transplantation of GI organoids by providing GI tissue-mimetic microenvironments. Tissue-specific and age-related ECM profiles of GI ECM hydrogels that affect organoid development were also elucidated through proteomic analysis. Together, our results suggest that ECM hydrogels derived from decellularized GI tissues are an effective alternative to the current gold standard, Matrigel, and produce organoids suitable for GI disease modeling, drug development, and tissue regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols about decellularization of stomach and intestine tissues, sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript. The intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) and MaxLFQ algorithm was used for quantification of protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Matrigel, a mouse tumor extracellular matrix protein mixture, is an indispensable component of most organoid tissue culture. However, it has limited the utility of organoids for drug development and regenerative medicine due to its tumor-derived origin, batch-to-batch variation, high cost, and safety issues. Here, we demonstrate that gastrointestinal tissue-derived extracellular matrix hydrogels are suitable substitutes for Matrigel in gastrointestinal organoid culture. We found that the development and function of gastric or intestinal organoids grown in tissue extracellular matrix hydrogels are comparable or often superior to those in Matrigel. In addition, gastrointestinal extracellular matrix hydrogels enabled long-term subculture and transplantation of organoids by providing gastrointestinal tissue-mimetic microenvironments. Tissue-specific and age-related extracellular matrix profiles that affect organoid development were also elucidated through proteomic analysis. Together, our results suggest that extracellular matrix hydrogels derived from decellularized gastrointestinal tissues are effective alternatives to the current gold standard, Matrigel, and produce organoids suitable for gastrointestinal disease modeling, drug development, and tissue regeneration.

### Keywords
Tissue extracellular matrix, Gastrointestinal organoid

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Stem cell and biomaterial engineering Lab, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea.
Soongsil university

### Submitter
Sung-Hyun Jo

### Lab Head
Dr Seung-Woo Cho
Department of Biotechnology, Stem cell and biomaterial engineering Lab, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea.


