### Accession
PXD038601

### Title
Diagnosis of T-cell-mediated kidney rejection by biopsy-based proteomic biomarkers and machine learning

### Description
Background: Biopsy-based diagnosis is essential for maintaining renal allograft longevity by ensuring prompt treatment for graft complications. Although histologic assessment remains the gold standard, it carries significant limitations such as subjective interpretation, suboptimal reproducibility, and imprecise quantitation of disease burden. It is hoped that molecular diagnostics could enhance the efficiency, accuracy, and reproducibility of traditional histologic methods.  Methods: Quantitative label-free mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a set of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies from renal transplant patients, comprising five biopsies with the diagnosis of T-cell-mediated rejection (TCMR), five biopsies for polyomavirus BK nephropathy (BKPyVN), and normal kidney control tissue (STA). Using the differential protein expression result as a classifier, three different machine learning algorithms were tested to build a molecular diagnostic model for TCMR.  Results: The label-free proteomics method yielded 800-1350 proteins that could be quantified with high confidence per sample by single-shot measurements. Among these candidate proteins, 329 and 467 proteins were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) for TCMR in comparison with STA and BKPyVN, respectively. Comparing the FFPE quantitative proteomics data set obtained in this study using label-free method with a data set we previously reported using isobaric labeling technology, a classifier pool comprised of features from DEPs commonly quantified in both data sets, was generated for TCMR prediction. Leave-one-out cross-validation result demonstrated that the random forest (RF)-based model achieved the best predictive power. In a follow-up blind test using an independent sample set, the RF-based model yields 80% accuracy for TCMR and 100% for STA. When applying the established RF-based model to two public transcriptome datasets, 78.1%-82.9% sensitivity and 58.7%-64.4% specificity was achieved respectively.  Conclusions: This proof-of-principle study demonstrates the clinical feasibility of proteomics profiling for FFPE biopsies using an accurate, efficient, and cost-effective platform integrated of quantitative label-free mass spectrometry analysis with a machine learning-derived diagnostic model. It costs less than 10 dollars per test.

### Sample Protocol
Deparaffinization and protein extraction The biopsy tissue embedded in the paraffin blocks was extracted with a sharp scalpel, followed by cutting into 1 mm pieces. Each sample was deparaffinized by incubating with 1 mL of xylene at room temperature (RT) for 5 min, centrifugating at 3,000 × g for 2 min, with the supernatant discarded. Repeat the xylene washing step three times. Then, the deparaffinized sample was rehydrated by incubating with 1 mL of 100% ethanol at RT for 3 min, centrifugating at 3,000 × g for 2 min, with the supernatant discarded. Repeat the ethanol washing step three times. After that, 40 µL of lysis buffer, (2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 20 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris), 1% protease inhibitor, pH 8.0) was added to each sample, which was then subjected to a focused ultrasonication step (work 4s, suspend 6s, total time 2min) with Model 120 Sonic Dismembrator (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). After the focused ultrasonication repeated for five times, the disrupted samples were incubated at 98˚C for 120 min. With the supernatants collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4˚C, the concentration of the obtained protein supernatant was measured by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).   On-filter digestion For each FFPE sample, 10 µg of the extracted proteins were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) strategy with minor modifications. Briefly, the proteins were denatured and reduced by incubating with 100 mM TCEP for 10 min at 90°C. After the sample cooled down to the RT, 100 µL of 8 M urea (dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3) was added to the sample and mixed. Then the mixture of each sample was loaded onto a 10-kDa centrifugal filter unit (250 µL/unit) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min. After the proteins on the membrane were washed with 200 µL of 8 M urea once, 200 µL of 8 M urea containing 20 mM IAA was added to the membrane and incubated at RT for 30 min in the dark. Next, the proteins on the membrane were washed with 200 µL of 8 M urea three times followed by 100 mM NH4HCO3 three times. Finally, 150 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) containing 0.4 µg of trypsin was added to each unit and incubated at 37 °C for overnight. After digestion, FA was used to acidify the protein digests to terminate digestion at 1% FA (v/v). The filtrate units were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min, and the flow-through containing the peptides was collected. To increase peptide recovery from the membrane, the membrane was further washed with 150 µL of water, with elutes lyophilized with a vacuum concentrator.  Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance LC (UPLC) system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptide separation was performed on a C18 capillary column (10.5 cm, 3 μm, 120 Å) from New Objective (Woburn, MO). The two eluent buffers were H2O with 2% ACN and 0.1% FA (mobile phase A), and ACN with 2% H2O and 0.1% FA (mobile phase B), and both were at pH 3. The gradient of the mobile phase was set as follows: load the sample at 2% B for 25 min, 2%-35% B in 45 min, 35%-98% B in 10 min and maintained at 80% B for 10 min. After separation, equilibrate the column at 2% B for 25 min. The flow rate was 350 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 scans were acquired in the FT part at a resolution of 1.5 × 104 over the m/z 350-1,500 range. The AGC target was set as 1 × 106 (MS scans) and 5 × 103 (MS/MS scans), respectively while ion accumulation times were set as 60 ms (MS scans) and 50 ms (MS/MS scans), respectively. To improve the spectrum utility, only the ions with charge state between 2 and 4 were subjected to fragmentation, and the minimum signal threshold as 500. The 20 most intense ions were fragmented at a normalized collision energy of 35%, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the ion trap. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s, with the isolation window as 2 Da. For MS2, the selected precursor ions were fragmented with activation time of 20 ms while activation q as 0.25.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) with SEQUEST search engine. MS/MS spectra were matched with a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (204,961 entries, May 2022) and BK polyomavirus (strain AS) (BKPyV) database (5 entries, May 2022), using the following parameters: full trypsin digest with maximum 2 missed cleavages, static modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), dynamic modification of phosphorylation at serine, threonine, or tyrosine (+79.966 Da) as well as oxidation at methionine (+15.995 Da). Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Peptide spectral matches were validated using percolator based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate. To enable meaningful expression comparison of different proteins, the data across different phenotypes were quantile normalized with normalyzer software, which was implemented in R using Bioconductor packages. Principle component analysis (PCA) was performed by subjecting data to Perseus software (version 1.6.10.50, available online: https://maxquant.net/perseus/) based on singular value decomposition.   Statistical analysis and bioinformatics analysis  Statistical analysis was performed using the empirical Bayes method implemented in R package LIMMA to determine proteins with statistically significant difference in abundance across different biopsies. To minimize the inaccuracy issues associated with label-free quantitative proteomics, log transformation followed by quantile normalization were performed before quantification analysis. DEPs were selected using two criteria: 1) their expression levels in TCMR biopsies significantly changed (i.e., the Benjamin–Hochberg procedure adjusted p value < 0.05) in comparison with STA samples at 1% FDR; 2) fold changes of protein expression levels between TCMR and STA are >2 or <-2. Bioinformatics analysis, including protein localization and signaling pathways involved by the identified proteins, was uncovered using QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com›qiagen-ipa). Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) was performed for the functional annotation of the identified proteins. In addition, the protein-protein interaction was predicted with STRING software (https://string-db.org/) with a confidence cutoff as 0.7, followed by visualization with cytoscape software (https://cytoscape.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Quantitative proteomics, Ffpe, Machine learning, Diagnosis, Mass spectrometry, Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Center for Proteomics & Artificial Intelligence Center for Clinical Mass Spectrometry Allegheny Health Network Cancer Institute  100 S Jackson Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15202

### Submitter
Fei FANG

### Lab Head
Dr Kunhong Xiao
Center for Proteomics & Artificial Intelligence Center for Clinical Mass Spectrometry Allegheny Health Network Cancer Institute  100 S Jackson Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15202


