### Accession
PXD026913

### Title
Proteomics characterization of NTRK1/TrkA signaling in neuroblastoma cells reveals intra-nuclear aggregation of Lamin A/C

### Description
Simple Summary: Neuroblastoma (NB) accounts for 15% of all cancer related deaths of children. While amplification of the Myc-N proto-oncogene (MYCN) is a major driver of NB, expression of the neurotrophin receptor, NTRK1/TrkA, has been shown to associate with an excellent outcome. MYCN down-regulates NTRK1 expression, but it is unknown if the molecular effects of NTRK1 signaling also affect MYCN-induced networks. The aim of this study was to decipher NTRK1 signaling using an unbiased proteome and phosphoproteome approach. To this end, we realized inducible ectopic NTRK1-expression in a NB cell line with MYCN amplification and analyzed the proteomic changes upon NTRK1-activation in a time-dependent manner. In line with phenotypes observed, NTRK1-activation induced markers of neuronal differentiation and cell cycle arrest. Most prominently, NTRK1 upregulated expression and phosphorylation of the nuclear lamina component Lamin A/C. Moreover, NTRK1 signaling also induced aggregation of LMNA within nucleic foci, which accompanies differentiation in other cell types. Abstract: Background: Neuroblastomas (NB) are the most common extracranial solid tumors of childhood. Amplification of the Myc-N proto-oncogene (MYCN) is a major driver of NB aggressiveness, while high expression of the neurotrophin receptor NTRK1/TrkA is associated with mild disease courses. The molecular effects of NTRK1 signaling in MYCN-amplified NB, however, are still poorly understood and require elucidation. Methods: Inducible NTRK1-expression was realized in four NB cell lines with (IMR5, NGP) or without MYCN amplification (SKNAS, SH-SY5Y). Proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics upon NTRK1-activation by its ligand, NGF, were analyzed in a time-dependent manner in IMR5 cells. Target validation by immunofluorescence staining and automated image processing was performed using the three other NB cell lines. Results: In total, 230 proteins and 134 single phosphorylated class I phosphosites were found to be significantly regulated upon NTRK1 activation. Among known NTRK1-targets, Stathmin and the neurosecretory protein VGF were recovered. Additionally, we observed upregulation and phosphorylation of Lamin A/C (LMNA) that accumulated inside nuclear foci. Conclusions: We provide a comprehensive picture of NTRK1-induced proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics. Phosphorylation of LMNA within nucleic aggregates was identified as a prominent feature of NTRK1 signaling independent of the MYCN status of NB cells.

### Sample Protocol
Activation of ectopically expressed NTRK1/TrkA and preparation of lysates for proteome analyses NTRK1/TrkA expression was induced by tetracycline for 24 h before TrkA was activated by addition of NGF (100 ng/mL, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, NE). The control group was left untreated. Cells were harvested 0 h, 10 min, 1 h, 4 h, 12 h and 24 h after NGF treatment. To account for different culture times, adjusted cell numbers were seeded to warrant homogeneous densities at the time of harvesting (1.3*105 cells/mL were seeded for 0 h – 4 h time points, 1*105 cells/mL for 12 h and 7.5*104 cells/mL for 24 h). Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and subsequently incubated with 500 µL RIPA buffer containing PhosStop and cOmplete phosphatase and protease inhibitors (both Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and 0.5 µL Benzonase (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 min on ice. Cells were harvested and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 20 min (4°C). The supernatants were collected, proteins were precipitated using acetone (overnight, -20°C) and resolved in urea buffer (30 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea). The protein concentrations were determined using a commercialized assay based on the Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Next, 1 mg protein per sample were used for tryptic digestion. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 60°C followed by addition iodoacetic acid (final conc. 15 mM) for 30 min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted 1:7 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to lower the urea concentration and digested at 37°C overnight using trypsin (1:50 ratio, SERVA, Heidelberg, Germany). The digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% TFA and the peptides were purified using Oasis HLB PLUS cartridges (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). Peptide concentrations were determined via amino acid analysis (AAA) on an ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Phosphopeptide enrichment Briefly, 100 µg peptides per samples were mixed with 1 mL of loading buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid) and applied to 0.6 mg of TiO2-beads (Titansphere, 5 μm, GL Science, Tokyo, Japan). The peptides were allowed to bind to the beads and washed with 200 μL loading buffer (200 μL 80% ACN, 1% TFA and 200 µL 20% ACN, 0.5% TFA). Subsequently, the beads were vacuum-dried, dissolved in 50 μL 1% ammonium hydroxide (pH 11.3) and incubated for 10 min at 4°C. Beads were removed by centrifugation using self-packed C8 stage tips (Empore SPE C8, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Eluates were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 0.5% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid before they were purified using self-packed C18 stage tips (Empore SPE C18, Sigma-Aldrich) and eluted with 50% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid. The samples were stored vacuum-dried and re-suspended in 0.1% TFA before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled to an Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Pre-concentration was achieved on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μL/min using 0.1% TFA and peptides were then transferred to a Nano Viper C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptide separation was achieved by a gradient from 5%–40% solvent B over 120 min at 400 nL/min and 60°C (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and within a mass range of 350–1,400 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode at a resolution of 30,000. For MS/MS measurements, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; normalized collision energy (NCE) = 28).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.5.0). If not specified otherwise, default settings were used. Static modification was set for cysteine (carbamidomethyl). Dynamic modifications were considered for methionine (oxidation) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Spectra were searched against the UniprotKB/SwissProt database (release 2019_08; 560,823 entries) restricted to Homo sapiens. The “match between runs” feature was enabled. The label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) was not applied. Only proteins quantified in at least 50% of the replicates in at least one experimental condition were considered for further analyses. Raw abundancies were subsequently normalized using the cyclic LOESS approach. Phosphorylation sites were included in subsequent analyses only when localization probability exceeded 75% (class I p-sites).

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Neuroblastomas (NBs) are the most common extracranial solid tumors of children. The amplification of the Myc-N proto-oncogene (MYCN) is a major driver of NB aggressiveness, while high expression of the neurotrophin receptor NTRK1/TrkA is associated with mild disease courses. The molecular effects of NTRK1 signaling in MYCN-amplified NB, however, are still poorly understood and require elucidation. (2) Methods: Inducible NTRK1 expression was realized in four NB cell lines with (IMR5, NGP) or without MYCN amplification (SKNAS, SH-SY5Y). Proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics upon NTRK1 activation by its ligand, NGF, were analyzed in a time-dependent manner in IMR5 cells. Target validation by immunofluorescence staining and automated image processing was performed using the three other NB cell lines. (3) Results: In total, 230 proteins and 134 single phosphorylated class I phosphosites were found to be significantly regulated upon NTRK1 activation. Among known NTRK1 targets, Stathmin and the neurosecretory protein VGF were recovered. Additionally, we observed the upregulation and phosphorylation of Lamin A/C (LMNA) that accumulated inside nuclear foci. (4) Conclusions: We provide a comprehensive picture of NTRK1-induced proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics. The phosphorylation of LMNA within nucleic aggregates was identified as a prominent feature of NTRK1 signaling independent of the MYCN status of NB cells.

### Keywords
Mycn, Nuclear foci, Trka, Ntrk1, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Ruhr-University Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Ruhr-University Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics


