### Accession
PXD023021

### Title
Ribosomal protein deficiency generates proteotoxic stress that is alleviated by TOR inhibition

### Description
Ribosomes are multi-component molecular machines that synthesize all the proteins of living cells. Understandably, most genes encoding the protein components of ribosomes are essential. Reduction in gene dosage is often viable but deleterious and associated with human syndromes, collectively known as ribosomopathies. The cell biological basis of these pathologies has remained unclear. Here, we model human ribosomopathies in Drosophila and find widespread apoptosis and cellular stress in the resulting animals. This is not caused by insufficient protein synthesis, as reasonably expected. Instead, ribosomal protein deficiency elicits proteotoxic stress, which, we suggest, is caused by the accumulation of misfolded proteins that overwhelm the protein degradation machinery. We find that dampening the integrated stress response or autophagy worsens the harm inflicted by ribosomal protein deficiency, suggesting that these activities could be cytoprotective.  Inhibition of TOR activity, which dampens ribosomal protein production, slows down protein synthesis and stimulates autophagy, reduces proteotoxic stress in our ribosomopathy model.  Interventions that stimulate autophagy, combined with means of boosting protein quality control, could form the basis of a therapeutic strategy for this class of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and RPS23R67K/+ larvae were collected at the wandering L3 stage and briefly washed in PBS. Imaginal discs were dissected out in cold PBS and lysed in Triton extraction buffer. 50 imaginal discs were dissected and lysed in 40ml of extraction buffer containing 1% Triton, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2X Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitors (ThermoFisher #78441), 5mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT. Proteins were reduced and alkylated using DTT and Iodoacetamide. The sample volumes were then adjusted to 100ml using LC-MS grade water and subjected to acetone precipitation to remove detergents. Air dried acetone precipitated pellets were resuspended 25ml in 100 mM HEPES, 1M GuaHCl, pH8 in an ultrasonic bath. Endoprotease lysC was added in a 1:50 (enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37 degrees for 3h. The sample was then diluted 2-fold with MilliQ water and trypsin was added in a 1:50 (enzyme: protein) and incubated overnight at 37 degrees. The digests were acidified using TFA and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using an EvosepOne liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer run in Data Dependent Acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was then processed using MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 specifying iBAQ quantification with further downstream statistical analysis in Perseus 1.4.0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteotoxic stress, Rps26, Ribosomes, Diamond blackfan anemia, Ribosomopathies, Autophagy, P62, Rps23, Protein aggregates, Eif2, Tor, Protein translation, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Paul Vincent
The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK


