### Accession
PXD018345

### Title
Mapping of ISG15 interaction partners by Virotrap coupled to mass spectrometry

### Description
During infection, interferon production leads to upregulation of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) which encodes the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. ISG15 has a profound role in restricting intracellular infection by viral and bacterial pathogens. It can exert its function either as a free intracellular or extracellular molecule, or as an ubiquitin-like conjugate to substrate proteins in a process called ISGylation. Here, we used a viral-like particle trapping (Virotrap) technology and GST pull down, both coupled to mass spectrometry, to screen for intracellular ISG15-binding proteins. As strongest hit, we identified RNF213, a very large interferon-induced protein targeted to lipid droplets and a genetic risk factor for Moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder. We verified binding of ISG15 and RNF213 with biochemical methods and imaging and found that interferon signaling induces ISGylation and oligomerization of RNF213 on the surface of lipid droplets, acting as a binding platform for ISGylated proteins. Moreover, we showed that knockdown of RNF213 promotes in vitro infection by Listeria monocytogenes, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and Coxsackie virus (CV) B3, suggesting a broad antimicrobial activity of RNF213. In contrast, overexpression of RNF213 restricted Listeria infection and was associated with a striking co-localization of RNF213 with intracellular bacteria. Infection experiments in RNF213 deficient mice corroborated these results in vivo, revealing a so far unknown function of RNF213 in the host defense against infection. Together, we report that RNF213 assembles into a binding platform for ISGylated proteins on the surface of lipid droplets, acting as a first step of an antimicrobial cellular pathway that processes ISGylated proteins. Our findings provide novel molecular insights into the ISGylation pathway and point towards an important role of the immune response to infection in the etiology of Moyamoya disease.

### Sample Protocol
Virotrap experiments were performed as described in Titeca et al. 2017 Nat. Protocol. In short, the day before transfection 106 Hek293T cells (authenticated) were seeded in four T75 flasks for each condition. Cells were then transfected with four different bait proteins, each fused via their N-terminus to HIV-1 GAG: mature ISG15 (ending on -LRLRGG), mature non-conjugatable ISG15 (ending on -LRLRAA), full length ISG15 precursor, and eDHFR (dihydrofolate reductase from Escherichia coli) as control. VSV-G and FLAG-VSV-G were co-transfected to allow single-step purification of the produced particles. The day after transfection, these cells were treated with interferon-α for 24h (10 ng/mL; #11343596, Immunotools) during the particle production phase. Supernatant was harvested 40h after transfection followed by centrifugation and filtration (0.45 µM; SLHV033RS, Merck Millipore) to remove cellular debris. Virotrap particles containing protein complexes were purified in a single step using biotinylated anti-FLAG BioM2 antibody (F9291, Sigma-Aldrich) and Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 Beads (#65601, Thermo Fischer Scientific), and were consecutively eluted by competition using FLAG peptide (#F3290, Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were then processed with Amphipols A8-35 (#A835, Anatrace), digested using trypsin (V5111, Promega), and acidified. Each condition (4 baits, +/- interferon-α) was analyzed in quadruplicate, leading to a total of 32 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) of which 2.5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) before the peptides were separated on a 150 mm analytical column packed in the needle (75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Prior to packing of the column, the fused silica capillary had been equipped with a laser pulled electrospray tip using a P-2000 Laser Based Micropipette Peller (Sutter Instruments). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 30 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 5 min in 99% solvent B. The column was then re-equilibrated with 98% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 15 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive and data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (400-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6 for a maximum of 80 ms. The 10 most intense ions above a threshold value of 1.7E4 were isolated in the trap with an isolation window of 2 Da for maximum 60 ms to a target AGC value of 5E4. Precursor ions with an unassigned, or with a charge state equal to 1, 5-8, or >8 were excluded. Peptide match was set on “preferred” and isotopes were excluded. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 50 s. Fragmentation were performed at a normalized collision energy of 25%. MS/MS spectra were acquired at fixed first mass 140 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyzer. MS/MS spectrum data type was set to centroid. The polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 was used for internal calibration (lock mass) in addition to the ion at 361.14660 corresponding to a tri-peptide of asparagine that was spike-in the MS solvents as described in Staes et al., 2013 Anal. Chem.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM, peptide and protein level. For virotrap, the 32 recorded spectral data files were searched together against all human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2019 containing 20,413 protein sequences (taxonomy ID 9606), downloaded from www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the GAG, VSV-G, and eDHFR protein sequences. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. Only proteins with at least one peptide were retained leading to the identification of 1,214 proteins in all 32 samples. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum of two ratio counts from at least one unique peptide was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) after loading the proteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Hits identified in the reverse database, only identified by modification site and contaminants were removed and protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Replicate samples were grouped, proteins with less than four valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit to compile a list of 613 quantified proteins. On these quantified proteins, for each ISG15 bait a t-test was performed for a pairwise comparison with the eDHFR control to reveal specific ISG15 interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Virotrap, Interactome, Isg15

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
1. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. 2. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 3. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Fabien Thery

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
1. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. 2. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 3. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium


