### Accession
PXD020385

### Title
Metabolic control of DNA methylation and imprinted gene expression in naive pluripotent cells

### Description
Naive pluripotent epiblast cells of the preimplantation murine embryo and their in vitro counterpart, embryonic stem (ES) cells, have the capacity to give rise to all cells of the adult. Such developmental plasticity is associated with global genome hypomethylation. It is unclear whether genome methylation is dynamically regulated only via differential expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and Ten-eleven Translocation (TET) enzymes, which oxidase methylated DNA. Here we show that LIF/Stat3 signalling induces genomic hypomethylation via metabolic reconfiguration. In Stat3-/- ES cells we observed decreased alpha-ketoglutarate (ɑKG) production from reductive Glutamine metabolism, leading to decreased TET activity, increased Dnmt3a/b expression and to a global increase in DNA methylation. Notably, genome methylation is dynamically controlled by simply modulating αKG availability, mitochondrial activity or Stat3 activation in mitochondria, indicating effective crosstalk between metabolism and the epigenome. Stat3-/- ES cells also show increased methylation at Imprinting Control Regions accompanied with differential expression of >50% of imprinted genes. Single-cell transcriptome analysis of Stat3-/- embryos confirmed dysregulated expression of Dnmt3a/b, Tet2, and imprinted genes in vivo. Our results reveal that the LIF/Stat3 signal bridges the metabolic and epigenetic profiles of naive pluripotent cells, ultimately controlling genome methylation and imprinted gene expression. Several imprinted genes regulate cell proliferation and are often misregulated in tumors. Moreover, a wide range of cancers display Stat3-overactivation, raising the possibility that the molecular module we described here is exploited under pathological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
All the experiments have been performed in a labeling free setting. For each sample, 50g of total cellular protein extract were precipitate over-night at 4°C in acetone, then reduced and alkylated in a solution of 6M Guanidine-HCl, 5mM TCEP, and 55mM chloroacetamide. Peptides were obtained digesting proteins with LysC (WAKO) for 3h at 37°C and with the endopeptidase sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Generated peptides were extracted using an increasing acetonitrile concentration. Collected peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer (Michalski et al., 2011). Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a PicoFrit column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 250mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min, after loading, were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All acquired RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt mouse database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. For label free quantification (LFQ), minimum ratiocount was set as 1. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 4 in at least one group). Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Naive epiblast and embryonic stem cells (ESCs) give rise to all cells of adults. Such developmental plasticity is associated with genome hypomethylation. Here, we show that LIF-Stat3 signaling induces genomic hypomethylation via metabolic reconfiguration. Stat3<sup>-/-</sup> ESCs show decreased &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate production from glutamine, leading to increased Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b expression and DNA methylation. Notably, genome methylation is dynamically controlled through modulation of &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate availability or Stat3 activation in mitochondria. Alpha-ketoglutarate links metabolism to the epigenome by reducing the expression of Otx2 and its targets Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. Genetic inactivation of Otx2 or Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b results in genomic hypomethylation even in the absence of active LIF-Stat3. Stat3<sup>-/-</sup> ESCs show increased methylation at imprinting control regions and altered expression of cognate transcripts. Single-cell analyses of Stat3<sup>-/-</sup> embryos confirmed the dysregulated expression of Otx2, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b as well as imprinted genes. Several cancers display Stat3 overactivation and abnormal DNA methylation; therefore, the molecular module that we describe might be exploited under pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Tet, Dnmts, Es

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, Medical School, University of Padua, Padua 35121, Italy.
Department of Molecular Medicine, Medical School, University of Padua, Padua 35121, Italy

### Submitter
Graziano Martello

### Lab Head
Dr Graziano Martello
Department of Molecular Medicine, Medical School, University of Padua, Padua 35121, Italy


