### Accession
PXD007580

### Title
Identification of human blood plasma proteins in shotgun proteomics

### Description
The study focuses on identification of human blood plasma proteins based on the analysis of MS1 and MS2 data with the use of crude unlabelled synthetic (CUS) peptides for guaranteed recording of their MS2 spectra and subsequent verification of the protein identifications by the SRM method. The search performed and subsequent verification of the protein identifications by the selected reaction monitoring method of had identified 17 proteins in human blood plasma, which corresponded to 17 out of the 19 CUS peptides used.

### Sample Protocol
Of the 19 crude unlabelled synthetic (CUS) peptides prepared of the three same mixtures, and two of the mixtures were used individually to spike mixtures of proteolytic peptides of blood plasma. The obtained samples of CUS peptide mixture (SampleCUS; n=1), proteolytic peptides mixtures of human blood plasma (SamplesPP; n=2) and proteolytic peptides mixtures of human blood plasma with spike-in CUS peptides (SamplesSP; n=2) were analysed using LC-MS/MS shotgun (three technical repeats for each sample). Protein identifications were verified by the SRM method using the stable isotope-labeled standards.

### Data Protocol
The prepared samples were analysed using LC-MS/MS shotgun, Mascot (version 2.4.1) and Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1) software. LS-MS/MS analysis: UltiMate 3000 nano-flow HPLC system (Dionex, USA) connected to Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA); column Zorbax 300SB-C18; HCD fragmentation. Mascot identification: “SwissProt” database (version 2012_11; “fasta” format) for the Homo sapiens species; cutting enzyme – trypsin; peptide tolerance – 20 ppm; MS/MS-tolerance – ±0.1 Да; one possible missed trypsin cleavage sites was allowed; fixed modifications – cysteine carbamidomethyl; variable modifications – methionine oxidation. Progenesis LC-MS was used to align: SamplesCUS runs only; SamplePP runs only; SamplePP runs and SamplesSP runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spike-in peptides, Protein identification, Human plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Orekhovich Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia
Department of Bioinformatics, Laboratory of Parallel Computing and Informational Technology, Orekhovich Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Yuliana Miroshnichenko

### Lab Head
Dr Vladlen Stanislavovich Skvortsov
Department of Bioinformatics, Laboratory of Parallel Computing and Informational Technology, Orekhovich Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia


