### Accession
PXD023663

### Title
Investigation of region specific lipid alterations in symptomatic atherosclerotic plaques using mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
Atherosclerotic plaques are composed by different cell populations that interact one with each other in a complex and heterogeneous environment. Here we report a MALDI mass spectrometry imaging investigation of the lipid profile of specific plaque regions, to discriminate between symptomatic and asymptomatic atheromas. Regions were defined by histologic staining and immunofluorescence of consecutive tissue sections.

### Sample Protocol
Carotid atheromas were collected after scheduled or emergency endarterectomy surgery, rinsed in physiological solution and immediately frozen on dry ice at -80°C.Tissues were sectioned and 12 µm thick sections were thaw mounted on polylysine coated ITO conductive slides.Consecutive sections were sprayed with two different matrices. Norharmane (7 mg/mL, CHCl3:MeOH 70:30)  and 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB, 30 mg/mL in MeOH:H2O 70:30, 0.2% TFA) were sprayed using a SunCollect spraying system (4 bar, 50 mm z axis height). Both matrices were applied in 8 layers (2 layers at 5 µL/min followed by 6 layers at 10 µL/min). Sections were dried under vacuum for 15 minutes before imaging. MALDI MSI was performed using an EP-MALDI source (Spectroglyph, LLC.) equipped with a 349 nm laser, coupled with an Orbitrap QExactive Plus. The laser was operated at 1.65 A and 500 Hz while source pressure was 7.2 Torr and pixel size was 30x30 µm. Spectra were acquired in the range 150-2000 m/z at 70 000 resolving power.

### Data Protocol
The position file was aligned to the raw file using Image Insight (v. 0.1.0.11550). The raw spectra produced by the Orbitrap system during the MSI experiments were first converted into mzXML using RawConverter. The MSI datacube was then extracted from the mzXML files and position files using a modified version of the script ORBIIMAGEmzXML2Tricks (v. 0.10). Datacubes were imported in MATLAB R2019b for processing.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis is characterized by fatty plaques in large and medium sized arteries. Their rupture can causes thrombi, occlusions of downstream vessels and adverse clinical events. The investigation of atherosclerotic plaques is made difficult by their highly heterogeneous nature. Here we propose a spatially resolved approach based on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging to investigate lipids in specific regions of atherosclerotic plaques. The method was applied to a small dataset including symptomatic and asymptomatic human carotid atherosclerosis plaques. Tissue sections of symptomatic and asymptomatic human carotid atherosclerotic plaques were analyzed by MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI) of lipids, and adjacent sections analyzed by histology and immunofluorescence. These multimodal datasets were used to compare the lipid profiles of specific histopathological regions within the plaque. The lipid profiles of macrophage-rich regions and intimal vascular smooth muscle cells exhibited the largest changes associated with plaque outcome. Macrophage-rich regions from symptomatic lesions were found to be enriched in sphingomyelins, and intimal vascular smooth muscle cells of symptomatic plaques were enriched in cholesterol and cholesteryl esters. The proposed method enabled the MALDI MSI analysis of specific regions of the atherosclerotic lesion, confirming MALDI MSI as a promising tool for the investigation of histologically heterogeneous atherosclerotic plaques.

### Keywords
Vsmcs, Maldi msi, Atherosclerosis, Plaque vulnerability, Lipids, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56017 San Giuliano Terme (PI), Italy

### Submitter
Francesco Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Liam Andrew McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56017 San Giuliano Terme (PI), Italy


