### Accession
PXD012799

### Title
An Archaeal Pilus Survives the Most Extreme Conditions Through Extensive Glycosylation

### Description
Pili on the surface of Sulfolobus islandicus are used for a host of functions, and serve as receptors for certain archaeal viruses. We find that these pili, when removed from cells, resist digestion by trypsin or pepsin, and survive boiling in SDS or 5M guanidinium-HCl. We have used cryo-EM to determine the structure of these filaments at 4.1 Å resolution. An atomic model was built by combining the map with bioinformatics without prior knowledge of the pilin sequence, an approach that should prove useful when looking at assemblies where all of the components may not be known. The atomic structure of the archaeal pilus was unusual due to almost a third of the residues being either threonine or serine and many hydrophobic surface residues. While the map showed specific glycosylation of only three residues, mass per unit length measurements suggested extensive glycosylation. We show that this extensive glycosylation renders these filaments soluble and provides the remarkable structural stability. We also show that the overall fold of the archaeal pilin is quite similar to archaeal flagellin, establishing common evolutionary origins.

### Sample Protocol
The gel pieces from the band were transferred to a siliconized tube and washed in 200 µL 50% methanol.  The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 30 µL of 10 mM dithiolthreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and reduced at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The DTT solution was removed and the sample alkylated in 30 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The reagent was removed and the gel pieces dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile.  The acetonitrile was removed and the gel pieces rehydrated in 100 µL 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate.  The pieces were dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile, the acetonitrile removed and the pieces completely dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The gel pieces were rehydrated in 20 ng/µL chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 30 min.  Any excess enzyme solution was removed and 20 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added.  The sample was digested overnight at 37 oC and the peptides formed extracted from the polyacrylamide in a 100 µL aliquot of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid.  This extract was evaporated to 15 µL for MS analysis. The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer system with an Easy Spray ion source connected to a Thermo 75 µm x 15 cm C18 Easy Spray column.  3 µL of the extract was injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min over 1.0 hours.  The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9 kV.  The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (10 HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search UniProt Sulfolobus islandicus database (16206 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme chymotrypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 60.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Pili on the surface of Sulfolobus islandicus are used for many functions, and serve as receptors for certain archaeal viruses. The cells grow optimally at pH&#x2009;3 and ~80&#x2009;&#xb0;C, exposing these extracellular appendages to a very harsh environment. The pili, when removed from cells, resist digestion by trypsin or pepsin, and survive boiling in sodium dodecyl sulfate or 5&#x2009;M guanidine hydrochloride. We used electron cryo-microscopy to determine the structure of these filaments at 4.1&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. An atomic model was built by combining the electron density map with bioinformatics without previous knowledge of the pilin sequence-an approach that should prove useful for assemblies where all of the components are not known. The atomic structure of the pilus was unusual, with almost one-third of the residues being either threonine or serine, and with many hydrophobic surface residues. While the map showed extra density consistent with glycosylation for only three residues, mass measurements suggested extensive glycosylation. We propose that this extensive glycosylation renders these filaments soluble and provides the remarkable structural stability. We also show that the overall fold of the archaeal pilin is remarkably similar to that of archaeal flagellin, establishing common evolutionary origins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Pili, Cryo-em, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA
University of Virginia

### Submitter
JJ Park

### Lab Head
Dr Edward H. Egelman
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA


