### Accession
PXD033292

### Title
Diazirine photo-immobilisation for target profiling of natural products and co-factors: pulldown data

### Description
Finding the targets of natural products is of key importance in both chemical biology and drug discovery, and deconvolution of cofactor interactomes contribute to the functional annotation of the proteome. Identifying the proteins that underlie natural compound activity in phenotypic screens help to validate the respective targets and, potentially, expand the druggable proteome. Here, we present a generally applicable protocol for the photoactivated immobilisation of unmodified and microgram quantities of natural products on diazirine-decorated beads and their use for systematic affinity-based proteome profiling. We show that amongst 31 molecules of very diverse reported activity and biosynthetic origin, 25 could indeed be immobilised. Dose-response competition binding experiments using lysates of human or bacterial cells followed by quantitative mass spectrometry recapitulated <100 µM targets of 9 molecules. Among them, immobilisation of coenzyme A produced a tool to interrogate proteins containing a HotDog domain. Surprisingly, immobilisation of the cofactor flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) led to the identification of nanomolar interactions with dozens of RNA-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown assays: Proteins of native cancer cell lysates were pulled down by affinity matrices based on natural products and cofactors. The pulled down proteins were denaturated by urea, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with chloroacetamide and digested with Trypsin, before analysis via label free DDA LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Fusion Lumos Tribrid.  LC-MS/MS measurement: Three MS methods were used in course of this study. 1) Peptides were delivered to a trap column within 10 min in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water at 5 μL/min. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column over a 50 min gradient ranging 4-32 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in HPLC grade water) at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode, MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge ratio of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) target value to 5e5. Top 12 most abundant peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window of 1.7, maximum injection time of 22ms, and AGC value of 1e5), fragmented by HCD using 28% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. 2) Raw data was recorded in data dependent mode, MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge ratio of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap. Maximum injection time was set to 50ms and automatic gain control (AGC) target value to 4e5. A fixed cycle time of 2s was selected and peptide precursors were isolated (isolation width of 1.2Th, maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC value of 2e5), fragmented by HCD using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. 3) Pulldowns were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an online Dionex Ultimate3000 equipped with micro flow Vanquish pump UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were delivered to an analytical column within 5 min at 50 μL/min and separated over a 15 min gradient ranging 3-28 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in HPLC grade water) at 50 μL/min. Mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode, MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge ratio of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) target value to 4e5. A fixed cycle time of 0.6s was selected and peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window of 0.4, maximum injection time of 10ms, and AGC value of 1e5), fragmented by HCD using 32% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analysed in the IonTrap. The dynamic exclusion was set to 12s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed with MaxQuantv.1.5.3.30. Acquired raw MS data was searched against all canonical protein sequences annotated in Swissprot reference databases (Human and Escherichia Coli respectively) using integrated search engine Andromeda. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. IBAQ, Label free quantification LFQ and match between runs were enabled. All searches were performed with 1% PSM and protein FDR. Other search parameters were set as default.  For plotting of dose response competition curves (four-parameter log-logistic regression) an in-house built R pipeline was utilized. Relative binding for every compound concentration and correction (correction factor) for protein depletion was calculated as a ratio of LFQ intensity for every compound concertation to the DMSO control. The correction factor is calculated as a ratio of LFQ intensities from the second consecutive pulldown with the flowthrough of the DMSO vehicle pulldown to the LFQ intensities in the DMSO vehicle control.  EC50 values were derived from dose response curves. Apparent binding constants Kdapps were calculated by multiplying EC50 values with a correction factor (Kdapp = EC50 *correction factor). Targets or interactors were annotated manually if the resulting binding curve showed typical sigmoidal shape. Unique peptides and acquired MSMS spectral counts for each condition that showed a dose dependent decrease, along with binding curves, with increasing concentration of the competitor were used as additional level of evidence for binder annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulldowns, Natural products targets, Natural products profiling, Photo-immobilisation

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany

### Submitter
Polina Prokofeva

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany


