### Accession
PXD025459

### Title
Automated Phosphopeptide Enrichment for Gram Positive Bacteria

### Description
Protein phosphorylation in prokaryotes has gained more attention in recent years as several studies linked it to regulatory and signalling functions indicating an importance similar to protein phosphorylation in eukaryotes. Studies on bacterial phosphorylation have so far been conducted using manual or HPLC-supported phosphopeptide enrichment while automation of phosphopeptide enrichment has been established in eukaryotes, allowing for high throughput sampling. To facilitate the prospect of studying bacterial phosphorylation on a systems‐level we here establish an automated Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphopeptide enrichment workflow on the Agilent AssayMap platform. We present optimized buffer conditions for TiO2 and Fe(III)NTA-IMAC based enrichment, and the most advantageous, species specific starting amount for S. pyogenes, L. monocytogenes, and B. subtilis. Our data represents, to the best of our knowledge, the largest phosphoproteome identified by a single study for each of these bacteria. For higher sample amounts (> 250µg) we observed a superior performance of Fe(III)NTA cartridges, while more peptides were identified from smaller sample amounts using TiO2-based enrichment. Both cartridges largely enrich the same set of phosphopeptides suggesting no improvement of peptide yield from complementary use of both cartridges. Distribution of S/T/Y phosphorylation varied between bacterial strains with threonine being the main site of phosphorylation in S. pyogenes, while in B.subtilis and L. monocytogenes showed the highest percentage of phosphorylation at serine.

### Sample Protocol
For bacterial cell lysis, one volume of bacteria pellet was resuspended in five volumes lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 4% SDS, 1% NP-40, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA), 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1x Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fischer Scientific), 0.05 mg/mL Lysozyme). Protein concentration was determined via micro BCA protein assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The sample was then diluted to decrease the Guanidinhydrochloride concentration to 1.5 M using 50 mM HEPES pH 8 containing Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Protein digestion was performed at 37°C for 14 hours using a mix of trypsin and Lys-C at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 and 1:100 (w/w), respectively. Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak (3 cc) columns (Waters). Eluted peptides were dried down and resuspended in the phosphopeptide loading buffers as indicated. All phosphopeptide enrichment experiments were performed on an AssayMAP liquid handling platform (Agilent) using the “Phospho Enrichment v2.0” protocol using two types of cartridges available for the AssayMAP, TiO2 and Fe(III)-IMAC. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (both Thermo Scientific) that were was equipped with a FAIMS Pro device and coupled to 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on a pepmap trap cartridge (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, C18, Thermo) with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm analytical column (Picofrit, 360 µm O.D., 75 µm I.D., 10 µm tip opening, non-coated, New Objective) that was packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm (Agilent). Solvent A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water. Elution was carried out at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min within 90 minutes. A survey MS1 scan was acquired from 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The normalized AGC target was set to 300%. Monoisotopic precursor selection was activated. Precursor ions with charge states 2-6 were isolated within a 1.4 Da window, and subjected to HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy 28%). The cycle time was set to 1s for each of the two FAIMS voltages of -45V and -65V.

### Data Protocol
Protein databases containing canonical sequences for B. subtilis, S. pyogenes, and L. monocytogenes proteins, respectively, were retrieved from Uniprot. A database containing common contaminants was obtained from Maxquant. Raw files were converted into MzXML files and then analyzed by Maxquant 1.6.14.0 using default settings. Trypsin/P was set as enzyme with a maximum of two cleavages. Oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were used as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation (C) was used as fixed modification. Default parameters were used unless specified otherwise. The resulting txt files were further processed in Perseus 1.6.2.3 and R. Proteins flagged as “Reversed” and “Potential contaminant” were removed from the data set. Phosphosites with a localization probability of at least 0.75 were used for further analysis. For buffer comparison peptides with one valid value per buffer-condition were considered. For comparison of the different loading concentrations peptides with at least two valid values in at least one concentration were considered. For all further analysis peptides with at least two valid values per resin were considered. Data visualization was done using Graphpad Prism software and R with the ggplot2 package. Venn diagrams were created using the BioVenn web application. Pathway analysis was done using the functional annotation clustering tool from the DAVID bioinformatics resources web application. For analysis of potential motifs and conserved amino acids in proximity of the phosphorylation side we utilized pLogo web application using FASTA files containing NCBI reference sequences as background. Proteins found to be phosphorylated in all three bacteria were searched using BlastP against the “Model Organisms (landmark)” database. For human, yeast, and E.coli the highest scoring homologue was used for sequence alignment by Clustal Omega.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bravo assaymap; fe(iii)-imac; tio2; automation; phosphopeptide enrichment; phosphoproteomics; quantification; listeria monocytogenes; bacillus subtilis; streptococcus pyogenes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Chariteplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Karl Frese
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Chariteplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany


