### Accession
PXD037508

### Title
Differential gene expression of isotopically marked lysine producer and consumer subpopulations in yeast colonies

### Description
Genetically identical cells are known to differ in many physiological parameters such as growth rate and drug tolerance, but the source of such heterogeneity is often insufficiently understood. Exchange interactions between metabolite producing and consuming cells are believed to be one possible cause, but detecting metabolically divergent subpopulations remains technically challenging. We developed a proteomics-based technology, termed differential isotope labelling by amino acids (DILAC), which monitors amino acid incorporation into peptides with multiple occurrences of the same amino acid. DILAC is used to differentiate producer and consumer cells of a particular amino acid within an isogenic cell population. We applied DILAC to young, morphologically undifferentiated yeast colonies and reveal that they contain sub-populations of lysine producers and consumers which emerge due to nutrient gradients. DILAC can deconvolute the proteome of subpopulations from bulk measurements which indicated an in situ cross feeding situation where fast growing cells ferment and provide the slower growing, respiring cells with ethanol as substrate. Finally, by combining DILAC with FACS, we show that the metabolic states that differ between isogenic cells, confer resistance to the antifungal drug amphotericin B. Overall, this novel and broadly applicable methodological approach captures previously unnoticed metabolic heterogeneity, providing experimental evidence for the role of metabolic specialisation and cross-feeding interactions as a source of phenotypic heterogeneity in isogenic cell populations.  This submission contains 8 raw files as well as the following additional files relating to Dataset 3: DIA-NN_pipeline_PRIDE.pipeline - The DIA-NN pipeline file containing all the settings to run the analysis. In the first step, a modified spectral library with the required fixed and variable isotope labels was predicted. In the second step, the data files are analysed; 20210225_yeastspeclib.tsv.speclib - The original spectral library;  sSwath_yeastspeclib_C13K.predicted.speclib - The isotope-modified library; sSwath_yeastspeclib_C13K.predicted.ExcludeFromAssay.speclib.tsv - The isotope-modified library with unsuitable fragments excluded using the ExcludeFromAssay column; modify_library.ipynb - Jupyter notebook used to add ExcludeFromAssay column to library to filter suitable fragments for quantification; 20220428_Ex8_rerun_ExcludeFromAssay.tsv - The main DIA-NN report; hit_calling_PRIDE.ipynb - Jupyter notebook containing code for hit calling.  This submission contains an additional 7 raw files as well as the following additional files relating to the spike-in experiment shown in Extended View 4 E-G.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae colonies were grown for 2 days on synthetic minimal media containing 1% uniformly labelled 13C glucose and 200μM unlabelled lysine. At this concentration, lysine is limiting and two subpopulations of lysine producer and consumer cells emerge due to the lysine concentration gradient within the colony. The proteomes of these two subpopulations are hence isotopically marked, with that of lysine consumers containing unlabelled lysine and that of the producers containing labelled lysine. Proteomic samples were prepared from whole colonies for the proteome wide quantification of abundance ratios of labelled/unlabelled peptides, revealing differential gene expression in the two subpopulations.  Samples were prepared by mechanical lysis in denaturing urea buffer, followed by reduction-alkylation of cysteine residues (DTT and IAA), tryptic digestion, solid phase extraction and buffer exchange. Samples were analysed on a nano-flow chromatography setup (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled to a TIMS quadrupole time-of-flight instrument (timsTOF Pro2, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). We used a 25cm Aurora Series analytical column with emitter column (CSI, 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) maintained at 50°C. The mobile phases water/0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The total runtime of the method was 2 hours.  The spike-in experiment was performed on the same mass spectrometer, using Evosep chromatography (EVOTIP PERFORMANCE, set up according to the manufacturer's protocol), with the EVOSEP 15 SPD LC method (88 min gradient), the EV1137 PERFORMANCE column – 15 cm X 150 µm, 1.5 µm at 40C, coupled to the 10 µm Zero Dead Volume Captive Spray Emitter (Bruker #1865691).

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed in DIA-NN 1.8. Starting with spectral library experimentally obtained without isotopic labels, a modified spectral library was predicted by applying fixed modifications of the type ‘label’ to all amino acids, except lysine where the same was applied as a variable modification. Additionally, the number of allowed missed cleavages was set to 0 and the number of variable modifications was set to 1. the data files produced by the Bruker instrument control software were directly loaded into DIA-NN and analysed with the previously generated library. MS1 and MS2 mass accuracies were set to 10, ‘Use isotopologues’ was disabled, ‘Remove likely interferences’ was enabled and ‘Robust LC (high precision)’ was set for Quantification Strategy. Default options were used otherwise.

### Publication Abstract
Genetically identical cells are known to differ in many physiological parameters such as growth rate and drug tolerance. Metabolic specialization is believed to be a cause of such phenotypic heterogeneity, but detection of metabolically divergent subpopulations remains technically challenging. We developed a proteomics-based technology, termed differential isotope labelling by amino acids (DILAC), that can detect producer and consumer subpopulations of a particular amino acid within an isogenic cell population by monitoring peptides with multiple occurrences of the amino acid. We reveal that young, morphologically undifferentiated yeast colonies contain subpopulations of lysine producers and consumers that emerge due to nutrient gradients. Deconvoluting their proteomes using DILAC, we find evidence for in situ cross-feeding where rapidly growing cells ferment and provide the more slowly growing, respiring cells with ethanol. Finally, by combining DILAC with fluorescence-activated cell sorting, we show that the metabolic subpopulations diverge phenotypically, as exemplified by a different tolerance to the antifungal drug amphotericin&#x2009;B. Overall, DILAC captures previously unnoticed metabolic heterogeneity and provides experimental evidence for the role of metabolic specialization and cross-feeding interactions as a source of phenotypic heterogeneity in isogenic cell populations.

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Yeast, Dilac, Colony

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Stephan Kamrad

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Department of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany


