### Accession
PXD007752

### Title
Identification of the covalent binding site of Ibrutinib and 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol to ZAK

### Description
The goal of this experiment was to identify the reaction site of Ibrutinib and 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol to ZAK by determination of mass shifts according to a covalent modification by the inhibitors using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Incubation of recombinant ZAK with a molar excess of Ibrutinib or 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol. Digestion of ZAK with GluC and trypsin followed by mass spectrometry analysis searching for a covalent modification of cysteines, serines, or tyrosines by the mass of Ibrutinib or 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis using in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics profiling of kinase inhibitors with kinobeads enables the assessment of inhibitor potency and selectivity for endogenously expressed protein kinases in cell lines and tissues. Using a small panel of targeted covalent inhibitors, we demonstrate the importance of measuring covalent target binding in live cells. We present a differential kinobeads profiling strategy for covalent kinase inhibitors where a compound is added either to live cells or to a cell extract that enables the comprehensive assessment of inhibitor selectivity for covalent and noncovalent targets. We found that Acalabrutinib, CC-292, and Ibrutinib potently and covalently bind TEC family kinases, but only Ibrutinib also potently binds to BLK. ZAK was identified as a submicromolar affinity Ibrutinib off-target due to covalent modification of Cys22. In contrast to Ibrutinib, 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol reacted with Cys150 next to the DFG loop, demonstrating an alternative route to covalent inactivation of this kinase, e.g., to inhibit canonical TGF-&#x3b2; dependent processes.

### Keywords
Cys22, Covalent modification, Cys150, Recombinant zak, Ibrutinib, 5z-7-oxozeaenol

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


