### Accession
PXD036859

### Title
Production and properties of adhesin-free gingipain proteinase RgpA

### Description
To obtain RgpA free of adhesin requires a means of separating the RgpA catalytic domain from the adhesins domains or adaptation of a method to prevent RgpA complex association.In this study, recombinant suicide plasmids were designed for use in homologous recombination with the rgpA locus so as to produce modified RgpA that would release from the P. gingivalis surface, thus enabling RgpA purification from the culture fluid.

### Sample Protocol
A 1.5 mL tube was filled with 25 µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer and 20 µg of protein. Then, 25 µL of the denaturant trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 1 µL of 500 mM TCEP were added and mixed. The protein was denatured by heating at 600C for 45 minutes, after which 20 mL of a stock solution containing 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and mixed. The solution was stored in the dark at room temperature for one hour (foil covered rack). The excess IAM was neutralised by adding 1 µL of 500 mM TCEP, followed by the addition of 300 µL of water to dilute the denaturant and 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB to elevate the pH 1 µg of trypsin was added to 10 µL of 25 mM TEAB buffer before the mixture was incubated at 37 0C for 18–24 hours. After an overnight incubation, 1% formic acid or trifluoroacetic acid was added to halt the activity of trypsin. Finally, 40 µL of trypsin-digested protein samples were put into an LCMS vial for analysis using LCMS.

### Data Protocol
The MS experiments were performed for rRgpAH using a nanoelectrospray ionization source at positive mode and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The spray voltages, capillary temperature, and S-lens RF level were set to 1.9 kV, 275 °C, and 30%. The mass spectrometry data was acquired with a 3 second cycle time for one full scan MS spectra and as many data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS spectra as possible. Full scan MS spectra had an m/z range of 400-1500, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, an auto gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, a maximum ion trapping time of 50 milliseconds. The data dependent HCD-MS/MS of peptide ions (charge states from 2 to 5) was performed using an m/z isolation window of 1.6, an AGC target value of 5e4, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%, a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with a maximum ion trapping time of 54 milliseconds. All mass spectrometry data were acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was used for 30 s.88 The MS experiments were performed for rRgpA-PP and rRgpB-PP using Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The temperature of the ion transfer tube, the spray voltage, and S-lens of the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer were set at 250 °C, 1.8 kV, and 50%, respectively. The full MS scans were acquired at m/z 375-1400, resolving power of 70,000, an AGC target value of 3.0 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 15 most abundant ions in the MS spectra were subjected to HCD at a resolving power of 35,000, AGC target value of 1 × 105, the maximum injection time of 120 ms, isolation window of m/z 1.2 and NCE of30%. Dynamic exclusion of 30 s was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Honorary Research Fellow
Laureate Professor Eric C Reynolds  Melbourne Dental School The University of Melbourne 720 Swanston Street, VIC 3010 Tel. +61 3 9341 1547 Fax. + 61 3 9341 1596  Email: e.reynolds@unimelb.edu.au

### Submitter
Abu Sayeed Mohammad Mahmud

### Lab Head
Dr Eric C Reynolds
Laureate Professor Eric C Reynolds  Melbourne Dental School The University of Melbourne 720 Swanston Street, VIC 3010 Tel. +61 3 9341 1547 Fax. + 61 3 9341 1596  Email: e.reynolds@unimelb.edu.au


