### Accession
PXD035541

### Title
Early Secretory Pathway glycoprotein analysis dataset

### Description
Protein misfolding is one of the causes for several diseases and as a consequence, analysis of the misfolded protein fraction is one of the major aims in translational research. Here, we report a workflow and its associated dataset which focuses on the analysis of the Early Secretory Pathway (ESP) glycoproteins (gESP) from melanoma cells. Our results provide an overview on the ESP glycoprotein members by analysis of both the peptide and glycan chains. Moreover we provide the quantitative analysis of cells treated with kifunensine (an immunomodulatory agent), which blocks class I mannosidases processing of the misfolded or unfolded glycoproteins sent to degradation. Our dataset provides an overview of the major cargo of ESP glycoproteins, underpinning novel candidates for glycoprotein-related Endoplasmic Reticulum Associated Degradation (ERAD) which could be involved in melanoma antigen presentation.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins from A375 melanoma cells stably expressing the soluble version of tyrosinase, were reduced, alkylated and subject to trypsin or GluC digestion. The glycopeptides were further enriched by Concanavalin A lectin affinity followed by Endoglycosidase H (Endo H) digestion. The resulting glycopeptides were further analyzed by reverse-phase C18 nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled online with high resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). An Easy-nanoLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for sample analysis. For peptide backbone identification the identified ions were subject to fragmentation in the HCD collision cell and the resulting ions were further detected in the orbital trap. For glycan analysis, proteins extracted from the same cells were subject to overnight Endo H digestion and the glycans were recovered following centrifugation in a 10K microcon device. These were analyzed by direct injection using the nanoES direct injection kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Glycan fragmentation was performed similarly, using the HCD collision cell and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched against the human UniProtKB proteome downloaded from the UniProt web-site using the Andromeda algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant environment with the following settings: protease Trypsin or GluC with maximum two or four missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.01 Da) residues as a fixed modification, Methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da), protein N-terminus acetylation (+42.01 Da), HexNAc (+203.08 Da) and dHexHexNAc (+349.14 Da) were used as variable modifications. The maximum allowed precursor mass accuracy was set 20 ppm for the first search and 7 ppm for the main search. For FTMS acquired data the fragment mass accuracy tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The FDR was calculated using the built-in MaxQuant procedure.

### Publication Abstract
N-glycosylation is a key process for various biological functions like protein folding, maturation and sorting for the conventional secretory compartment, cell-cell communication and immune response. This is usually accomplished by a complex system of mannosidases in which those from class I have an outstanding role, commonly involved in the early protein sorting associated to the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) in the N-glycan dependent quality control (ERQC) and ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Although these are vital processes in maintaining cellular homeostasis, large-scale analysis studies for this pool of molecules, further denoted as proteins from the early secretory pathway (ESP), were limited addressed. Here, using a custom workflow employing a combination of glycomics and deglycoproteomics analyses, using lectin affinity and selective Endoglycosidase H (Endo H) digestion, we scrutinize the steady-state oligomannosidic glycoprotein load and delineate ESP fraction in melanoma cells. All of these were assessed by applying our workflow for glycosite relative quantification of both the peptide chain and carbohydrate structure in cells with inhibited activity of class I mannosidases after kifunensine treatment. We found that most of the ESP are transient clients involved in cell communication <i>via</i> extracellular matrix, particularly integrin-mediated communication which adopt Man9 N-glycans in kifunensine-treated cells. Moreover, our results reveal that core-fucosylation is decreased subsequent inhibition of class I mannosidases and this could be explained by a general lower protein level of FUT8, the enzyme responsible for fucosylation. By comparing our data with results obtained following downregulation of a key mannosidase in misfolded protein degradation, we mapped both novel and previously suggested endogenous substrate candidates like PCDH2, HLA-B, LAMB2 or members of the integrin family of proteins such as ITGA1 and ITGA4, thus validating the findings obtained using our workflow regarding accumulation and characterization of ESP transitory members following mannosidase class I inhibition. This workflow and the associated dataset not only allowed us to investigate the oligomannosidic glycoprotein fraction but also to delineate differences mediated at glycosite-level upon kifunensine treatment and outline the potential associated cellular responses.

### Keywords
Degradation, Glycoproteomics, Liquid-chromatography, Melanoma, Misfolded, Mass spectrometry, Mannosidase, Kifunensine

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)

### Submitter
Cristian Munteanu

### Lab Head
Dr Ștefana M. Petrescu
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)


