### Accession
PXD035836

### Title
Proteome of hemodialysis filter membranes

### Description
Used hemodialysis filter membranes (HD filters) are discarded as waste products but represent a reservoir of valuable biological information. Numerous serum proteins are known to bind to HD filters, but whether this process selectively affects individual protein classes has not been adequately elucidated. Modern proteomics analyses offer the possibility to identify and quantify this therapy-specific subproteome and, in combination with bioinformatics methods, allow the analysis of the associated metabolic pathways. The description of the proteins at a HD filter membrane could provide insights into important modulators of the immune system or pathophysiological processes at the patient level. The aim of this project is to characterize the extracorporeal proteome of HD patients. HD filters were continuously rinsed with physiological saline immediately after the end of the HD session to remove most of the remaining blood from the capillaries. Then, a chaotropic buffer was circulated in the system for 1h by peristaltic pump to elute adsorbed proteins. Enzymatically digested proteins were desalted and purified, and separated in technical duplicate by liquid chromatography and analyzed by Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and identified bioinformatically.

### Sample Protocol
25 µg of each sample were digested using single-pot, solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). Briefly, the reduced (10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C) and alkylated (55 mM IAA, 30 min at RT) proteins were bound to SP3 beads (10:1 beads:protein ratio, GE Healthcare), washed with 80% ethanol and acetonitrile, and subjected to on-bead digestion with trypsin/LysC Mix (1:25 protease:protein ratio, Promega) overnight at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 (Sigma). After elution peptides were desalted using either Pierce Peptide Desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or with Microspin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manual. The elutions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano coupled directly to an Exploris 480 with FAIMSpro (all Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Samples were injected onto a reversed-phase C18 column (50 cm x 75 µm i.d., packed in-house) and eluted with a gradient of 4% to 38% mobile phase B over 94 min by applying a flow rate of 230 nl/min. MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 375–1650 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z = 200). MS/MS scans were performed choosing a resolution of 15,000; normalized collision energy of 30%; isolation width of 1.4 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 90s. Two different FAIMS voltages were applied (-40V and -60V) with a cycle time of 1.5 sec per voltage. FAIMS was operated in standard resolution mode with a static carrier gas flow of 4.1 L/min.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed and analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (v2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher). SequestHT was used as search engine and following parameters were chosen: database: Homo sapiens (SwissProt, downloaded on 2019-09-24); enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavage sites: 2; static modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus), met-loss (M), met-loss + acetyl (M); precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. Precursor ion quantification was done using the Minora Feature Detector node. Retention time alignment was performed with a maximum RT shift of 10 min and a mass tolerance of 10ppm. For feature linking the RT and mass tolerance were set to 0 with a minimum S/N threshold of 5. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, which was based on intensity. Normalization was done on total peptide amount and scaling mode on all average. Only peptides and proteins with FDR <0.01 are reported and single peptide IDs were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Used hemodialysis membranes (HD-M) are a valuable reservoir of biological information. Proteins bind to HD-M, but whether this process depends on the type of membrane or patient factors or selectively affects specific protein classes has not been adequately elucidated. State-of-the-art proteomics techniques are capable of identifying and quantifying this therapy-specific subproteome to enable the analysis of disease- or membrane-induced pathophysiologies. We demonstrate the feasibility of the deep proteomic characterization of the extracorporeal proteome adsorbed to HD-M. A shotgun proteomics approach using nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry identified 1648 unique proteins eluted by a chaotropic buffer from the HD-M of eight patients. In total, 995 proteins were present in all eluates; a more stringent approach showed that a core proteome of 310 proteins could be identified independently in all samples. Stability of the dialyzer proteome was demonstrated by a &gt;90% re-identification rate on longitudinal samples of a single patient. The core proteome showed an overrepresentation of pathways of hemostasis and the immune system, and showed differences in membrane materials (polysulfone vs. helixone). This study demonstrates that optimized conditions combined with high-performance proteomics enable the in-depth exploration of the subproteome bound to HD-M, yielding a stable core proteome that can be exploited to study patient-specific factors and improve hemodialysis therapy.

### Keywords
Hemodialysis

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


