### Accession
PXD027754

### Title
Metabolic reprogramming during hyperammonemia targets mitochondrial function and post-mitotic senescence

### Description
Ammonia is a cytotoxic metabolite with pleotropic molecular and metabolic effects in non-hepatic tissue/cells targeting mitochondrial oxidative function that may contribute to post-mitotic senescence. Global molecular responses were determined by analysis of unbiased data followed by experimental validation of critical functional consequences in hyperammonemic differentiated myotubes and skeletal muscle from the portacaval anastomosis (PCA) rat. Integrating whole cell transcriptome with whole cell and mitochondrial proteome from hyperammonemic myotubes identified oxidative dysfunction and senescence pathways as being the most enriched with differentially expressed genes/proteins. Hyperammonemia and ammonia-lowering result in distinct clusters of molecular responses. Functional and metabolic studies in hyperammonemic myotubes showed that defects in electron transport chain (ETC) complexes I and III, loss of supercomplex assembly, decreased ATP synthesis, increased free radical generation with oxidative modification of proteins/lipids and increased expression of senescence associated molecular phenotype (SAMP) that were partially reversed by ammonia lowering. Studies in muscle from PCA rats established physiological relevance of our cellular studies. Dysregulated ammonia metabolism causes mitochondrial dysfunction by transcriptional and translational perturbations in multiple pathways with a distinct skeletal muscle SAMP.

### Sample Protocol
For the cell and the mitochondria samples, each sample were suspended in 150 μL 8 M urea 0.1 M TrisHCl buffer pH8 with freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail(ROCHE, Basel, Switzerland). The samples were homogenized using a sonication cell disruptor for 15s x 3 with 15 second between runs. The samples were centrifuged at 17kg for 15 minutes and the supernatants were transferred to new centrifuge tubes. A 2 μL supernatant was used for BCA assay analysis. Based on the BCA result, 30 µg from each sample was used for in-solution trypsin digestion.  The rat muscle tissues were thawed on ice. Each tissue sample was transferred to a lysing Matrix D (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) in 200 µl 8M urea 0.1M Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0 with freshly added complete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (ROCHE, Basel, Switzerland). The samples were homogenized on a FastPrep 24 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) using a 30s x 4 program at 6 m/s speed with 5min between runs. Homogenized samples were centrifuged at 17kg for 15 minutes at room temperature. Supernatants of the samples were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, and a small aliquot from each supernatant were diluted 10x with water and used for a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Thirty µg of protein from each sample based on BCA result was taken for in-solution trypsin digestion. The samples were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide. Half μg of sequencing grade trypsin was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature overnight. The digested samples were desalted using C18 cartridges. Desalted samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 1% acetic acid and ready for LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the search engine Sequest-HT which is integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software. For the cell and mitochondria samples, the protein sequence database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 16,996 entries (downloaded on July 9th, 2019) with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences). For the rat muscle samples, the protein sequence database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot rat protein database containing 8,131 entries (downloaded on June 24th, 2021) with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences).  The protease was set to full activity trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Keratins were known contaminants and were excluded from identified proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identification and calculated using the number of identified peptides/proteins from decoy database divided by the total number of identified peptides/proteins. Two peptides were required for positive protein identification to decrease the chance of false discovery by a random match.  A precursor intensity based label free quantification was achieved by the Minora Feature Detector node of Proteome Discoverer using peptide precursors in MS full scans and normalized by total amount of peptide in each sample. The peptides used in this quantitation correspond to unique + razor. At least two quantifiable peptides are required for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ammonia, Hyperammonemia, Portacaval anastomosis, Cytotoxic, Pca

### Affiliations
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasan Dasarathy
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio


