### Accession
PXD021791

### Title
Tailored cofactor traps for the in situ detection of hemithioacetal-forming pyridoxal kinases

### Description
Pyridoxal kinases (PLK) are crucial enzymes for the biosynthesis of pyridoxal phosphate, an important cofactor in a plethora of enzymatic reactions. The evolution of these enzymes resulted in different catalytic designs. In addition to the active site, the relevance of a cysteine, embedded within a distant flexible lid region, was recently shown. This cysteine forms a hemithioacetal with the pyridoxal aldehyde and is essential for catalysis. Despite the prevalence of these enzymes in various organisms, no tools were available to assess the general relevance of the lid residue. We here introduce pyridoxal probes equipped with an electrophilic trapping group in place of the aldehyde which readily reacts with reactive lid cysteines as a mimic of hemithioacetal formation. This irreversible capture not only facilitates the readout of cysteine reactivity but also the enrichment of PLKs from living cells via alkyne handles placed at two different positions within the pyridoxal structure. Interestingly, depending on the position, the probes either displayed a preference for Gram-positive or Gram-negative PLK enrichment in living cells. By applying the cofactor traps, we were able to validate not only previously investigated Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus faecalis PLKs but also Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PLKs unravelling a crucial role of the lid cysteine for catalysis. Overall, our tailored probes facilitated a reliable readout of lid cysteine containing PLKs and thereby qualify them as chemical tools for further mining diverse proteomes for this important enzyme class.

### Sample Protocol
Labeling and Lysis. Day cultures of S. aureus, E. faecalis and E. coli were used to inoculate fresh media and bacteria were grown to stationary phase (S. aureus: OD600 of 8.3, 12 h; E. faecalis: OD600 of 2.0, 6 h; E. coli: OD600 of 3.1, 6 h). The cells were harvested (6,000 rpm, 10 min, 4 °C) and washed with PBS (15 mL; 6,000 rpm, 10 min, 4 °C). Pellets were resuspended in PBS to obtain a calculated OD600 of 40. To 1 mL of OD600 of 40 culture, 10 µL probe (final concentrations indicated in corresponding figures, 1% DMSO) or DMSO was added. The cultures were incubated (24 h, 25 °C, 800 rpm) and harvested by centrifugation (6,000 rpm, 10 min, 4 °C). The pellets were washed with PBS (2×1 mL) and resuspended in 1 mL 0.4% SDS in PBS for lysis. E. coli samples were lysed by sonication (3×20 s, 80%, Sonopuls HD 2070 ultrasonic rod, Bandelin electronic GmbH) with cooling breaks on ice. E. faecalis and S. aureus samples were transferred into 2 mL lysis tubes for bead disruption (Precellys 24 Homogenizer, Bertin Technologies) using the following cycle three times: 30 sec at 6,500 rpm, with 20 sec cooling break using liquid nitrogen air flow. The lysed cells were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and lysate was cleared (13,000 rpm, 30 min, r. t.). Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology) and sample concentrations were adjusted to equal protein amounts (1-2 mg/mL) in a total volume of 500 µL. Click reaction and protein precipitation. The samples were subjected to click-reaction for 1 h at r. t. using 3 µL biotin-azide (10 mM in DMSO), 10 µL TCEP (52 mM in ddH2O), 30 µL 1 × ligand (TBTA) and 10 µL CuSO4 per 500 µL sample. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (4 volumes) at -20 °C overnight, centrifuged (16,900 × g, 4 °C, 15 min) and washed twice with ice-cold methanol (1 mL). Pellets were resuspended in 500 µL 0.4% SDS in PBS by sonication (10 sec, 10% intensity, Sonopuls HD 2070 ultrasonic rod, Bandelin electronic GmbH). Protein enrichment. All aqueous solutions were prepared using MS-grade water. Affinity enrichment was performed with avidin agarose resin (A9207 Sigma-Aldrich, pre-washed three times with 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS (1 mL); 400 × g for 2 min was used to pellet beads; typically, 50 µL of bead slurry was used for enrichment). The protein samples were centrifuged (18,000 × g, 5 min, r. t.), added to the bead suspension and incubated with agitation for 1 h at r. t. The samples were transferred to washing columns and beads were washed as follows: 0.4% SDS in PBS (4×0.6 mL), 6 M urea (3×0.6 mL), PBS (4×0.6 mL).  On bead digest. The beads with bound proteins were resuspended in 200 µL X-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) and reduced by adding 2 µL TCEP (5 mM) followed by incubation for 1 h (37 °C, 450 rpm). Alkylation was performed with 4 µL IAA (500 mM in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) followed by incubation for 30 min (r. t., 450 rpm). The reaction was stopped by adding 4 µL DTT (10 mM) and incubation of 30 min (r. t., 450 rpm). The samples were digested by LysC (1 µL, 0.5 ug/µL, Wako) for 2 h (r. t., 450 rpm) and diluted with TEAB (50 mM, 0.6 mL). Trypsin (1.5 µL, 0.5 ug/µL in 50 mM acetic acid, Promega) was added to digest the samples for 16 h (37 °C, 450 rpm). On the next day, the reaction was stopped by acidification using formic acid (FA, 10 µL, final pH below 3.0). Desalting and Filtration. The digested protein samples were centrifuged (13,000 rpm, 3 min, r. t.) and the supernatant was loaded on 50 mg SepPak C18 columns (Waters) equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were washed three times with 1 mL 0.1% TFA and 500 µL 0.5% FA. Afterwards, the peptides were eluted three times with 250 µL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% FA), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until further usage. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 25 µL 1% FA, and filtered through 0.22 µm PVDF filters (Millipore), which were equilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA. The filtrate was transferred into MS-vials and stored at -20 °C until the measurements were performed.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 was used to analyze the obtained raw files of the label-free quantification with Andromeda. The following settings were applied: variable modifications: oxidation (methionine), acetylation (N-terminus); fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (cysteine); proteolytic enzyme: trypsin/P, missed cleavages: 2; “No fractions”, “LFQ”, “Requantify” and “Match between runs” were enabled, “Second Peptide” was disabled. Searches were performed against FASTA files from UniProtKB: S. aureus USA300 (taxon identifier: 367830, downloaded: 1 April 2019), E. faecalis V583 (taxon identifier: 226185, downloaded:1 April 2019), E. coli K12 (taxon identifier: 83333, downloaded: 7 April 2020). Perseus 1.6.2.3 was used for statistical analysis. The protocol for data-filtering was used as follows. (1) LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. (2) Rows were annotated into groups - DMSO (control) and probe treatments with corresponding concentration. (3) Potential contaminants were removed. (4) Peptides only identified by site were removed. (5) Reverse peptides were removed. (6) Rows were filtered for at least 3 valid values at least one group. (7) Imputation of missing values from normal distribution. (8) Annotations derived from data banks were added. (9) Volcano plots were created with cut-off lines FDR = 0.05 (95%) and s0 = 0.3 based on two-sided two sample Student’s t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
Pyridoxal kinases (PLK) are crucial enzymes for the biosynthesis of pyridoxal phosphate, an important cofactor in a plethora of enzymatic reactions. The evolution of these enzymes resulted in different catalytic designs. In addition to the active site, the importance of a cysteine, embedded within a distant flexible lid region, was recently demonstrated. This cysteine forms a hemithioacetal with the pyridoxal aldehyde and is essential for catalysis. Despite the prevalence of these enzymes in various organisms, no tools were yet available to study the relevance of this lid residue. Here, we introduce pyridoxal probes, each equipped with an electrophilic trapping group in place of the aldehyde to target PLK reactive lid cysteines as a mimic of hemithioacetal formation. The addition of alkyne handles placed at two different positions within the pyridoxal structure facilitates enrichment of PLKs from living cells. Interestingly, depending on the position, the probes displayed a preference for either Gram-positive or Gram-negative PLK enrichment. By applying the cofactor traps, we were able to validate not only previously investigated <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> and <i>Enterococcus faecalis</i> PLKs but also <i>Escherichia coli</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> PLKs, unravelling a crucial role of the lid cysteine for catalysis. Overall, our tailored probes facilitated a reliable readout of lid cysteine containing PLKs, qualifying them as chemical tools for mining further diverse proteomes for this important enzyme class.

### Keywords
Pyridoxal, S. aureus, Pyridoxal kinase, E. faecalis, Lc-ms/ms, E. coli, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center For Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA), Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Ines Hübner

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center For Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA), Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85748 Garching, Germany


