### Accession
PXD000109

### Title
ThinPrep Cervical Smear iTRAQ LC-MS/MS

### Description
The protein content from ThinPrep cervical smear specimens was purified with TCA precipitation. The protein pellets were dissolved and protein concentration was measured with the Bradford assay. 100 ug of protein for each sample were reduced  with TCEP, cysteines were blocked with MMTS and finally digested overnight with trypsin. The resultant peptides were labeled with the iTRAQ 8plex reagents and after mixing were subjected to off-line high pH C18 fractionation. The peptide fractions were further analyzed with low pH C18 LC-Orbitrap Elite HCD MS/MS (MS resolution 120,000, top 10 precursors, isolation width 1.2 m/z, 100 min gradient method). Protein Identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software. SEQUEST node included prec. mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da, iTRAQ8plex Nterm and K,Y static modification, Methylthio static modification, Phospho S variable modification, Oxidation M  variable modification, Deamidation N,Q variable modification. All spectra were search against a Uniprot fasta file containing all reviewed Human entries and all reviewed and un-reviewed human papillomavirus entries. Peptide and PTM validation was performed with Percolator and PhosphoRS nodes respectively. Protein quantitation was performed with the Reporter Ions Quantifier node.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The ThinPrep cervical smear is widely used in clinical practice for the cytological and molecular screening against abnormal cells and Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Current advancements made to LC-MS proteomics include the use of stable isotope labeling for the in-depth analysis of proteins in complex clinical specimens. Such approaches have yet to be realized for ThinPrep clinical specimens. In this study, an LC-MS method based on isobaric (iTRAQ) labeling and high-resolution FT-Orbitrap mass spectrometry was used for the proteomic analysis of 23 human ThinPrep smear specimens. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed with both nitrogen high collision dissociation (HCD MS/MS) and helium collision induced dissociation (CID MS/MS) peptide fragmentation modes. The analysis of three 8-plex sample sets yielded the identification of over 3200 unique proteins at FDR &lt; 1%, of which over 2300 proteins were quantitatively profiled in at least one of the three experiments. The interindividual variability served to define the required sample size needed to identify significant protein expression differences. The degree of in-depth proteome coverage allowed the detection of 6 HPV-derived proteins including the high-risk HPV16 type in the specimens tested. The presence of the HPV strains of origin was also confirmed with PCR-hybridization molecular methods. This proof-of-principle study constitutes the first ever report on the nontargeted analysis of HPV proteins in human ThinPrep clinical specimens with high-resolution mass spectrometry. A further testament to the sensitivity and selectivity of the proposed study method was the confident detection of a significant number of phosphopeptides in these specimens.

### Keywords
Orbitrap elite, Thinprep, Itraq, Hpv

### Affiliations
WTSI

### Submitter
Theodoros Roumeliotis

### Lab Head


