### Accession
PXD021988

### Title
Human, bronchoalveolar lavage, extracellular vesicles

### Description
The aim of the project was to explore large extracellular vesicles capacity to seperate non lung cancer from lung cancer cases. A case control study of patients suspected for lung cancer (12 non lung cancer and 12 lung cancers). The raw files are labeled according to clinical status. Small and large extracellular vesicles were isolated by differential centrifugation. The proteome of full BAL, vesicle depleted BAL, small and large extracellular vesicles were characterized by LC-MS. Small extracellular vesicles were further analyzed by nanoparticle tracking analysis, Transmission electron microscopy and western blots.

### Sample Protocol
The recovered fluid was placed at 4 °C immediately. BAL was centrifuged at 320×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, to remove the cellular fraction. The resulting cell-free supernatant was immediately aliquoted and frozen at −80 °C until further analysis.  Frozen acellular BAL specimens were thawed and centrifuged at 3,000×g for 20 min at 4°C and then at 12,000×g for 60 min at 4°C. Clarified plasma was ultracentrifuged in a Beckman Coulter Optima TM L-80XP Ultracentrifuge at 100,000×g at 4°C for 120 minutes with a Type 50.2 Ti rotor (k-factor: 157.7) to pellet EVs. The supernatant was carefully removed, and crude EV-containing pellets were resuspended in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by floatation on sucrose cushion (30%, D2O) for 60 minutes at 100,000×g at 4°C to remove nonEV protein complexes. After washing, by pelleting the EVs collected in the sucrose cushion for 16h at 100 000×g at 10°C, EVs were resuspended in PBS and subjected to NanoSight NS300 analysis (Malvern Instruments, Inc., Westborough, MA).  Protein solution containing SDS and DTT were loaded onto filtering columns and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega).  The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY nLC1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides reconstituted in 0.5% FA (formic acid) were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100, LC C18, 5 μm, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 μL/min. The peptides were resolved at 0.3 μL/min flow rate using an increasing gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) on an analytical column (Easy-Spray™ PepMap™ RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of about 2.1 kV. The total run time was 120 min.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data from the 28 LC-MS runs were searched using VEMS  and MaxQuant. The MSMS spectra were searched against a standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640). Permutated protein sequences, where Arg and Lys were not permutated, were included in the database for VEMS search. Trypsin cleavage allowing a maximum of 4 missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation was included as variable modifications. 5 ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 10 m/z for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups as defined by Matthiesen et al

### Publication Abstract
Acellular bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) proteomics can partially separate lung cancer from non-lung cancer patients based on principal component analysis and multivariate analysis. Furthermore, the variance in the proteomics data sets is correlated mainly with lung cancer status and, to a lesser extent, smoking status and gender. Despite these advances BAL small and large extracellular vehicles (EVs) proteomes reveal aberrant protein expression in paracrine signaling mechanisms in cancer initiation and progression. We consequently present a case-control study of 24 bronchoalveolar lavage extracellular vesicle samples which were analyzed by state-of-the-art liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). We obtained evidence that BAL EVs proteome complexity correlated with lung cancer stage 4 and mortality within two years&#xb4; follow-up (<i>p</i> value = 0.006). The potential therapeutic target DNMT3B complex is significantly up-regulated in tumor tissue and BAL EVs. The computational analysis of the immune and fibroblast cell markers in EVs suggests that patients who deceased within the follow-up period display higher marker expression indicative of innate immune and fibroblast cells (four out of five cases). This study provides insights into the proteome content of BAL EVs and their correlation to clinical outcomes.

### Keywords
Bronchoalveolar lavage, Lung cancer, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC, Chronic Diseases Research Centre, NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Campo dos Martires da Patria, 130, 1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC, Chronic Diseases Research Centre, NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Campo dos Martires da Patria, 130, 1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal


