### Accession
PXD010978

### Title
D. magna CT448 protease specificity

### Description
Mass developments of toxin-producing cyanobacteria are frequently observed in freshwater ecosystems due to eutrophication and global warming. These mass developments can partly be attributed to cyanobacterial toxins, such as protease inhibitors (PIs), which inhibit digestive serine proteases of Daphnia, the major herbivore of phytoplankton and cyanobacteria. To date, mechanisms of this inhibition in the gut of the crustacean Daphnia magna are not known. Here, we characterize a single serine protease, chymotrypsin 448 (CT448), which is present in the gut of the crustacean D. magna.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by tryptic digest of E.coli K12 lysates as described (Chen et al., 2017). The peptide library was split in three aliquots that were treated with recombinant CT448 with and without prior activation by trypsin or with a buffer control for 1.5 h at RT. After incubation, peptides were triplex stable isotope labelled by reductive dimethylation (Boersema et al., 2009). Isotopically light formaldehyde (CH2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was used to label control-treated library peptides, deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O) and  NaBH3CN were used  to label the assay with recombinant CT448 without prior activation and heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) and sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaBD3CN) were used to label samples after incubation with trypsin-activated CT448. Dimethylation was performed for 2 h at RT and quenched by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 1 h. Subsequently samples were mixed, desalted and purified by C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). 1 µg peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC, Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, ID 75 µm, trap column length 2 cm, particle size 3 µm, analytical column length 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, Thermo) coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017). Peptides were eluted with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 90 min (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA), followed by washing and re-equilibration steps to a total runtime of 2 h per sample.  The Bruker HyStar Software (v3.2) was used to acquire line-mode MS spectra in a mass range from 200-1750 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz. For each MS spectrum, the Top17 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation and an exclusion window of 40s was applied.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from the acquired MS spectra using the MaxQuant software package, v1.6.0.16 (Tyanova et al., 2016) and a UniProt E.coli K12 proteome library (downloaded Nov 2015). Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme for semi-specific searches (e.g. only one side of the peptide was required to match the trypsin specificity). Label multiplicity was set to three, considering light dimethylation (+ 28.0313 Da), medium dimethylation (+ 32.0564 Da) and heavy dimethylation (+ 36.0757) as peptide N-terminal and lysine labels. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.0215 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+ 15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) was considered as variable modifications. PSM false discovery rate was set to 0.01.   Identified peptides that showed at least a fourfold increase in intensity after protease treatment compared to the control treatment or were exclusively present in the protease-treated condition were considered as putative cleavage products. An in-house developed Perl script was used to remove putative library peptides (trypsin specificity on both sides of the identified peptide) and to reconstruct the full cleavage windows from the identified cleavage products as described (Schilling and Overall, 2008). Aligned validated cleavage windows were visualized as icelogos (Colaert et al., 2009), displaying site-specific differential amino acid abundance calculated as per cent difference compared to the E.coli K12 proteome as reference set (p-value 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Mass developments of toxin-producing cyanobacteria are frequently observed in freshwater ecosystems due to eutrophication and global warming. These mass developments can partly be attributed to cyanobacterial toxins, such as protease inhibitors (PIs), which inhibit digestive serine proteases of Daphnia, the major herbivore of phytoplankton and cyanobacteria. To date, mechanisms of this inhibition in the gut of the crustacean Daphnia magna are not known. Here, we characterize a single serine protease, chymotrypsin 448 (CT448), which is present in the gut of the crustacean D. magna. Sequence alignments with human serine proteases revealed that CT448&#x2009;has a putative N-terminal pro-peptide which is extended compared to the mammalian homologs and within this pro-peptide two N-linked glycosylation motifs were found. CT448 was heterologously expressed in Sf21 insect cells using a baculovirus expression system for optimized protein production and secretion into the medium. The protein was purified via a one-step affinity chromatography, which resulted in a protein yield of 3.45&#x2009;mg/l medium. The inactive precursor (zymogen) could be activated by tryptic digestion. This is the first example of a recombinant expression of an active crustacean serine protease, which functions in the gut of Daphnia. Proteomic identification of protease cleavage sites (PICS) and hydrolysation of various synthetic substrates showed that CT448 is a chymotrypsin-like elastase. In this study, we confirm that CT448 is a target of cyanobacterial protease inhibitors. Local evolutionary modifications of CT448 might render this proteolytic enzyme less susceptible against cyanobacterial secondary metabolites and might improve the fitness of Daphnia during cyanobacterial blooms.

### Keywords
Ct448 pics protease specificity

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


