### Accession
PXD003180

### Title
IP-MS of DCAF1/VprBP interacting proteins in mouse CD4 T cells

### Description
DCAF1, also known as VprBP (HIV-1-viral-protein-r-binding-protein), is an evolutionary conserved substrate-binding subunit of CRL4 (Cul4a-Ddb1-Roc1) ubiquitin ligase complex. It is a cellular protein targeted by HIV-1 viral protein R (Vpr). DCAF1 modulates cellular response against HIV in macrophages, controls the survival and reprogramming of oocyte, and regulates G2/M transition. DCAF1 functions through diverse mechanisms including regulating protein poly-ubiquitination, mono-ubiquitination and phosphorylation. Nonetheless, whether and how DCAF1 controls the function of primary T cell, a major cell type infected by HIV, remains unknown. We found DCAF1 is required for cell size growth and cell cycle entry from quiescence. To investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms and identify the cellular factors that associate with DCAF1 in T cells, we analyzed DCAF1-interacting proteins in T cells using VprBP immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
To identify DCAF1 interacting proteins in T cells, CD4 T cells were purified by MACS and activated by plate bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for 24 hours. The cells were treated with MG132 for 4 hours prior to harvest.  Cells were lysed in NP40 lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) and MG132. The crude lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant was divided into two parts and incubated with agarose beads (Santa Cruz, sc-2003) that conjugated with DCAF1 antibody (ProteinTech, 11612-1-AP) or rabbit IgG in cold room overnight. The immunocomplex was washed four times with NP40 lysis buffer and then three times with PBS. Associated proteins were eluted by adding 2X Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610737) and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. The eluted proteins were resolved in SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad, 4569034). Protein samples were excised into twenty slices according to molecular weight and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega, V5113). The gel extracts were dried in a SpeedVac lypholizer and stored at -80̊°C until further analysis.  The products of immuno-precipitation were then subjected to mass-spectrometry. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a nanoLC-Ultra system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). Peptides were resuspended in 30 μl HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5 µl was loaded onto an IntegraFrit column (New Objective, C18). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a linear gradient from 10% to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 130 minutes, followed by 5% buffer B for another 10 minutes. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire spectra in a data-dependent and positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 2.1 kV using the XCalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range between m/z 300-1,800. For each cycle, the top fifteen most intense ions were subjected to CID fragmentation in the LTQ Orbitrap with normalized collision energy at 35% and activation Q 0.25; dynamic exclusion was enabled. Selected ions were repeated once and then excluded from further analysis for 60 sec. Unassigned ions or those with a charge of 1+ were rejected. Maximum ion accumulation times were 400 ms for each full MS scan and 200 ms for MS/MS scans. One microscan was acquired for each MS and MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files obtained from the LTQ Orbitrap were processed through the Andromeda and MaxQuant software suite (version 1.2.2.5) with the default settings. The MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt mouse database (release date of November 30, 2010. 20248 entries). A database that contains contamination proteins was also used. Peptides that matched to the contaminated protein database were excluded. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavage peptides was allowed. Oxidation (M) was set to be a variable modification. Peptide and MS/MS tolerance were set to be 7.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed per peptide. Only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were considered for identification. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a maximum 1% and 5% false discovery rate, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
On activation, naive T cells grow in size and enter cell cycle to mount immune response. How the fundamental processes of T-cell growth and cell cycle entry are regulated is poorly understood. Here we report that DCAF1 (Ddb1-cullin4-associated-factor 1) is essential for these processes. The deletion of DCAF1 in T cells impairs their peripheral homeostasis. DCAF1 is upregulated on T-cell receptor activation and critical for activation-induced T-cell growth, cell cycle entry and proliferation. In addition, DCAF1 is required for T-cell expansion and function during anti-viral and autoimmune responses in vivo. DCAF1 deletion leads to a drastic stabilization of p53 protein, which can be attributed to a requirement of DCAF1 for MDM2-mediated p53 poly-ubiquitination. Importantly, p53 deletion rescues the cell cycle entry defect but not the growth defect of DCAF1-deficient cells. Therefore, DCAF1 is vital for T-cell function through p53-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

### Keywords
Dcaf1, Hiv-1, T cell, Vprbp

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Lineberge Comprehensive Cancer Center	
Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology
School of Medicine	
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Yisong Wan

### Lab Head
Dr Yisong Y. Wan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


