### Accession
PXD011301

### Title
Translation of non-standard codon nucleotides reveals minimal requirements for codon-anticodon interactions

### Description
The precise interplay between the mRNA codon and the tRNA anticodon is crucial for ensuring efficient and accurate translation by the ribosome. The insertion of RNA nucleobase derivatives in the mRNA allowed us to modulate the stability of the codon-anticodon interaction in the decoding site of bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes, allowing an in-depth analysis of codon recognition. In addition to a quantitative analysis of the protein products that are formed in dependence of the modified codons, the interpretation of these RNA nucleobase derivatives by the ribosomal decoding site was also determined. For each modification, the translated peptides from the bacterial and eukaryotic systems were purified and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Pulled down proteins were extensively washed with 50 mM ammonium acetate and were directly digested on the beads. Therefore, washed beads were resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM, pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) for 30 min at 56 °C, digested for 6 h at 37 °C by adding 0.5 µg Trypsin and alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM) at room temperature for 20 min. Peptides were analyzed using a Dionex, UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Germering, Germany) coupled via nanospray ionization source to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Vienna, Austria) using instrument settings as described previously (1). (1) Faserl, K., Sarg, B., Sola, L. & Lindner, H. H. Enhancing Proteomic Throughput in Capillary Electrophoresis–Mass Spectrometry by Sequential Sample Injection. Proteomics 17, (2017).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using ProteomeDiscoverer (Version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) with search engine Sequest HT. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human protein database (Uniprot, reference proteome, last modified Feb 2018, 20939 entries) to which 21 different ErmCL protein sequences were added. The following settings were applied: Enzyme for protein cleavage was trypsin; two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylcysteine; variable modifications were N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 20 mmu. Maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The precise interplay between the mRNA codon and the tRNA anticodon is crucial for ensuring efficient and accurate translation by the ribosome. The insertion of RNA nucleobase derivatives in the mRNA allowed us to modulate the stability of the codon-anticodon interaction in the decoding site of bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes, allowing an in-depth analysis of codon recognition. We found the hydrogen bond between the N<sup>1</sup> of purines and the N<sup>3</sup> of pyrimidines to be sufficient for decoding of the first two codon nucleotides, whereas adequate stacking between the RNA bases is critical at the wobble position. Inosine, found in eukaryotic mRNAs, is an important example of destabilization of the codon-anticodon interaction. Whereas single inosines are efficiently translated, multiple inosines, e.g., in the serotonin receptor 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> mRNA, inhibit translation. Thus, our results indicate that despite the robustness of the decoding process, its tolerance toward the weakening of codon-anticodon interactions is limited.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Translation elongation, Nucleotide modifications, Decoding, Biological, Codon-anticodon interactions

### Affiliations
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics

### Submitter
Thomas Hoernes

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias David Erlacher
Medical University of Innsbruck - Biocenter, Division of Genomics & RNomics


