### Accession
PXD036271

### Title
AAV-based gene therapy prevents and halts the progression of dilated cardiomyopathy in a new mouse model of inherited phosphoglucomutase 1 deficiency (PGM1-CDG)

### Description
PGM1 deficiency is recognized as the third most common N-linked Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) in humans. Affected individuals present with liver, musculoskeletal, endocrine, and coagulation symptoms; however, the most life-threatening complication is an early onset of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Recently, we discovered that oral D-galactose supplementation improved liver disease, endocrine and coagulation abnormalities, but does not alleviate the fatal cardiomyopathy and the associated myopathy. To study the pathobiology of the cardiac disease observed in PGM1-CDG, we constructed a novel cardiomyocyte-specific conditional Pgm2 (mouse ortholog of human PGM1) knockout (Pgm2 cKO) mouse model. Echocardiography studies corroborated a DCM phenotype with significantly reduced ejection fraction and left ventricular dilatation similar to those seen in individuals with PGM1-CDG. Histological studies demonstrated excess glycogen accumulation and fibrosis, while ultrastructural analysis revealed Z-disk disarray and swollen/fragmented mitochondria. We observed similar ultrastructural pathology in the cardiac explant of an individual with PGM1-CDG. We found decreased mitochondrial function in the heart of Pgm2 cKO mice. Transcriptomic analysis of hearts from Pgm2 cKO mice demonstrated a gene signature of DCM. Although proteomics revealed only mild changes in global protein expression in left ventricular tissue of Pgm2 cKO mice, a glycoproteomic analysis  revealed an overall decreased protein glycosylation with significant glycosylation defects in sarcolemmal proteins including different subunits of laminin protein. Finally, augmentation of PGM1 in KO mice via AAV9-PGM1 gene replacement therapy prevented and halted the progression of the DCM phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Pgm2-cKO (n=5) and wildtype (n=3) murine heart samples after tamoxifen treatment day 30 were lysed in 4% SDS (in 100 mM TEABC) using Bioruptor sonication device. The protein amount was quantified using BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were acetone precipitated and pellet was resuspended in 8M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. Samples were reduced using 20mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 minutes in a 95°C heat block, then alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then digested with trypsin (Worthington) onto S-Trap midi cartridges as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Protifi). Peptides were quantified by Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay and equal amounts of peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) for a 10-plex mass spectrometry experiment as per the manufacturer’s protocol. All the labelled samples were pooled and splited into two aliquots. One aliquot was subjected to SEC for glycopeptide enrichment and another aliquot was fractionated by bRPLC for total proteomics. SEC was performed in isocratic run mode with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for 130 min on Superdex peptide 10/300 column (GE Healthcare). Twelve fractions were collected starting at 10 minutes after injection, dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition. Basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) was performed on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System 120 min using a gradient flow (0.5 mL/min) with solvent A (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9) and solvent B (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9, in 90% acetonitrile). Ninety-six fractions were collected and concatenated into 12 fractions, which were dried analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer connected to Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The proteomic MS/MS raw data was searched Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against the UniProt Mouse Reviewed protein sequences (21,984 entries). Fully tryptic peptides with 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The raw glycoproteomic MS/MS data was searched for the identification of N-glycopeptides using publically available software pGlyco 3.0. Error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Fully tryptic peptides with 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The output contained peptide sequence, glycosylation site, gene symbol with accession number and glycan composition at each site. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT mass of lysine and peptide N-terminal was used as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications for both proteomics and glycoproteomics. False discovery rate was set at 1% at peptide, glycan and glycopeptide levels. For the glycopeptide quantitation, reporter ion intensities were quantified with Proteome Discover 2.5 and matched with pGlyco identification on a scan-to-scan basis.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) deficiency is recognized as the third most common N-linked congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) in humans. Affected individuals present with liver, musculoskeletal, endocrine, and coagulation symptoms; however, the most life-threatening complication is the early onset of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Recently, we discovered that oral D-galactose supplementation improved liver disease, endocrine, and coagulation abnormalities, but does not alleviate the fatal cardiomyopathy and the associated myopathy. Here we report on left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) in 6 individuals with PGM1-CDG. LVEF was pathologically low in most of these individuals and varied between 10% and 65%. To study the pathobiology of the cardiac disease observed in PGM1-CDG, we constructed a novel cardiomyocyte-specific conditional Pgm2 gene (mouse ortholog of human PGM1) knockout (Pgm2 cKO) mouse model. Echocardiography studies corroborated a DCM phenotype with significantly reduced ejection fraction and left ventricular dilation similar to those seen in individuals with PGM1-CDG. Histological studies demonstrated excess glycogen accumulation and fibrosis, while ultrastructural analysis revealed Z-disk disarray and swollen/fragmented mitochondria, which was similar to the ultrastructural pathology in the cardiac explant of an individual with PGM1-CDG. In addition, we found decreased mitochondrial function in the heart of KO mice. Transcriptomic analysis of hearts from mutant mice demonstrated a gene signature of DCM. Although proteomics revealed only mild changes in global protein expression in left ventricular tissue of mutant mice, a glycoproteomic analysis unveiled broad glycosylation changes with significant alterations in sarcolemmal proteins including different subunits of laminin-211, which was confirmed by immunoblot analyses. Finally, augmentation of PGM1 in KO mice via AAV9-PGM1 gene replacement therapy prevented and halted the progression of the DCM phenotype.

### Keywords
Heart, Glycoproteomics, Mouse, Proteomics, Pgm1-cdg

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905 United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905 United States


