### Accession
PXD041316

### Title
Modulation of ST6Gal1 in Prostate Cancer Cells

### Description
Proteomics analyses using LC-MS/MS was performed on wild-type and ST6Gal1 overexpressing DU145 prostate cancer cells.  Total cell lysate and secreted proteins from both were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media and cell pellets were collected from wildtype and ST6Gal1 overexpressing DU145 prostate cancer cells.  Cell pellets were lysed with SDS.  Conditioned media was concentrated by speed vac followed by addition of SDS.  Protein concentration was measured with BCA.  25 ug of proteins from lysates and media were used for reduction with TCEP and alkylation with iodoacetamide.  Proteins were preciptiated with acetone, reconstituted, and digested with trypsin.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex Ultimate Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system coupled to an LTQ-Elite Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Chromatographic runs were aligned following data extraction from the MS1 spectra.  This data was presented as the AUC of the extracted ion current (XIC) of all detected peptides. The Generic Integration Algorithm was then used to analyze changes in protein abundance. All quantitative data is expressed as Z-scores at the protein or peptide level, where the log2 ratios were calculated by comparing the AUC of peptides in ST6Gal1 overexpression and wildtype DU145. The corresponding statistical weight is then calculated at the spectrum level using the WSPP model, rescaled, and standardized to a normal distribution N (0,1). Plotting the cumulative distributions was used to carefully examine the validity of the null hypothesis at each level (spectrum, peptide, and protein).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant glycosylation is a universal feature of cancer cells, and cancer-associated glycans have been detected in virtually every cancer type. A common change in tumour cell glycosylation is an increase in &#x3b1;2,6 sialylation of N-glycans, a modification driven by the sialyltransferase ST6GAL1. ST6GAL1 is overexpressed in numerous cancer types, and sialylated glycans are fundamental for tumour growth, metastasis, immune evasion, and drug resistance, but the role of ST6GAL1 in prostate cancer is poorly understood. Here, we analyse matched cancer and normal tissue samples from 200 patients and verify that ST6GAL1 is upregulated in prostate cancer tissue. Using MALDI imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS), we identify larger branched &#x3b1;2,6 sialylated N-glycans that show specificity to prostate tumour tissue. We also monitored ST6GAL1 in plasma samples from &gt;400 patients and reveal ST6GAL1 levels are significantly increased in the blood of men with prostate cancer. Using both in vitro and in vivo studies, we demonstrate that ST6GAL1 promotes prostate tumour growth and invasion. Our findings show ST6GAL1 introduces &#x3b1;2,6 sialylated N-glycans on prostate cancer cells and raise the possibility that prostate cancer cells can secrete active ST6GAL1 enzyme capable of remodelling glycans on the surface of other cells. Furthermore, we find &#x3b1;2,6 sialylated N-glycans expressed by prostate cancer cells can be targeted using the sialyltransferase inhibitor P-3F<sub>AX</sub> -Neu5Ac. Our study identifies an important role for ST6GAL1 and &#x3b1;2,6 sialylated N-glycans in prostate cancer progression and highlights the opportunity to inhibit abnormal sialylation for the development of new prostate cancer therapeutics. &#xa9; 2023 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Cell line, St6gal1, Glycosylation, Cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology School of Medicine Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology School of Medicine Stanford University


