### Accession
PXD008992

### Title
Characterization of the small intestinal lesion in celiac disease by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
This study describes a comparison of global proteome expression in small intestinal tissue collected from celiac disease patients at different stages of disease. We have analyzed sections from FFPE biopsy blocks and identified more than 4500 protein without sample pre-fractionation. We have compared protein expression in two sample cohorts that were chosen retrospectively from patients participating in research protocols at our facility. First we compared biopsies from 10 patients collected at the time of diagnoses (untreated CD) with biopsies collected 1 year later following gluten free diet (treated CD). We observed overall good agreement between differential expression of proteins and histological changes that occur in the intestine. We identified biological pathways that are known to operate in the disease lesion. We also observed a strong signal for neutrophil infiltration. By use of a dedicated immunoglobulin variable gene family database we found that differential expression of IGHV5-51 distinguished our untreated from treated CD patients. We also compared protein expression in 4 treated CD patients that developed histological changes in the small intestine in response to a 3 day gluten challenge. Although these patients develop an intestinal lesion resembling the lesion observed in untreated patients, we observed differential expression of proteins involved in acute tissue remodeling that were not seen when we compared UCD to TCD samples. Our study presents a proof-of-concept to demonstrate that analysis of material from FFPE tissue block material can provide a comprehensive overview of many disease processes that occur in the celiac small intestine. Changes in protein expression will reveal information on disease state that may not be observed by histological evaluation

### Sample Protocol
15 5µm thick tissue sections from FFPE biopsy blocks were deparaffinized and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate with Protease Max. Proteins were extracted by sonication in a water bath followed by boiling. Samples from our first cohort (P1-P10) were spiked with intact lysozyme (chicken) to 0.2 % (w/w) prior to digestion over night with Trypsin. Following C18 purification, samples P1-P10 were spiked with reference peptides (150 fmol, MassPREP Digestion Standard Mix 1, Waters). Samples from patients B-E were not spiked with external proteins. Total tissue digests were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap or Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific)).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with the software MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 using Andromeda to search against the UniProtKB FASTA database for the human proteome (85,915 entries including isoforms and canonical sequences, downloaded from www.UniProt.org, October 2014) in addition to a FASTA database of spiked in proteins for patients P1-P10. Samples from patient P1-P10 were also searched against a FASTA database generated from amino acid sequences of human Ig families obtained from the International ImMunoGeneTics Information System (IMGT) database in addition to the database for spiked-in proteins. In all searches the digestion enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin with no proline restriction, and the following variable modifications: deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), Gln-pyro (Q), and pyro-Glu (E). Mass error tolerance for MS scans was first searched with an error window of 20 ppm and then with a main search error of 6 ppm. Mass tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1 and a false discovery rate of 0.01 was used in all instances. For identification, “match between runs” was enabled, and quantification was done using the MaxQuant label free quantification algorithm with a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
Global characterization of tissue proteomes from small amounts of biopsy material has become feasible because of advances in mass spectrometry and bioinformatics tools. In celiac disease (CD), dietary gluten induces an immune response that is accompanied by pronounced remodeling of the small intestine. Removal of gluten from the diet abrogates the immune response, and the tissue architecture normalizes. In this study, differences in global protein expression of small intestinal biopsy specimens from CD patients were quantified by analyzing formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded material using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and label-free protein quantitation. Protein expression was compared in biopsy specimens collected from the same patients before and after 1-year treatment with gluten-free diet (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;10) or before and after 3-day gluten provocation (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;4). Differential expression of proteins in particular from mature enterocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells could distinguish untreated from treated CD mucosa, and Ig variable region IGHV5-51 expression was found to serve as a CD-specific marker of ongoing immune activation. In patients who had undergone gluten challenge, coordinated up-regulation of wound response proteins, including the CD autoantigen transglutaminase 2, was observed. Our study provides a global and unbiased assessment of antigen-driven changes in protein expression in the celiac intestinal mucosa.

### Keywords
Human, Celiac disease, Ffpe, Shot-gun proteomics, Small intestine, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Oslo Rikshospitalet
KG Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, University of Oslo, 0372 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Jorunn Stamnaes

### Lab Head
Dr Ludvig M. Sollid
KG Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, University of Oslo, 0372 Oslo, Norway


