### Accession
PXD024168

### Title
Identification of indisulam-mediated DCAF15 interacting proteins by TurboID and shotgun proteomics

### Description
In this project, we used proximity labeling with TurboID to identify proteins that interact with DCAF15 in the presence of indisulam in a gastric cancer AGS cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Construction of stable cell lines: Lentiviral particles expressing pCDH-HA-TurboID-DCAF15 were used to infect AGS cells. The cells were selected by puromycin for two weeks to obtain the stable cell line.  The stable HA-TurboID-DCAF15 expressing AGS cells were pretreated with MG132 (20 μM) for 2 h, DMSO or indisulam (2 μM) for 6 h, and then biotin (50 μM) for 10 min. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS for three times and then lysed in the RIPA buffer with freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Cell lysate was incubated with prewashed NeutrAvidin agarose resin at 4℃ overnight. The agarose resin was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 2 min and washed with buffer 1 (2% SDS in ddH2O, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) for 3 times, buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) for 3 times, buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) for twice, and buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 50 mM NaCl) for 3 times. Protein samples were eluted twice with 30 μL 2X sample loading buffer.  The purified proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining. The gel of each sample decolorized. Disulfide bonds were reduced, thiols were alkylated, and proteins were digested in-gel. The extracted peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted with C18 ZipTips, dried again, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS analysis An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (MS) with an electrospray ionization inlet (Thermo Fisher) was used to analyze the peptide samples. Samples were separated on a C18 analytical column through a nanoscale HPLC with solution A of 0.1% formic acid and solvent B of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC gradient was 6% to 44% solvent B for 90 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive-ion mode with an automatic Xcalibur data system. Each precursor ion was analyzed twice in 60 s. The resolution for the precursor ion was set to 120000 at 400 m/z and the isolation window of the selected precursor ion for MS/MS analysis was set to 2 m/z. The experiments were performed for five biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched with MaxQuant software suite (www.maxquant.org/, version 1.6.1.1). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search and that for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. The cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The MS data were searched against the UniProt human protein database (www.uniprot.org) concatenated with common contaminants and the decoy database. The 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels was applied for the analysis. Relative protein quantification was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) included in the MaxQuant software suite (MaxLFQ).

### Publication Abstract
Indisulam exhibits antitumor activity against several cancer cells. Although the DCAF15-indisulam-RBM39 axis has been well documented in the inhibition of cancer cell growth, it is unknown whether RBM39 degradation alone is the mechanism of action of indisulam. Here, we verified the inhibitory effect of indisulam on the proliferation of gastric cancer cells and its dependence on DCAF15. Proximity-dependent biotin labeling with TurboID and quantitative proteomics revealed that indisulam indeed promoted the interaction between DCAF15 and RBM39. Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence also revealed that indisulam promoted the ubiquitin-mediated RBM39 degradation and RBM39 colocalized with DCAF15 in the nucleus. DCAF15 knockdown almost completely abolished the indisulam-mediated RBM39 reduction. Further knockdown of <i>RBM39</i> eliminated the effect of <i>DCAF15</i> on the proliferation of gastric cancer cells upon indisulam treatment. Immunoblotting of gastric tumor tissues confirmed the downregulation of RBM39 by indisulam. Database analysis unveiled that <i>RBM39</i> was highly expressed in gastric cancer tissues and its high expression significantly shortened the survival time of gastric cancer patients. Taken together, we demonstrated that indisulam enhanced RBM39 ubiquitination and degradation by promoting its interaction with DCAF15, thus inhibiting the proliferation of gastric cancer cells. This work may provide valuable information for drug discovery through proteolysis targeting chimeras. MS data were deposited in ProteomeXchange (Dataset identifier: PXD024168).

### Keywords
Human, Dcaf15, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Ags, Turboid

### Affiliations
Soochow University
soochow university

### Submitter
jiaqi lu

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Xu
Soochow University


