### Accession
PXD001526

### Title
Rumen metaproteomics -  Catching the tip of the iceberg - evaluation of sample preparation protocols for metaproteomic studies of the rumen microbiota

### Description
Metaproteomic studies of the rumen microbiota are challenged by the need of optimized sample preparation protocols in order to retrieve an enhanced amount of prokaryotic instead of plant and bovine derived cells before protein extraction and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. The present study evaluates three different protocols applied to the rumen microbiota either attached to plant fibres or present as planktonic cells. The findings of our work suggest the integration of cheesecloth-gauze filtration in sample preparation to achieve a better protein identification ratio.

### Sample Protocol
Solid fractions and liquid fraction of the rumen were sampled. The first protocol for the solid fraction investigating the particle-associated ruminal species included HistodenzTM density-gradient centrifugation. In the second protocol for the solid rumen fraction, common cheesecloth gauze was used. Protocol for the planktonic cells subjected 10 mL of rumen fluid to 1 min sonication bath and 1 min vortexing prior to filtering through a sterile 40 µm PE filter. The filter surface was carefully scratched with a sterile spatula to prevent clogging. Protein extraction of the separated cells was done using a common SDS-based protocol. Proteins were separated by 1D SDS PAGE and in-gel digested using trypsin. Eluted peptides were desalted and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatography was performed with 0.1% formic acid in solvent A (100% water) and B (100% acetonitrile). For the solid fractions the solvent B gradient was set from 1 to 40% during the first 115 min and subsequently increased to 90% within 5 min plus an additional 5 min at 90% using a nano-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Ultimate3000 UHPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the liquid protocol, the solvent B gradient was set from 1% to 40% during the first 115 min and subsequently increased to 45% within 15 min followed by 2 min to 90% plus an additional 5 min at 90%. Ionized peptides were analyzed and fragmented by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For analysis continuous scanning of eluted peptide ions was carried out between 300-1600 m/z automatically switching to MS/MS higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode and twelve MS/MS events per survey scan. For MS/MS HCD measurements the dynamic precursor exclusion was set to 20s and peptide match was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v.1.4.1.14), Mascot (v. 2.4) and the NCBInr databases (v. July 12th, 2014) for bacteria, archaea and eukaryota. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Precursor ion tolerance was defined at 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Furthermore, all peaks besides the top 12 peaks per 100 Da in each MS/MS were removed to de-noise spectra before identification. Using Thermo’s Proteome Discoverer the default filter was set to one peptide per protein and a Mascot Significance threshold of 0.05. Protein grouping was enabled with a minimum peptide confidence of medium and a delta Cn better than 0.15. Strict maximum parsimony principle was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Various metabolic processes are performed in the rumen caused by a complex microbiota comprising bacteria, archaea, protozoa, and fungi. Thus, the description of the active microbial fraction and their functions are of great interest for animal nutrition, biotechnology, and climatology. Metaproteomic studies of the rumen microbiota are challenged by the need of optimized sample preparation protocols in order to retrieve an enhanced amount of prokaryotic instead of plant- and bovine-derived cells before protein extraction and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. The present study evaluates three different protocols applied to the rumen microbiota either attached to plant fibers or present as planktonic cells. The findings of our work suggest the integration of cheesecloth-gauze filtration in sample preparation to achieve a better protein identification ratio. Our data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001526 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001526).

### Keywords
Rumen microbiota, Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Nutrition
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Nutrition


