### Accession
PXD035254

### Title
IFITM3 restricts virus-induced inflammatory cytokine production by limiting Nogo-B mediated TLR responses

### Description
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) is a restriction factor that limits viral pathogenesis and exerts poorly understood immunoregulatory functions. Here, using human and mouse models, we demonstrate that IFITM3 promotes MyD88-dependent, TLR-mediated IL-6 production following exposure to cytomegalovirus (CMV). IFITM3 also restricts IL-6 production in response to influenza and SARS-CoV-2. In dendritic cells, IFITM3 binds to the reticulon 4 isoform Nogo-B and promotes its proteasomal degradation. We reveal that Nogo-B mediates TLR-dependent pro-inflammatory cytokine production and promotes viral pathogenesis in vivo, and in the case of TLR2 responses, this process involves alteration of TLR2 cellular localization. Nogo-B deletion abrogates inflammatory cytokine responses and associated disease in virus-infected IFITM3-deficient mice. Thus, we uncover Nogo-B as a driver of viral pathogenesis and highlight an immunoregulatory pathway in which IFITM3 fine-tunes the responsiveness of myeloid cells to viral stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) cells from either wt or Ifitm3-/- mice were grown in SILAC RPMI media (Gibco, Thermo-Fisher) either supplemented with 10% HI dialysed and filtered FCS (Sigma-Aldrich) 0.1M HEPES,  B-Mercaptoethanol (both Gibco, Thermo-Fisher), and either L-Lysine-2HCl 13C6 15N2 and L-Arginine-HCl 13C6 15N4 (‘Heavy’ amino acids) or L-Lysine-2HCl 4,4,5,5-D4 and L-Arginine-HCl 13C6 (‘Medium’ amino acids) (all Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Wt cells were grown in ‘Medium’ SILAC media and Ifitm3-/- were grown in ‘Heavy’ SILAC media. BM-DC cells were differentiated as described above for 10 days and were infected or not with MCMV at an MOI of 1 for 3h. Cells were removed from the plates post infection and subsequently lysed using Pierce™ IP lysis buffer (Thermo-Fisher) supplemented with 1M proteasome inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich). Immuno-precipitation (IP), for IFITM3 (α-fragillis, 1μg/ml; Abcam) and anti-Nogo-B (1μg/ml, R & D Systems) was performed on all samples as described previously using Pierce™ Protein Plus Agarose A/G beads (Thermo-Fisher) 80. To confirm specificity of IP, control anti-rabbit IgG (1μg/ml; Abcam) was also performed. Post IP beads were that were bound to IFITM3 only were combined and eluted from the Agarose using 1 × NuPAGETM LDS sample buffer (Thermo-Fisher) supplemented with 100mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were run on a NuPAGETM 4 to 12% Bis/Tris gels (Thermo-Fisher) running approximately 0.5 to 1cm into the gel. The gel was stained using Colloidal blue staining kit (Thermo-Fisher) as per manufacturers recommendations. The stained lane was excised and cut into 6 fragments. Following in-gel reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested using trypsin, and the resulting peptides were eluted and dried prior to analysis on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher). Loading solvent was 3% MeCN, 0.1% FA, analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µl/min for 5mins in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-40% B over 29mins followed by a 3min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 10mins. The following settings were used: MS1: 300-1500 Th, 120,000 resolution, 4 × 105 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 1.6, HCD fragmentation (NCE 35) with fragment ions scanning in the Orbitrap from m/z 110, 5 × 104 AGC target, 60ms maximum injection time, ions accumulated for all parallelisable time. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/- 10 ppm for 60s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5 × 104 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed in MaxQuant version 1.6.4.0 using Uniprot MuHV-1 and Mus Musculus databases with peptide and protein FDR set to 0.01. SILAC quantitation was enabled using Arg6, Lys4 and Arg10, Lys8 with cabamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Results were exported in Perseus where significance A were generated and used to estimate P values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Viral pathogenesis, Ip-mass spec, Silac

### Affiliations
Division of Infection and Immunity/Systems Immunity University Research Institute, Cardiff University
CIMR medicine

### Submitter
Robin Antrobus

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Ian Humphreys
Division of Infection and Immunity/Systems Immunity University Research Institute, Cardiff University


