### Accession
PXD035705

### Title
Proteomics analysis of TDP-43 aggregates derived from HEK293A

### Description
97% of sporadic ALS patients exhibit pathology and aggregation of a global RNA regulator protein, transactive response DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43). The goal of this study was to optimize and characterize a novel immuno-purification platform for ALS-associated TDP-43 aggregates using a scalable HEK293A culture model. Proteomics analysis was used to profile disease-associated post-translational modifications and TDP-43 co-aggregating proteins. Our findings support use of this protocol to generate pathologically relevant TDP-43 aggregates suitable for mechanistic studies in biochemical and cell-based assays.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prep: Immunoprecipitated samples were rinsed in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), three times, and were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion, as previously described (Rank et al., 2021). 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) containing 1 µg trypsin (Promega) was added to beads overnight at 37ºC with shaking. The next day, 500 ng of trypsin was added then incubated for an additional 3 h at 37ºC with shaking. Supernatants from pelleted beads were transferred, then beads were washed twice with 50 ul LC/MS grade water. These rinses were combined with original supernatant, then acidified to 2% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis. LC/MS/MS Analysis: Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5 - 40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode, where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and searched against the reviewed human database (containing 20245 sequences), appended with the mutant TARDBP sequence, using Sequest. Tryptic peptides were identified using the following parameters: minimum peptide length was set to 5 and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Variable modifications included: oxidation of M, phosphorylation of S/T/Y, GlyGly of K, and acetyl of K. Label-free quantification (LFQ) using razor + unique peptides was enabled. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used to filter proteins and peptides. A minimum of two peptides per protein and <50% missing values across all samples was required for further analysis.  Normalized data were exported from Proteome Discoverer and imported into Perseus version 1.6.14.0 for additional analysis. Imputation of missing values based on normal distribution with width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8, was performed. Student’s t-test was performed for each pairwise comparison (TDP_Isotype) and FDR corrected q-value and p-value were calculated. A log2 fold change ratio for TDP_Isotype was calculated using the normalized quantitative values and a log2 ratio ±-1 was considered significant. Samples 1-3: Isotype control IP Samples 4-6: TDP IP

### Publication Abstract
Transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43&#xa0;kDa (TDP-43) is a highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed nucleic acid-binding protein that regulates DNA/RNA metabolism. Genetics and neuropathology studies have linked TDP-43 to several neuromuscular and neurological disorders including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Under pathological conditions, TDP-43 mislocalizes to the cytoplasm where it forms insoluble, hyper-phosphorylated aggregates during disease progression. Here, we optimized a scalable <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> immuno-purification strategy referred to as tandem detergent-extraction and immunoprecipitation of proteinopathy (TDiP) to isolate TDP-43 aggregates that recapitulate those identified in postmortem ALS tissue. Moreover, we demonstrate that these purified aggregates can be utilized in biochemical, proteomics, and live-cell assays. This platform offers a rapid, accessible, and streamlined approach to study ALS disease mechanisms, while overcoming many limitations that have hampered TDP-43 disease modeling and therapeutic drug discovery efforts.

### Keywords
Aggregates, Affinity purification-mass spectrometry, Als

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Todd Cohen
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology, UNC-Chapel Hill


