### Accession
PXD020759

### Title
Quantitative interactomics of Lck-TurboID in living human T cells unveils T cell receptor stimulation-induced proximal Lck interactors

### Description
While Lck has been widely recognized to play a pivotal role in the initiation of the T cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway, an understanding of the precise regulation of Lck in T cells upon TCR activation remains elusive. Investigation of protein-protein interaction (PPI) using proximity labeling techniques such as TurboID has the potential to provide valuable molecular insights into Lck regulatory networks. By expressing Lck-TurboID in Jurkat T cells, we have uncovered a dynamic, short-range Lck protein interaction network upon 30 minutes of TCR stimulation. In this novel application of TurboID, we detected 27 TCR stimulation-induced Lck-proximal interactors in living T cells, including both bona fide and uncanonical Lck interactors, validating the discovery power of this tool. Our results revealed previously unappreciated Lck PPI which may be associated with cytoskeletal rearrangement, ubiquitination of TCR signaling proteins, activation of the MAPK cascade, coalescence of the LAT signalosome, and formation of the immunological synapse. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time in immune cells and for the kinase Lck that TurboID can be utilized to unveil PPI dynamics in living cells at a time scale consistent with TCR signaling.

### Sample Protocol
TurboID proximity labeling and T cell receptor stimulation Five replicates of 3×107 J.Lck.TurboID cells were washed with DPBS, resuspended in 6×107 cells/mL in DPBS, and allowed to rest for 20 minutes in 37°C. To initiate proximity labeling and TCR stimulation simultaneously, equal volume of 2 mM D-biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AAA1420703) dissolved in DPBS containing anti-TCR antibody (C305 IgM) to achieve a final concentration of 1 mM biotin and 1 μg/mL of C305 for 30 minutes at 37°C. Proximity labeling without the addition C305 antibody was included as control samples without TCR stimulation. For pervanadate (PV) treatment, as a positive control in immunoblots, cells were incubated with 500 µM PV (prepared by mixing equal volume of 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM hydrogen peroxide) for 10 minutes at 37°C. Sample processing for proteomic analysis Immediately after proximity labeling, cells were washed three times with 10 mL of DPBS, lysed in 1 mL of 1.2% SDS in DPBS, and boiled in 95°C for 5 minutes. Lysates were then sonicated at 30-W for 30 seconds and clarified via centrifugation at 20000×g for 10 minutes at 20°C. Protein concentration of the supernatant lysate was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). Lysate was diluted 6-fold in DPBS and transferred to 100 μL of streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 20353) for a 3-hour incubation period on a rocking platform at room temperature. Incubated beads were centrifuged at 1800×g for 5 minutes at 20°C, washed once with 4 mL of 0.2% SDS in DPBS, twice with 10 mL of DPBS, and once with 10 mL of milliQ water. Beads were subsequently resuspended in 8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 15 minutes at 65°C, alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Urea concentration in lysate was reduced to 2 M by dilution in 20 mM HEPES (pH 8) before addition of 2 μg of trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 37°C overnight for on-bead tryptic digestion. Digested peptides were collected and acidified to 0.15% TFA prior to desalting using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters, WAT023590) and subsequently solvent evaporation using speedvac vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry  Peptides were separated on a 15 cm (75 um ID) reversed phase analytical column packed in-house with XSelect CSH C18 2.5 μm resin (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted with a 65-minute gradient from 5% to 30% Buffer B, followed by a 5-minute gradient from 30% to 95% Buffer B, in a total method duration of 90 minutes (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Data was acquired on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by applying 2.2 kV of electrospray voltage in positive ion mode with advanced peak determination. MS scans with a 375-1400 m/z scan range for precursor ions of charge states 2-5 were acquired on the Orbitrap detector in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000, maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, automatic gain control (AGC) of 800,000, dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds in a data-dependent mode with 2-second cycle time. Up to top 9 precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (30% energy) and isolated within a mass isolation window of 0.7 m/z. MS/MS scans were collected in centroid mode on the ion trap detector with a scan range of 200-1300 m/z, a dynamic maximum injection time of 12 or 35 milliseconds, a dynamic AGC target of 10,000 or 20,000, depending on the precursor ions intensity. Database Search Parameters and Acceptance Criteria for Identifications Raw files were processed in MaxQuant (19) version 1.6.10.43 using the integrated peptide search engine Andromeda (20). MS/MS spectra were searched against a human UniProt database (Homo sapiens, last modified 12/01/2019) comprised of 74,811 forward protein sequences. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set on peptide spectrum match (PSM) using a reverse decoy protein sequence database approach. Protein groups identification was also set at 1% FDR. The following parameters were used: precursor ion tolerance of 3 ppm, ITMS MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, a maximum of two possible missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modifications of oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. “Match-between-runs” was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 minutes. Protein intensity was quantified using LFQ with default parameters (minimum ratio count of 2, fast LFQ enabled, minimum of 3 neighbors, average of 6 neighbors, normalized) (17).  Data Analysis ProteinGroups.txt (Table S2) from MaxQuant was imported into Perseus (21) version 1.6.10.43. Protein groups originating from reverse hits, only identified by site, and common or potential contaminants (such as keratin, ribosome-associated proteins) are removed prior to logarithmic transformation of the LFQ protein intensities. Only protein groups with at least 3 out of 5 replicates in which the protein intensities were quantified in each condition were analyzed. Missing values in protein intensities were then imputed from the normal distribution of each replicate (width 0.3; downshift 1.8) before p values were obtained using a two-sample unpaired student’s t-test. Subsequently, p values were corrected to q values using permutation-based FDR multiple hypothesis testing correction. Protein groups with a q value less than 0.15 were considered significant, and further binned into three categories: high stringency (q < 0.05), medium stringency (0.05 ≤ q < 0.10) or low stringency (0.10 ≤ q < 0.15). To further improve the confidence of significant hits, only protein groups that exceed a minimum threshold of 0.2 in |log2(fold change)| were further analyzed. A fold-change cutoff of 0.2 represents one standard deviation of the distribution of log2(fold change) across all proteins (Figure S2A), as previously described (22). Significantly changing proteins were used for Fisher’s exact test to determine the enriched Gene Ontology Biological Process categories confined within 1% FDR using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Protein motif analysis were generated using InterProScan (23).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cell receptor, Lck, Interactome, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of molecular biology, cell biology and biochemistry, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Brown University, United States

### Submitter
Xien Yu Chua

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur, Salomon
Department of molecular biology, cell biology and biochemistry, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Brown University, United States


