### Accession
PXD003606

### Title
Proteomics characterization of VPCs

### Description
hESCs were differentiated into vascular progenitor cells, using defined growth conditions. Initial population of SCs and the two derivative CD34 positive and CD34 negative populations were analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed using RIPA buffer and run in 1D-SDS-PAGE. Gel slices were trypsin digested and analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant. Proteins were quantified using LFQ algorithm. Statistical analysis was performed using Statistica software or R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are promising in regenerative medicine (RM) due to their differentiation plasticity and proliferation potential. However, a major challenge in RM is the generation of a vascular system to support nutrient flow to newly synthesized tissues. Here we refined an existing method to generate tight vessels by differentiating hESCs in CD34(+) vascular progenitor cells using chemically defined media and growth conditions. We selectively purified these cells from CD34(-) outgrowth populations also formed. To analyze these differentiation processes, we compared the proteomes of the hESCs with those of the CD34(+) and CD34(-) populations using high resolution mass spectrometry, label-free quantification, and multivariate analysis. Eighteen protein markers validate the differentiated phenotypes in immunological assays; nine of these were also detected by proteomics and show statistically significant differential abundance. Another 225 proteins show differential abundance between the three cell types. Sixty-three of these have known functions in CD34(+) and CD34(-) cells. CD34(+) cells synthesize proteins implicated in endothelial cell differentiation and smooth muscle formation, which support the bipotent phenotype of these progenitor cells. CD34(-) cells are more heterogeneous synthesizing muscular/osteogenic/chondrogenic/adipogenic lineage markers. The remaining &gt;150 differentially abundant proteins in CD34(+) or CD34(-) cells raise testable hypotheses for future studies to probe vascular morphogenesis.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Vascular progenitor cells, Cd34

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Konstantinos Tsolis

### Lab Head
Dr Anastasios (Tassos) Economou
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium


