### Accession
PXD012557

### Title
 Small RNA-mediated transgenerational silencing of histone genes impairs fertility in piRNA mutants

### Description
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) promote fertility in many animals. Yet, whether this is due to their conserved role in repressing repetitive elements (REs) or other functions remains unclear. Here, we show that the progressive loss of fertility in Caenorhabditis elegans lacking piRNAs is not caused by derepression of REs or other piRNA targets, but rather mediated by the epigenetic silencing of all the replicative histone genes. In the absence of piRNAs, downstream components of the piRNA pathway relocalize from germ granules and piRNA targets to histone mRNAs to synthesize antisense small RNAs (sRNAs) and induce transgenerational silencing. Removal of the downstream components of the piRNA pathway is sufficient to restore histone mRNA expression and fertility in piRNA mutants, and the inheritance of histone sRNAs in wild-type worms adversely affects their fertility for multiple generations. We conclude that the transgenerational silencing of histone genes contributes to the progressive loss of fertility in piRNA mutants and that coupling piRNAs and histone silencing may serve to maintain piRNAs production across evolution.

### Sample Protocol
The strains used for quantification of PRG-1 and CSR-1 IPs are MHE7 (prg-1(gc007[prg-1::3xFLAG::2xHA])I) and MHE27 (csr-1(gc017[csr-1::3xFLAG::1HA])IV) respectively. Wild-type Bristol N2 was used as control for background. The train used for Quantification of WAGO-1 IPs in wild-type and piwi mutant were MHE51 (wago-1(gc026[3xflag::ollas::wago-1])I) and MHE58 (wago-1(gc026[3xflag::ollas::wago-1])I ;piwi (gc025)I). Wild-type Bristol N2 was used as control for background. Synchronous population of 120,000 (for CSR-1 and PRG-1 IPs) or 40,000 (for WAGO-1 IPs) worms were harvested at 48 hours post hatching and suspended in the extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.25% NP40, protease inhibitor cocktails (Fermentas)) followed by 30 strokes using a metal dounce on ice. Crude protein extracts were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was quantified by the Bradford assay, and 2 mg of protein extract was incubated with 15 μl of packed Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Agarose Beads (M8823, Sigma) for 1 hour at 4°C. After four washes with the extraction buffer the beads were r washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Caenorhabditis elegans database (UP000001940_6239 containing 19990 entries) subset of the UniProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.

### Publication Abstract
In the Caenorhabditis elegans germline, thousands of mRNAs are concomitantly expressed with antisense 22G-RNAs, which are loaded into the Argonaute CSR-1. Despite their essential functions for animal fertility and embryonic development, how CSR-1 22G-RNAs are produced remains unknown. Here, we show that CSR-1 slicer activity is primarily involved in triggering the synthesis of small RNAs on the coding sequences of germline mRNAs and post-transcriptionally regulates a fraction of targets. CSR-1-cleaved mRNAs prime the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, EGO-1, to synthesize 22G-RNAs in phase with translating ribosomes, in contrast to other 22G-RNAs mostly synthesized in germ granules. Moreover, codon optimality and efficient translation antagonize CSR-1 slicing and 22G-RNAs biogenesis. We propose that codon usage differences encoded into mRNA sequences might be a conserved strategy in eukaryotes to regulate small RNA biogenesis and Argonaute targeting.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Lc-ms/ms, Wago-1

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


