### Accession
PXD001025

### Title
Basement Membranes from Human Retinal Blood Vessels, Inner Limiting Membranes, and Lens Capsules

### Description
Three types of BMs from adult human eyes, the inner limiting membrane, the retinal vascular BMs and the lens capsule, were isolated for analysis by 1D-SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
BMs from adult human eyes, the inner limiting membrane, the retinal vascular BMs and the lens capsule, were manually dissected from normal human cadaver eyes and incubated in 2% Triton X100 overnight. Deoxycholate was added, and the detergent-insoluble BMs were transferred multiple times into new detergent. The tube-like blood vessel BMs (BV) were manually separated from the sheet-like inner limiting membranes (ILMs) under a dissecting microscope using dark-field illumination. Lens capsule (LCs) were dissected from the isolated lenses.  The BMs were then deglycosylated with heparitinase and chondroitinase ABC lyase (100U/ml; Seikagaku America, East Falmouth, MA) for 2 hours, then solubilized in 8M urea/mercaptoethanol. The solubilized sample was separated using a low percentage gradient (3-15%) 1D SDS PAGE gel under reducing conditions. SDS PAGE gel lanes were cut into 14-48 bands, reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Digests were analyzed on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Velos Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification along with relative quantification by iBAQ values were done by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Basement membranes (BMs) are extracellular matrix sheets comprising the laminins, type-IV collagens, nidogens, and the heparan sulfate proteoglycans, perlecan, collagen XVIII, and agrin. In intact BMs, BM proteins are physiologically insoluble and partially resistant to proteolytic digestion, making BMs a challenge to study. Here three types of BMs from adult human eyes, the inner limiting membrane (ILM), the retinal vascular BMs, and the lens capsule, were isolated for analysis by 1D-SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS. Peptide and protein identifications were done using MaxQuant. 1129 proteins were identified with a 1% false discovery rate. Data showed that BMs are composed of multiple laminins, collagen IVs, nidogens, and proteoglycans. The dominant laminin family member in all BMs was laminin &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;2&#x3b3;1. The dominant collagen IV trimer in lens capsule (LC) and blood vessel (BV) BMs had a chain composition of &#x3b1;1(IV)<sub>2</sub>, &#x3b1;2 (IV), whereas the dominant collagen IV in the ILM had the &#x3b1;3(IV), &#x3b1;4(IV), &#x3b1;5(IV) chain composition. The data also showed that the ratio of laminin and collagen IVs varied among different BM types: the ratio of collagen IV to the other BM proteins is highest in LC, followed by BV and lowest for the ILM. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001025.

### Keywords
Nidogens, Laminin, Collagen iv, Proteomics, Collagens, Perlecan, Mass spectrometry, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Guy Uechi

### Lab Head
Dr Guy T. Uechi
University of Pittsburgh


