### Accession
PXD031214

### Title
Identification of a HTT-specific binding motif in DNAJB1 essential for suppression and disaggregation of HTT

### Description
Identification of the binding interface between HttExon1Q48 and the molecular chaperone DNAJB1. The proteins were incubated and cross-linked in vitro and the binding interface was mapped to the hinge region between CTDI and CTDII of DNAJB1 and the proline rich domain of HTTEXon1Q48.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linked proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and subsequent in-gel digestion. In brief, gel bands were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out using elastase at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using XlinkX 45 with the following parameters: unspecific in silico digestion with minimum peptide length = 6; maximal peptide length = 30 and missed cleavages = 3; fix modification: Cys carbamidomethyl = 57.021 Da; variable modification: Met oxidation = 15.995 Da; SDA cross-linker = 82.04186 Da; precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance = 20 ppm. MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing HTTExon1Q48 and DNAJB1 proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease is a neurodegenerative disease caused by an expanded polyQ stretch within Huntingtin (HTT) that renders the protein aggregation-prone, ultimately resulting in the formation of amyloid fibrils. A trimeric chaperone complex composed of Hsc70, DNAJB1 and Apg2 can suppress and reverse the aggregation of HTTExon1Q<sub>48</sub>. DNAJB1 is the rate-limiting chaperone and we have here identified and characterized the binding interface between DNAJB1 and HTTExon1Q<sub>48</sub>. DNAJB1 exhibits a HTT binding motif (HBM) in the hinge region between C-terminal domains (CTD) I and II and binds to the polyQ-adjacent proline rich domain (PRD) of soluble as well as aggregated HTT. The PRD of HTT represents an additional binding site for chaperones. Mutation of the highly conserved H244 of the HBM of DNAJB1 completely abrogates the suppression and disaggregation of HTT fibrils by the trimeric chaperone complex. Notably, this mutation does not affect the binding and remodeling of any other protein substrate, suggesting that the HBM of DNAJB1 is a specific interaction site for HTT. Overexpression of wt DNAJB1, but not of DNAJB1<sup>H244A</sup> can prevent the accumulation of HTTExon1Q<sub>97</sub> aggregates in HEK293 cells, thus validating the biological significance of the HBM within DNAJB1.

### Keywords
Dnajb1, Htt, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Faculty of Chemistry and Biology University of Bremen
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie

### Submitter
Heike Stephanowitz

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Kirstein
Faculty of Chemistry and Biology University of Bremen


