### Accession
PXD030294

### Title
A novel small molecule that induces cytotoxicity in lung cancer cells inhibits disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1

### Description
Phenotype-based screening can identify unique small molecules that elicit a desired cellular response, but additional approaches are required to characterize their targets and mechanisms of action. Here we show that a compound termed LCS3, which selectively impairs the growth of human lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells, induces oxidative stress. To identify the target that mediates this effect, we used thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and uncovered the disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1 as targets. We confirmed through enzymatic assays that LCS3 inhibits disulfide reductase activity through a reversible, uncompetitive mechanism. Further, we demonstrate that LCS3-sensitive LUAD cells are sensitive to the synergistic inhibition of glutathione and thioredoxin pathways. Lastly, a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen identified NQO1 loss as a mechanism of LCS3 resistance. This work highlights the ability of TPP to uncover targets of small molecules identified by high-throughput screens and demonstrates the potential therapeutic utility of inhibiting disulfide reductases in LUAD.

### Sample Protocol
Five million H23 cells were seeded in two 15cm plates and harvested the next day by 2x cold PBS wash and gentle scraping using a cell lifter. Cells were pelleted at 1000rpm, resuspended in cold PBS, and lysed by three freeze-thaw cycles using an ethanol-dry ice bath. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and diluted in PBS to a concentration of 1mg/mL. Lysates (1.2mL volume) were then treated with either 0.1% DMSO or 2µM LCS3 in duplicate, incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature and then placed on ice, as specified  by the TPP protocol (Franken et al., 2015). Treated lysates were aliquoted into 100µL volumes in eleven PCR tubes, which were then heated to Celsius temperatures of 37º, 41º, 44º, 47º, 50º, 53º, 56º, 59º, 63º, 67º for 3 minutes by thermocycler, placed in a room temperature water bath for 3 minutes, and then snap frozen in an ethanol-dry ice bath. The lysates were thawed together on ice, transferred into thickwall polycarbonate centrifuge tube and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 xg for 20 minutes at 4ºC in a Beckman TL-100 ultracentrifuge. Following ultracentrifugation, 90μL of lysate was carefully pipetted from the surface as not to capture denatured proteins pelleted by centrifugation. The proteins were then digested, reduced, alkylated and cleaned up by single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) by established methods (Hughes et al., 2019). Pooled mixtures of peptides from each temperature condition were desalted and checked for quality on a LTQ Orbitrap VelosTM mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were then TMT labelled according to manufacturer specifications. In the multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) preparation, in the 11th channel (TMT11-131C) we included an untreated H23 lysate mix, which was not subjected to temperature challenge or ultracentrifugation, to enhance discovery of underrepresented peptides. Peptides were desalted by stage tipping, fractionated by HPLC and speed vacuumed to dryness before reconstitution in 1% formic acid, 1% DMSO and injection into an Orbitrap FusionTM mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
TPP data were processed by Proteome Discoverer software and resulting detected proteins were ranked by a non-linear regression data analysis (NPARC) using an open source R package (Childs et al., 2019). Proteins with an adjusted p-value < 0.01 were considered hits. This analysis produced a list of 77 protein candidates, which were then clustered into gene ontology biological processes by DAVID Bioinformatics Database v6.8 (Huang da et al., 2009) for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotype-based screening can identify small molecules that elicit a desired cellular response, but additional approaches are required to characterize their targets and mechanisms of action. Here, we show that a compound termed LCS3, which selectively impairs the growth of human lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells, induces oxidative stress. To identify the target that mediates this effect, we use thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and uncover the disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1 as targets. We confirm through enzymatic assays that LCS3 inhibits disulfide reductase activity through a reversible, uncompetitive mechanism. Further, we demonstrate that LCS3-sensitive LUAD cells are sensitive to the synergistic inhibition of glutathione and thioredoxin pathways. Lastly, a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen identifies NQO1 loss as a mechanism of LCS3 resistance. This work highlights the ability of TPP to uncover targets of small molecules identified by high-throughput screens and demonstrates the potential therapeutic utility of inhibiting disulfide reductases in LUAD.

### Keywords
Lcs3, Thermal proteome profiling

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Fraser Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr William Lockwood
University of British Columbia


