### Accession
PXD019506

### Title
Proteome analysis revealed the essential functions of protein phosphatase PP2A in the induction of Th9 cells

### Description
we performed proteome analysis of Th9 cells to understand the involvement of proteins that might be crucial for the anti-tumor functions of Th9 cells. Here we show for the first time a comprehensive proteomic analysis of murine Th0 and Th9 cells, which identified 1451 total proteins among which 1367 proteins were common. Further analysis revealed that 118 proteins were upregulated while 81 proteins were downregulated in Th9 cells. Pathway analysis suggested an abundance of phosphoproteins in the proteome of Th9 cells. Among upregulated phosphoproteins which showed to be involved in immune 34 system, Ppp2ca (catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase, PP2A) was found to be highly expressed in Th9 cells. Although the role of PP2A has been shown to regulate the differentiation and functions of Th1,Th2, Th17 and Tregs, its role in differentiation and functions of Th9 cells is not identified yet. Our results show for the first time that PP2A is required for the differentiation and anti-tumor functions of Th9 cells. PP2A inhibition leads to the suppression of IL-9 induction and the expression of key transcription factors of Th9 cells.

### Sample Protocol
All fractions were subjected to 5600 Triple-TOF mass spectrometer which is directly linkedto reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatography Ekspert-nanoLC 415 system (Eksigent).The data dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments was set to obtain a high resolution TOF-MS scan over a mass range 100–1250 m/z, followed by MS/MS scans of 20 ion candidates per cycle with activated rolling collision energy, operating the instrument in high sensitivity mode using the Analyst TF 1.7 where each 1 second MS survey scan was followed by 3 MS/MS scans of 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) software against a UniProt mouse protein database (June, 2018). Carboamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modification. MaxQuant search algorithm uses separate mass tolerances for each peptide, however, the initial maximum precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis identifies post-translational functions of proteins, which remains obscure in transcriptomics. Given the important functions of Th9 cells in anti-tumor immunity, we performed proteome analysis of Th9 cells to understand the involvement of proteins that might be crucial for the anti-tumor functions of Th9 cells. Here we performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of murine Th0 and Th9 cells, and identified proteins that are enriched in Th9 cells. Pathway analysis identified an abundance of phosphoproteins in the proteome of Th9 cells as compared to Th0 cells. Among upregulated phosphoproteins, Ppp2ca (catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase, PP2A) was found to be highly enriched in Th9 cells. Although the role of PP2A has been shown to regulate the differentiation and functions of Th1, Th2, Th17 and Tregs, its role in the differentiation and functions of Th9 cells is not identified yet. Here we found that PP2A is required for the induction of Th9 cells, as PP2A inhibition leads to the suppression of IL-9 and expression of key transcription factors of Th9 cells. PP2A inhibition abrogates Th9 cell-mediated anti-tumor immune response in B16-OVA melanoma tumor model. Thus, we report that PP2A is essential for the differentiation and anti-tumor functions of Th9 cells.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pp2a, Th9 cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway Faridabad 121 001 Haryana, INDIA

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Amit Awasthi
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway Faridabad 121 001 Haryana, INDIA


