### Accession
PXD020316

### Title
Neuronal cells from ASL patients

### Description
This study describes altered CREB-dependent activity related transcription, and disrupted synaptic composition as common pathological features in ALS. These aberrations are restored by Apamin and XE991, two K+ channel blockers targeting the SK and Kv7 channels and modulating neuronal excitability.This study describes altered CREB-dependent activity related transcription, and disrupted synaptic composition as common pathological features in ALS. These aberrations are restored by Apamin and XE991, two K+ channel blockers targeting the SK and Kv7 channels and modulating neuronal excitability.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 50µg of cell lysates according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 1.2% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Two extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2.5µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 100µl of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each replicate to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human database. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein.  statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.12.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. For statistical comparison, we set three groups (corresponding to Vehicle, Apamin, and XE991 treatments), each containing four biological replicates. Each sample was run in technical triplicates as well. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values out 4 in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. Hierarchical clustering of all proteins was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances. We performed a T-test of each treatment against vehicle and data were plotted in a multiple volcano plot (class A proteins FDR<0.01, S0=1, class B proteins FDR<0.01, S0=0.1). Significative proteins Class B upregulates and downregulates by the two treatments were submitted to Fisher enrichment test (Benjamin-Hochberg FDR<0.02).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Motoneurons, Label free, Asl

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomic Platform Necker, INSERM US24, SFR Necker Université de Paris

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr GUERRERA Isa Chuara
Proteomic Platform Necker, INSERM US24, SFR Necker Université de Paris


