### Accession
PXD025344

### Title
Fruit fly O-GlcNAc glycoproteomics

### Description
The reversible posttranslational O-GlcNAc modification of serine or threonine residues of intracellular proteins is involved in many cellular events from signaling cascades to epigenetic and transcriptional regulation.  O-GlcNAcylation is a conserved nutrient-dependent process involving two enzymes, O-GlcNAc Transferase (OGT) adding O-GlcNAc while O-GlcNAcase (OGA) removing it in a manner that’s protein and context dependent. O-GlcNAcylation is essential for epigenetic regulation of gene expression through its action on Polycomb and Trithorax and Compass complexes. However, the important role of O-GlcNAc on adult life and healthspan have been largely unexplored, mainly due the lack of available model systems. Cataloging the O-GlcNAc proteome has proven useful in understanding the biology of this modification in vivo. In this study, we leveraged a recently developed oga knockout fly  mutant to identify the O-GlcNAcylated proteins in adult Drosophila melanogaster. The adult O-GlcNAc proteome revealed many proteins related to cell and organismal growth, development, differentiation, and epigenetics. We identified many O-GlcNAcylated proteins that serve a role in increased growth and decreased longevity, including HCF, SIN3A, LOLA, KISMET, ATX2, SHOT, and FOXO.

### Sample Protocol
Male and female flies were prepared at 4°C by homogenization in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.05% Rapigest (Waters) buffer. Following a brief (30 min) incubation on ice, each sample was sonicated before removal of tissue/cell debris by centrifugation (2000g, 4°C, 10 min). Total protein extracts were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (60°C, 30 min) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) in dark for 30 min before digestion with 25 µg trypsin (37°C, 16h). Tryptic peptides were labeled with dimethyl stable isotopes using light reagent for WT and medium (deuterated) reagent for ogadel.1 knockout samples.  WT and ogadel.1 knockout tryptic digests were subsequently mixed at 1:1 ratio and desalted on Sep-Pak C18  cartridges (Waters). The tryptic digests were then treated with PNGase F and PNGase A glycosidases to remove N-linked (GlcNAc) glycans. The mixed and labeled sample was passed through a 2.8m ConA column mainly to enrich for O-Man glycopeptides but also to remove any remaining N-glycopeptides. The flow-through fraction from the ConA was then passed through a VVA column for depletion of O-GalNAc glycopeptides. Finally, the VVA flow-through fraction was enriched using an in-house packed 10m WGA-agarose (Vector Laboratories) column. Five percent (v/v) of each flow-through, wash and elution (0.5M GlcNAc) fraction was screened by mass spectrometry for m/z 204 oxonium ions. Selected fractions were then pooled, concentrated, and subjected to a second round of WGA chromatography. For female flies, fractions containing O-GlcNAc were once again pooled, purified by C18 reversed phase chromatography and further fractionated by isoelectric focusing into 12 fractions. For male flies, O-GlcNAc peptides were enriched by sequential WGA chromatography before high-pH reversed-phase orthogonal fractionation into 8 fractions. IEF and high-pH fractions were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Multiply charged precursor ions were selected for HCD and ETciD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Raw files were processed using MS Amanda/Sequest HT nodes and searched against the canonical D. melanogaster proteome from Uniprot (January, 2016). Carbamidomethyl (Cys: +57.021 Da) and dimethyl (peptide N-term and Lys: +28.031 Da or +32.056 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation (Met: +15.995 Da) and HexNAc (Ser/Thr: +203.079 Da) were set as variable modifications. One missed tryptic (full- and semi-specific) cleavage was allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was <10 ppm and MS2 fragment tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate was calculated by the Target Decoy PSM validator note and only highly confident peptide hits were considered. The identified PSMs were further validated by manual inspection to assure correct assignments. MS1-level quantification was performed using the Precursor Ions Quantifier node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-glcnac, Fusion, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Copenhagen Denmark


