### Accession
PXD037097

### Title
Proteomics,N-glycoproteomics and Phosphoproteomics of SARS-Cov-2 Infected Calu-3 Cells

### Description
We present an multiple proteomics study of SARS-Cov-2 infection to comprehensively decipher the changes in host cells in response to viral infection, including global proteomics, N-glycoproteomics and phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate from the flow-through of immunoprecipitation was collected for proteomics analysis. Proteins from the flow-though were precipitated by adding 10 volumes of cold acetone overnight at -20 °C. Protein precipitates were washed with acetone for three times and air dried in a fume hood. For digestion, proteins were solubilized in 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH=7.4) and protein concentration was measured by Dc Assay. Proteins were reduced by DTT, alkylated by IAA and digested by trypsin. Protein digest was desalted by HyperSep C18 SPE cartridge and protein digest were dried by Speed Vac for further process. Hydrophilic interaction solid phase extraction (HILIC SPE) was conducted as previously described with minor changes. 200 µg of dried protein digest was solubilized in 80 % of acetonitrile (ACN) with 1 % of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto the microcolumn packed with 5 mg of polyhdroxylethyl beads (100 Å, 5 µm). After three washes with the same loading buffer, glycopeptides retained on SPE column were eluted by 30 % of ACN with 0.1 % TFA. For the flow-through lysate digestion, two replicates of HILIC enrichment were carried out and eluted glycoppeptides from one replicate was lyophilized for intact glycopeptides analysis. Glycopeptides from the other replicate was then deglycosylated by incubation with 50 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH=7.5) with 1 unit per microliter of PGNase F (New England Biolabs) over night at 37 °C. Deglycosylated peptides were dried with Speed Vac and the samples were stored at -80 oC until MS analysis. For HLA protein from immunoprecipitation, flow-though and wash was combined to collect non-glycosylated peptides for protein identification. Elution from HILIC SPE was lyophilized for intact glycopeptides analysis. For phosphopeptide enrichment, affinity enrichment with titanium dioxide nanoparticles was adapted from a previous method[14]. TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared in suspension of 20 mg/ml in 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile with the adding of glycolic acid (300 mg/ml). 200 µg protein digest was reconstituted in 200 µl of each loading buffer and 50 µl of TiO2 suspension was added. The mixture was kept shaking at room temperature for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 3 min. Supernatant was discarded and 250 µl of loading buffer was added.  The mixture was shaken for 15 min and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 3 min. The pellet was then washed by 200 µl of 80% ACN in 0.1 % TFA for 15 min. After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 3 min, 200 µl of 5% ammonia was added to the pellet and the pellet was shaken for 15 min. In the final step, the mixture was centrifuged at 17,000 g for 3 min and supernatant containing eluted phosphopeptides was transferred to a clean tube. Eluted phosphopeptides was dried the elution with Speed Vac and stored the samples at -80 oC until MS analysis

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed with Maxquant and protein database search were done by Androma engine against the same database used for immunopeptidomics. For total proteomics, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and as variable modifications. For phosphopteomics, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation were added as variable modification. For N-glycoproteomics, deamination of asparagine was set as variable modification. An FDR of 1% was set for PSM, site and protein. LFQ was selected to extract the peak intensities of each phosphosites and the results were processed by Persus.

### Publication Abstract
We present an integrated immunopeptidomics and proteomics study of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection to comprehensively decipher the changes in host cells in response to viral infection. Immunopeptidomics analysis identified viral antigens presented by host cells through both class I and class II MHC system for recognition by the adaptive immune system. The host proteome changes were characterized by quantitative proteomics and glycoproteomics and from these data, the activation of toll-like receptor 3-interferon pathway was identified. Glycosylation analysis of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) proteins from the elution and flow-through of immunoprecipitation revealed that SARS-CoV-2 infection changed the glycosylation pattern of certain HLA alleles with different HLA alleles, showing distinct dynamic changes in relative abundance. The difference in the glycosylation and abundance of HLA alleles changed the number of strong binding antigens each allele presented, suggesting the impact of SARS-CoV-2 infection on antigen presentation is allele-specific. These results could be further exploited to explain the imbalanced response from innate and adaptive immune system in coronavirus disease 2019 cases, which would be helpful for the development of therapeutics and vaccine for coronavirus disease 2019 and preparation for future pandemic.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Calu-3

### Affiliations
National Research Council Canada
Human Health Therapeutics Research Centre, National Research Council Canada

### Submitter
Rui Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Chen
Human Health Therapeutics Research Centre, National Research Council Canada


