### Accession
PXD015319

### Title
Peptide-based quorum sensing systems in Paenibacillus polymyxa

### Description
Paenibacillus polymyxa is an agriculturally important plant growth promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR). Many Paenibacillus species are known to be engaged in complex bacteria-bacteria and bacteria-host interactions, which in other bacteria were shown to necessitate quorum sensing communication, but to date no quorum sensing systems have been described in Paenibacillus. Here we show that the type strain P. polymyxa ATCC 842 encodes at least 16 peptide-based communication systems. Each of these systems comprises a pro-peptide that is secreted to the growth medium and further processed to generate a mature short peptide. Each peptide has a cognate intracellular receptor of the RRNPP family, and we show that external addition of P. polymyxa communication peptides to the medium leads to reprogramming of the transcriptional response. We found that these quorum sensing systems are conserved across hundreds of species belonging to the Paenibacillaceae family, with some species encoding more than 25 different peptide-receptor pairs, representing a record number of quorum sensing systems encoded in a single genome.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria culture and growth conditions P. polymyxa ATCC 842 was obtained from the BGSC (strain 25A2) and stored in -80°C as a glycerol stock. For all experiments, bacteria were first streaked on an LB plate, grown in 30°C at least overnight and colonies were used to inoculate round-bottom ventilated 15 mL tubes containing 4-5 mL LB medium, grown at 30°C with 200 RPM shaking.  Preparation of growth media for mass spectrometry experiments To search for peptide fragments secreted to the growth medium, overnight 5 ml cultures of P. polymyxa or B. subtilis 168 were first washed by centrifuging for 5 min in 4,000 RPM at room temperature and re-suspended in 5 ml of chemically defined medium described in reference (Agata, N., Ohta, M., Mori, M. & Shibayama, K. Growth conditions of and emetic toxin production by Bacillus cereus in a defined medium with amino acids. Microbiol. Immunol. 43, 15–8 (1999)). Washed cultures were then diluted 1:100 into 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 50 mL defined media. The cells were grown in 30°C with 200 RPM shaking for 8 hrs for P. polymyxa log samples (OD ~0.1) and 24 hrs for the stationary samples; and 5 hours for B. subtilis log samples (OD ~0.3) and 8 hours for the stationary samples (OD ~0.9). At the designated time point, 23 mL samples were centrifuged for 5 mins at 4000 RPM in 4°C, and two technical replicates of 10 mL of the supernatant for each sample were transferred to new tubes and flash frozen immediately.  Sample Preparation for MS-analysis A method based on protein interaction with a solid phase was applied to enrich for communication peptides present in the supernatants. Prior to usage, a disposable solid phase enrichment (SPE) column (Phenomenex, 8B-S100-AAK), packed with an 8.5 nm pore size, modified styrene-divinylbenzene resign was equilibrated by rinsing with twice 1 ml acetonitrile and twice 1 ml water. Subsequently, 10 ml culture supernatant was loaded and unbound, potentially larger proteins were removed by washing twice with 1 ml water. Finally, the enriched sample fraction was eluted with 0.5 ml acetonitrile (70% v/v) and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid before MS-analysis. Mass spectrometry Peptides derived from the cytosolic fraction were loaded on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 mm, outer diameter 360 mm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 mm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Elution of peptides was executed with a nonlinear 86 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan at a resolution of R = 70,000 and 3 x 106 automatic gain control target with activated lock mass correction was followed by selection of the 12 most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. Data-dependent MS/MS Scans were performed at a resolution of R = 17,500 and 1 x 105 automatic gain control target with a NCE of 27.5. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states or charge states higher than six were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion for 30 s was activated.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides was carried out by database search using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 with the implemented Andromeda algorithm (Cox, J. et al. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–26 (2014)) applying the following parameters: digestion mode unspecific; variable modification, methionine oxidation, and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide; activated ‘match-between runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match, peptide and protein level were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for identification. Two databases were used for peptide identification: An IMG-contig based database for P. polymyxa ATCC 842 also containing the sequences for the Alo systems (5,429 entries) and the reference proteome of B. subtilis 168 downloaded from the Uniprot database (at 19/01/2019) containing 4,264 entries. Common laboratory contaminations and reverse entries were added during MaxQuant search and a peptide length of 5-35 amino acids was specified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paenibacillus polymyxa, Peptides, Quorum sensing, Communication system

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


