### Accession
PXD026419

### Title
Gendered burial practices of early Bronze Age children align with peptide-based sex identification: a case study from Franzhausen I, Austria

### Description
Gendered burial practices that differentiate between men and women by the way the body was placed were used over large parts of Central Europe in the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age (c. 2900−1600 BC). The differentiation of bodies placed on the left/right side in opposite orientation was extended to children, but until recently, it was difficult to confirm if the biological sex of the children matched the classification as men and women.  We applied nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) to identify sex-specific peptides in human tooth enamel in 75 children buried at one of the largest Early Bronze Age cemeteries in Europe, Franzhausen I, Austria, 70 of which produced reliable results.  The study confirmed that the sex of the children corresponds to the gendered body position in 98.4 % of cases. For burials in which the gendered sidedness and orientation are not internally consistent with the male or female pattern, we found that the sidedness of the body corresponds to the sex of the children rather than the orientation.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared using a slightly modified version of the previously described protocol by Stewart et al. 2017. In order to avoid potential sample cross-contamination, samples were prepared in an isolated fashion on workbenches not dedicated to proteomics sample preparation. A small fraction of the tooth enamel was abraded using fine grit sandpaper. The tooth was subsequently washed with 4% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide (8070.1; Carl Roth) and rinsed with MS grade water (83645.320; VWR). The abraded part of the tooth’s surface was immersed in 120 µL 5% (v/v) hydrochloric acid (1.00317.100; Merck) placed in the cap of a 0.5 mL Eppendorf microcentrifuge tube and etched for 2 minutes; the first etch solution was discarded. A second etch was performed similarly to the first one, which was further processed. C18 ZipTip (87782; Pierce® C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific) were used for the peptide clean-up procedure. The C18 ZipTip conditioning was performed by pipetting 3 times 10 µL 100% acetonitrile (83639.320; VWR), followed by 3 times 10 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (84865.180; VWR). Each draw was discarded. The etch solution was bound to the resin by pipetting the etch solution into a clean microcentrifuge tube, followed by pipetting up and down in the transferred solution until total pipetting steps were equal to 20 times pipetting. The resin was washed by pipetting 10 µL 0.1% formic acid 6 times, each draw was discarded. Elution of peptides was performed by pipetting 2 times 10 µL each elution buffer (60% ACN, 0.1% FA) into a clean 1.5 mL Eppendorf microcentrifuge tube. The sample was dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 2 µL 30% formic acid solution containing four synthetic standard peptides (10 fM) for internal quality control, 10 µL Eluent A (97.9% MS grade water, 2% MS grade ACN, 0.1% FA) were added. Analysis was performed employing a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a Q Exactive classic orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source. Measurement protocol for LC and MS conditions were an adapted version of a recently published method (Stewart et al. 2017). In short, peptide trapping was performed with a Thermo Scientific Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column with 20mm length (100µM ID, 5µM particle size), followed by peptide separation with a Thermo Scientific Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column with 500mm length (75µM ID, 3µM particle size). A non-linear gradient from 1% to 45% Eluent B (20% MS grade water, 79% MS grade ACN, 0.1% FA) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL per minute with subsequent increase to 99% Eluent B for 5 minutes followed by column equilibration at 1% Eluent B for 19 minutes. The mass spectrometer was set to a scan range from 300 to 1400 m/z at MS1 level. Resolution was set to 70.000 and 17.500 at 200 m/z with a maximum IT of 50 and 150ms and AGC target of 3e6 and 2e4 for MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively. For MS2 scans, an isolation width of 1.8 m/z was chosen and only charge states from 2 to 4 were allowed for HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of enamel peptides, the software Peaks (Peaks Studio 10.5 build 20191120) was used. For the database supported search, a version of the human proteome from uniprot with 20.429 entries (October 2019) was employed. Dynamic modifications, namely N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and arginine deamidation were considered. Digestion mode was set to “unspecific”. The maximal mass deviation of the precursor peptide was 15 ppm, the maximal fragment mass deviation was set to 0.05 Da. For peptide identification, a strict FDR of 1% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of sex-specific peptides in human tooth enamel by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) represents a quantum leap for the study of childhood and social relations more generally. Determining sex-related differences in prehistoric child rearing and mortality has been hampered by the insufficient accuracy in determining the biological sex of juveniles. We conducted mass spectrometric analysis to identify sex-specific peptides in the dental enamel of a child from a settlement pit of the Early Bronze Age settlement of Schleinbach, Austria (c. 1950-1850 bc). Four perimortal impression fractures on the skull of a 5-6-year-old child indicate an intentional killing, with a co-buried loom weight as possible murder weapon. Proteomic analysis, conducted for the first time on prehistoric teeth in Austria, determined the child's sex as male. While we cannot conclusively determine whether the child was the victim of conflicts between village groups or was slain by members of his own community, we suggest that contextual evidence points to the latter. A possible trigger of violence was the follow-on effects of an uncontrolled middle ear infection revealed by an osteological analysis. The boy from Schleinbach highlights the potential for further investigation of gender-biased violence, infanticide and child murder based on the recently developed method of proteomic sex identification.

### Keywords
Sex, Burial practice, Gender, Bronze age, Enamel peptides

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


