### Accession
PXD004120

### Title
Pre-assembled Nuclear Pores Insert into the Nuclear Envelope During Early Development

### Description
Nuclear Pore Complexes (NPCs) span the nuclear envelope (NE) and mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport. In metazoan oocytes and early embryos, NPCs not only reside within the NE but also at some endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) membrane sheets, termed annulate lamellae (AL). Although a role for AL as NPC storage pools has been discussed, it remains controversial if and how they contribute to the NPC density at the NE. Here we show that AL insert into the NE as the ER feeds rapid nuclear expansion in Drosophila blastoderm embryos. We demonstrate that NPCs within AL resemble pore scaffolds that mature only upon insertion into the NE. We delineate a topological model in which NE openings are critical for AL uptake that nevertheless occurs without compromising the permeability barrier of the NE. We finally show that this unanticipated mode of pore insertion is developmentally regulated and operates prior to gastrulation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized by adding urea buffer (10 M urea in 250 mM NH4HCO3) and 2% (w/v) Rapigest (Waters) to a final concentration of 4 M and 0.2% (w/v), respectively. Samples were then sonicated in a vial tweeter for 3x 30 s, each time followed by one minute rest on ice, and stored at -80°C until further processing. Samples were rapidly thawed in a bath sonicator and further sonicated in a vial tweeter for 3x 30 s, each time followed by one minute rest on ice. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 min at 37°C) and cysteines were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark). Protein digestion was performed in two steps, first using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 4 h at 37°C then finalized with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37°C, after the urea concentration was diluted to 1.5 M. Samples were then acidified with 10% (v/v) TFA and the cleavage of Rapigest was allowed to proceed for 30 min at 37°C. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000x g for 5 min at room temperature and desalted using C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston MA, USA) following standard procedures Samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3 and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed by collision-induced dissociation using a TOP-20 strategy with standard parameters. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the Orbitrap were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Drosophila Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB (database release 2013_05, 26951 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications, if applicable; mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor) and 0.5 Da (fragments). The retention times were matched between runs, using a time window of 2 minutes. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) span the nuclear envelope (NE) and mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport. In metazoan oocytes and early embryos, NPCs reside not only within the NE, but also at some endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane sheets, termed annulate lamellae (AL). Although a role for AL as NPC storage pools has been discussed, it remains controversial whether and how they contribute to the NPC density at the NE. Here, we show that AL insert into the NE as the ER feeds rapid nuclear expansion in Drosophila blastoderm embryos. We demonstrate that NPCs within AL resemble pore scaffolds that mature only upon insertion into the NE. We delineate a topological model in which NE openings are critical for AL uptake that nevertheless occurs without compromising the permeability barrier of the NE. We finally show that this unanticipated mode of pore insertion is developmentally regulated and operates prior to gastrulation.

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Lc-ms/ms, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
EMBL
Structural and Computational Biology Unit  European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Meyerhofstr. 1  69117 Heidelberg  Germany

### Submitter
Marie-Therese Mackmull

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
Structural and Computational Biology Unit  European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Meyerhofstr. 1  69117 Heidelberg  Germany


