### Accession
PXD030436

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Hsp78-interacting proteins highlights chaperone role during protein aggregation in mitochondria under heat stress - Part B Aggregation

### Description
Chaperones of the Hsp100 chaperone family support protein homeostasis, the maintenance of protein activity under stress, by refolding aggregated proteins or targeting them for degradation. Hsp78, the ClpB-type mitochondrial member of the Hsp100 family, can be found in lower eukaryotes like yeast. Although Hsp78 has been shown to contribute to protection against elevated temperatures in yeast, the biochemical mechanisms underlying this mitochondria-specific thermotolerance are still largely unclear. To identify endogenous chaperone substrate proteins, we generated an Hsp78-ATPase mutant with a stabilized substrate binding behavior. We used two SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry approaches to analyze the role of Hsp78 during heat stress-induced mitochondrial protein aggregation and disaggregation processes on a proteomic level. In the first setup, Hsp78-interacting polypeptides were identified to reveal the endogenous substrate spectrum of the chaperone. Our analysis revealed that Hsp78 is interacting with a wide variety of proteins related to metabolic functions including energy production and protein synthesis, as well as other chaperones, thus maintaining crucial functions for mitochondrial stress resistance. We compared these interaction data with a second experimental setup that focused on the on overall aggregation and disaggregation processes in mitochondria under heat stress on a proteomic level. This revealed specific aggregation-prone protein populations and demonstrated the direct quantitative impact of Hsp78 on stress-dependent protein solubility different conditions and. We conclude that Hsp78 together with its cofactors represents a recovery system that protects major mitochondrial metabolic functions during as well restores protein biogenesis capacity after heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation Gel slices were subjected to tryptic in gel digestion. In brief, slices were washed consecutively with water, 50% and 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Proteins were reduced with 20 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and alkylated with 40 mM acrylamide (in 50 mM bicarbonate). The slices were washed again and dehydrated with ACN. Dried slices were incubated with 250 ng sequencing grade trypsin at 37°C overnight. The peptide extract was separated and remaining peptides extracted with 50% ACN. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C. LC-MS measurements of peptides  Peptides were dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3 μl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mM length, 100 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made in-house. Bound peptides were eluted onto a C18 analytical column (200 mM length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, with 0.1% formic acid as solvent A). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) within 83/90 min at 250 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000 (maximum fill time 400 ms, AGC target 106). The 22 most intense precursor ions (threshold intensity 3000, isolation width 1.2/1.0 Da) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID, normalized energy 35) and analysed in the linear ion trap. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 20/15 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide analysis raw data processing and database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identifications were done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against Saccharomyces cerevisiae sequences in SwissProt (release 2017_10). Precursor ion m/z tolerance was 8 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. Propionamide on cysteines was set as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine, labels 13C615N2, and 2H4 on lysine were allowed as dynamic modifications. Mascot results were assigned q-values by the Percolator algorithm (30) version 2.05 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% q-value were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed) and 10 ppm MS1 mass tolerance (propionamide dynamic on Cys). Proteins were included if at least two peptides were identified with <1% FDR. Typical FDR values were ≤1% (peptide spectrum matches), 1.2% (peptides), and <1% (proteins) were only applied for copurification experiments. Only unique peptides were included in protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Chaperones of the Hsp100/Clp family represent major components of protein homeostasis, conferring maintenance of protein activity under stress. The ClpB-type members of the family, present in bacteria, fungi, and plants, are able to resolubilize aggregated proteins. The mitochondrial member of the ClpB family in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is Hsp78. Although Hsp78 has been shown to contribute to proteostasis in elevated temperatures, the biochemical mechanisms underlying this mitochondria-specific thermotolerance are still largely unclear. To identify endogenous chaperone substrate proteins, here, we generated an Hsp78-ATPase mutant with stabilized substrate-binding behavior. We used two stable isotope labeling-based quantitative mass spectrometry approaches to analyze the role of Hsp78 during heat stress-induced mitochondrial protein aggregation and disaggregation on a proteomic level. We first identified the endogenous substrate spectrum of the Hsp78 chaperone, comprising a wide variety of proteins related to metabolic functions including energy production and protein synthesis, as well as other chaperones, indicating its crucial functions in mitochondrial stress resistance. We then compared these interaction data with aggregation and disaggregation processes in mitochondria under heat stress, which revealed specific aggregation-prone protein populations and demonstrated the direct quantitative impact of Hsp78 on stress-dependent protein solubility under different conditions. We conclude that Hsp78, together with its cofactors, represents a recovery system that protects major mitochondrial metabolic functions during heat stress as well as restores protein biogenesis capacity after the return to normal conditions.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Protein aggregation, Yeast, Proteostasis, Chaperone, Cell biology, Hsp78, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
nstitute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IBMB), Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Voos
nstitute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IBMB), Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany


