### Accession
PXD019895

### Title
Cathepsin A contributes to left ventricular remodeling by degrading the antioxidant enzyme extracellular superoxide dismutase

### Description
In the heart, the serine carboxypeptidase cathepsin A (CatA) is distributed between lysosomes and the extracellular matrix (ECM). CatA-mediated degradation of extracellular peptides may contribute to ECM-remodeling and left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of CatA overexpression on LV remodeling. A proteomic analysis of the secretome of adult mouse cardiac fibroblasts upon digestion by CatA identified the extracellular antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) as a novel substrate of CatA (5-fold decreased abundance; p=0.0001). In vitro, cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts expressed and secreted CatA protein. EC-SOD protein was expressed and secreted only by cardiac fibroblasts. Cardiomyocyte-specific over-expression of CatA and increased activity in the LV of transgenic mice (CatA-TG) reduced EC-SOD protein levels by 43% (p<0.001). Loss of EC-SOD-mediated anti-oxidative protection resulted in accumulation of superoxide radicals (WT: 4.54±1.2 vs. CatA-TG: 8.62±2.3µmol/mg tissue/min; p=0.0012), increased inflammation, myocyte hypertrophy (WT: 19.8±1.0 vs. CatA-TG: 21.9±1.8µm; p=0.024), cellular apoptosis, and elevated mRNA expression of hypertrophy-related and pro-fibrotic marker genes, without effecting intracellular detoxifying proteins. In CatA-TG mice LV interstitial fibrosis formation was enhanced by 19% (p=0.028) and type I/type III collagen ratio was shifted towards higher abundance of collagen I fibers (p=0.026). Cardiac remodeling in CatA-TG was accompanied by increased LV weight/body weight and LV enddiastolic volume (WT: 50.8±5.8 vs. CatA-TG: 61.9±6.2 µl; p=0.018). Thus, in the heart CatA-mediated reduction of EC-SOD protein contributes to increased oxidative stress, myocyte hypertrophy, ECM remodeling and inflammation. This implicates CatA as a potential therapeutic target to prevent ventricular remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Primary mouse cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) were isolated from the hearts of 5 weeks old male C57BL/6N mice (n=4). CFs were cultured on 0.1% gelatin-coated T25 flasks in complete medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, 100U/mL penicillin, 100ug/mL streptomycin) at 37C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 until 80% confluence. Cells were washed 3 times with serum-free medium then incubated in serum-free medium for 3 days. The conditioned medium was centrifuged at 4000rpm (3200 x g) for 10min to remove cell debris. Conditioned media were concentrated and the buffer was exchanged to assay buffer (25mM MES, 5mM DTT, pH=5.5) with 3KDa MWCO spin column (Merck Millipore). Control samples (n=4) were incubated in buffer with protease inhibitor only (for inhibition of endogenous proteases other than CatA). Treated samples (n=4) were incubated in buffer with protease inhibitor only (for inhibition of endogenous proteases other than CatA) plus human recombinant CatA (1µg/mL, Sanofi-Aventis, Deutschland). Both groups were incubated at 37°C for 24 hours with agitation. After reaction, the samples were centrifuged. The degradation products in the <3kDa fractions were collected and purified with C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75μm Å x 25cm) on a nanoflow LC system (Ultimate3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 300μm Å x 5mm). The chromatographic separation was performed with a mobile phase of HPLC grade water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic aid (eluent A) and a mobile phase of 80% acetonitrile, 20% HPLC grade water and 0.1% formic acid (eluent B) with a 70-minute gradient at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The column was coupled to an LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanospray source (Picoview, New Objective, Inc.). The mass spectrometry acquisition involved 1 full MS scan over a mass-to-charge range encompassing m/z 400–1600 using the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by data-dependent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scans of the 6 most intense ions detected in the full scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled and rejection of singly charged ions.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Changes with peptides intensity > 2-fold change, p<0.05 were identified by Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.3.01) in a no-enzyme search against the UniProt/SwissProt mouse database (version 2012_03, 16520 protein entries) using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.8Da. Search results were loaded back to Progenesis. Peptides with Mascot score >10 were used for quantification and final protein table was exported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular superoxide dismutase, Cardiac hypertrophy, Cardiac remodeling, Extracellular matrix protein; oxidative stress, Cathepsin a; carboxypeptidase

### Affiliations
King's BHF Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's BHF Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, London, UK


