### Accession
PXD026218

### Title
Exoproteomic analysis of two MLST clade 2 strains of Clostridioides difficile from Latin America

### Description
Clostridioides difficile BI/NAP1/ribotype 027 is an epidemic hypervirulent strain found worldwide, including in Latin America. We examined the genomes and exoproteomes of two multilocus sequence type (MLST) clade 2 C. difficile strains considered hypervirulent: ICC-45 (ribotype SLO231/UK[CE]821), isolated in Brazil, and NAP1/027/ST01 (LIBA5756), isolated during a 2010 outbreak in Costa Rica. C. difficile isolates were cultured and extracellular proteins were analyzed using high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Genomic analysis revealed that these isolates shared most of the gene composition. Only 83 and 290 NAP1/027 genes were considered singletons in ICC-45 and NAP1/027, respectively. Exoproteome analysis revealed 197 proteins, of which 192 were similar in both strains. Only five proteins were exclusive to the ICC-45 strain. These proteins were involved with catalytic and binding functions and indirectly interacted with proteins related to pathogenicity. Most proteins, including TcdA, TcdB, flagellin subunit, and cell surface protein, were overrepresented in the ICC-45 strain; 14 proteins, including mature S-layer protein, were present in higher proportions in LIBA5756. These data show close similarity between the genome and proteins in the supernatant of two strains with hypervirulent features isolated in Latin America and underscore the importance of epidemiological surveillance of the transmission and emergence of new strains.

### Sample Protocol
Two clade 2 C. difficile strains of the Latin America multilocus sequence type (MLST) were used in this study: ICC-45 (ribotype SLO231/UK[CE]821) and NAP1/027/ST01 (LIBA5756). After growth of the C. difficile isolates on Brucella agar plates, 2–4 colonies of each were inoculated in 40 mL of brain heart infusion (BHI) broth. The strains were incubated for 24 h at 37 ºC in anaerobic jars (90% N2, 10% CO2, 10% H2). After incubation, tubes were centrifuged twice (4,000 g, 8 min, 4 ºC) and the supernatants were stored. The supernatants were not filtered. Uninoculated culture media (negative control, BHI broth) were subjected to the same conditions9. This experiment was performed in triplicate and protein extracts were used for exoproteomic analysis. All supernatants were precipitated with 1 part chloroform to 4 parts methanol31. After the addition of chloroform and methanol, the supernatants were mixed and centrifuged (2000 g/20 min). The upper phase was discarded, and another 3 volumes of methanol were added. Thereafter, the supernatants were subjected to further washes and the pellets were lyophilized. After drying, precipitates were stored at -80 ºC.  Dried supernatants were reconstituted with 500 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0) with 1 mM calcium chloride, as described previously6. Protein concentrations were determined using a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Invitrogen, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). All tubes were kept at -80 oC until the moment of use.  -Proteomic analysis - in solution digestion  We mixed 100 mL of each supernatant with 300 μL of AMBIC, then pipetted the mixture into a 30-kDa spin filter (Amicon ULTRA 0.5 mL; MilliporeSigma, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA) for on-filter digestion. Dried peptides were resuspended with 0.1% formic acid and vortexed before separation and mass spectrometry analysis using a Nano-LC (Waters Corporation, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA)6. -Protein analysis by mass spectrometry  The digestion products, obtained in solution, were analyzed for protein identification using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, IL, USA) , according to the protocol described previously6. The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive mode with a voltage of 35 kV for the acquisition of data based on reading values from 400 to 1,400 m/z, at a nominal mass resolution of 60,000 for the acquisition of ions. For the mass spectrometry analysis, the device was programmed to select the 15 most intense ions with two or more loads. The MS/MS acquisition time was 120 min.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Mascot program (v. 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) with a search for homologous sequences. Mascot was programmed to search for and recognize proteins based on the modified NCBI database using the term "Cdiff-nr-630-base-Sep2015-Vs4," in which the amino acid sequence of ADH 30030 (control) and strains ATCC 43255 and R20291 were concatenated, with trypsin being used as the digestion agent. A peptide mass tolerance of 50 p.p.m. for the parent ion and 0.60 Da for the fragment ions was specified. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and cysteine carboxymethyl were also specified in the Mascot as variable modifications. The files generated by Mascot were converted for analysis in Scaffold (v. 4.8.6.0; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, Oregon, USA). Subsequently, Blast2Go (https://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome), PsortB v. 3.0 (http://www.psort.org/psortb/), and database STRING v. 10.5 (https://string-db.org/) were used to predict the biological functions, subcellular localization of the physical and functional interactions between the identified proteins, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Clostridioides difficile BI/NAP1/ribotype 027 is an epidemic hypervirulent strain found worldwide, including in Latin America. We examined the genomes and exoproteomes of two multilocus sequence type (MLST) clade 2 C. difficile strains considered hypervirulent: ICC-45 (ribotype SLO231/UK[CE]821), isolated in Brazil, and NAP1/027/ST01 (LIBA5756), isolated during a 2010 outbreak in Costa Rica. C. difficile isolates were cultured and extracellular proteins were analyzed using high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Genomic analysis revealed that these isolates shared most of the gene composition. Only 83 and 290 NAP1/027 genes were considered singletons in ICC-45 and NAP1/027, respectively. Exoproteome analysis revealed 197 proteins, of which 192 were similar in both strains. Only five proteins were exclusive to the ICC-45 strain. These proteins were involved with catalytic and binding functions and indirectly interacted with proteins related to pathogenicity. Most proteins, including TcdA, TcdB, flagellin subunit, and cell surface protein, were overrepresented in the ICC-45 strain; 14 proteins, including mature S-layer protein, were present in higher proportions in LIBA5756. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026218. These data show close similarity between the genome and proteins in the supernatant of two strains with hypervirulent features isolated in Latin America and underscore the importance of epidemiological surveillance of the transmission and emergence of new strains.

### Keywords
Latin america, Proteomics, Clostridioides difficile, Mass spectrometry, Rybotype

### Affiliations
Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceara Brazil
Federal Univesity of Santa Catarina

### Submitter
Glauber Wagner

### Lab Head
Dr Gerly Brito
Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceara Brazil


