### Accession
PXD026385

### Title
Chromatin transaction map during vertebrate mitotic entry

### Description
We have used a combination of chemical genetics, chromatin proteomics and imaging to map the earliest chromatin transactions during vertebrate cell entry into mitosis. Chicken DT40 Cdk1as cells undergo synchronous mitotic entry within 15 minutes following release from a 1NM-PP1-induced arrest in late G2. In addition to changes in chromatin association with nuclear pores and the nuclear envelope, earliest prophase is dominated by changes in the association of ribonucleoproteins with chromatin, particularly in the nucleolus, where pre-rRNA processing factors leave chromatin significantly before RNA polymerase I. Nuclear envelope barrier function is lost early in prophase and cytoplasmic proteins begin to accumulate on the chromatin. As a result, outer kinetochore assembly appears complete by nuclear envelope breakdown (NEBD). Most interphase chromatin proteins remain associated with chromatin until NEBD, after which their levels drop sharply.

### Sample Protocol
DT40 cells were grown to a density of 1x106 cells/ml. 1NM-PP1 was added to 0.2 µM and further incubated for 10 or 13 hours (see manuscript for additional details on the overall experimental design). The G2 arrested cells were washed three times with RPMI medium supplemented with 56 mM PIPES pH=7.0 (RPMI-PIPES). Washed cells were resuspended in RPMI-PIPES at a cell density of 1x106 cells/ml, aliquoted and incubated for a set time. Cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes. 1/20 volume of 2.5M glycine was added and incubated for 5 minutes before harvesting cells. The fixed cells were washed with TBS (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl), and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80°C. Once thawed on ice, heavy and light labelled cells were mixed and chromatin was enriched using the Chromatin Enrichment for Proteomics (ChEP) protocol (Kustatscher et al., 2014; PMID: 24534090 and PMID: 25101823).   ChEP chromatin was processed for mass spectrometry by in-gel trypsin digestion as described in Samejima and Earnshaw (2018; PMID: 29804675). Tryptic peptides were fractionated on strong cation exchange chromatography, using PolySULFOETHYL A (Poly-LC). Mobile phase A consisted of 5mM KH2PO4, 10% acetonitrile at pH 3; mobile phase B was 5 mM KH2PO4, 1 M KCl, and 10% acetonitrile, pH 3. The peptides were fractionated using the following gradient: 0%–60% buffer B in 18 min, then to 70% in 2 min, and then to 0% in 6 min. The flow rate was constant at 200 µl/min. Fractions were collected in 1-min intervals. Fractionated samples were combined into six fractions. The peptide samples were desalted on C18 stage tips. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled on-line to Easy-Spray HPLC column ES803 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.7.10 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against chicken complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (downloaded on April 2, 2020) with additional sequences from our in-house database of chicken proteins, using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
We have used a combination of chemical genetics, chromatin proteomics, and imaging to map the earliest chromatin transactions during vertebrate cell entry into mitosis. Chicken DT40 CDK1<sup>as</sup> cells undergo synchronous mitotic entry within 15&#xa0;min following release from a 1NM-PP1-induced arrest in late G<sub>2</sub>. In addition to changes in chromatin association with nuclear pores and the nuclear envelope, earliest prophase is dominated by changes in the association of ribonucleoproteins with chromatin, particularly in the nucleolus, where pre-rRNA processing factors leave chromatin significantly before RNA polymerase I. Nuclear envelope barrier function is lost early in prophase, and cytoplasmic proteins begin to accumulate on the chromatin. As a result, outer kinetochore assembly appears complete by nuclear envelope breakdown (NEBD). Most interphase chromatin proteins remain associated with chromatin until NEBD, after which their levels drop sharply. An interactive proteomic map of chromatin transactions during mitotic entry is available as a resource at https://mitoChEP.bio.ed.ac.uk.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Mitosis, Silac, Chicken

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology

### Submitter
Georg Kustatscher

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
University of Edinburgh


