### Accession
PXD016517

### Title
Cuticular structure proteomics analyses of the pea aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum

### Description
Aphids are sap-feeding insects with piercing-sucking mouthparts. They are serious pests in agriculture and provoke significant losses, with a formidable capacity to transmit numerous plant viruses causing diseases in almost all important crops. The majority of viruses are acquired after feeding on an infected plant, retained on the aphid’s stylet and inoculated to healthy ones with a single probing puncture, promoting viral outbreaks. We have recently discovered the acrostyle, an organ located at the tip of aphid maxillary stylets, that harbors the receptors for Cauliflower Mosaic Virus (CaMV), and likely those for numerous other viruses. To our opinion, establishing an exhaustive inventory of the cuticular proteins composing the acrostyle, defining the peptide motifs accessible at the surface, identifying virus receptors among these proteins, will contribute to better understand virus/vector and plant/insect interactions at different scales including the molecular level. In this manuscript, we identify proteins or peptides at the surface of aphid stylets that might play a key role in plant virus binding. This may help to pave the way for future alternative “environmentally safe” strategies to control viral spread and aphid infestation in important crops worldwide.

### Sample Protocol
In this study we used a bottom-up proteomics strategy to analyse the cuticular proteins extracted from fours appendages of the Acyrthosiphon pisum (wings, legs, antenna and stylets). We performed a comparative proteomics analysis based on the expression of specific CPs with a focused attention paid to the CPs expressed within stylets. We succesfully characterized by proteomics approach and validated through immunolabeling, potential candidates of CPs that may correspond to candidate receptors of non-circulative viruses expressed at the surface of the stylets' acrostyles.

### Data Protocol
Cuticular proteins were extracted from the pea aphids appendages using hexafluoroisopropanol and digested using high grade trypsin. Data-dependentproteomics was used to perform a bottom-up sequencing using both a nanoLC-MS/MS hyphenated with a q-Exactive mass spectrometer and the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for protein annotation. The used database was made of Acyrthosiphon pisum proteome and databases from the feeding plants in which the pea aphid was growing. High confidence scores of confidence were considered in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Aphids are phloem-feeding insects known as major pests in agriculture that are able to transmit hundreds of plant viruses. The majority of these viruses, classified as noncirculative, are retained and transported on the inner surface of the cuticle of the needle-like mouthparts while the aphids move from plant to plant. Identification of receptors of viruses within insect vectors is a key challenge because they are promising targets for alternative control strategies. The acrostyle, an organ discovered earlier within the common food/salivary canal at the tip of aphid maxillary stylets, displays proteins at the cuticle-fluid interface, some of which are receptors of noncirculative viruses. To assess the presence of stylet- and acrostyle-specific proteins and identify putative receptors, we have developed a comprehensive comparative analysis of the proteomes of four cuticular anatomical structures of the pea aphid, stylets, antennae, legs, and wings. In addition, we performed systematic immunolabeling detection of the cuticular proteins identified by mass spectrometry in dissected stylets. We thereby establish the first proteome of stylets of an insect and determine the minimal repertoire of the cuticular proteins composing the acrostyle. Most importantly, we propose a short list of plant virus receptor candidates, among which RR-1 proteins are remarkably predominant. The data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD016517).

### Keywords
Aphid stylets, Virus receptor, Cuticular structure, Proteomics, Acrostyle, Immunolabeling

### Affiliations
CR University of Grenoble-Alpes, Institute for Advances Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France
Biopark Archamps

### Submitter
Karim Arafah

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Philippe BULET
CR University of Grenoble-Alpes, Institute for Advances Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France


