### Accession
PXD010604

### Title
Hippocampal proteomic alteration in triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: insights into the role of PINK 1 proteins in donepezil treatment Hippocampal proteomic alteration in triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: insights into the role of PINK 1 proteins in donepezil treatment

### Description
Donepezil, an acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitor, was approved by FDA for the symptomatic therapies of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in 1996. Although donepezil have been regarded as the standard and first-line treatment for AD, the capacity of such drugs to alter the underlying disease process is still unclear. In this study, we sought to explore the possible protective mechanism of donepezil in triple-transgenic Alzheimer’s disease (3×Tg-AD) mice model. 3×Tg-AD mice were treated for 4 months with donepezil (1.3 mg /kg) and its effects were evaluated by behavioral tests and molecular analysis. The cognition of donepezil-treated mice was restored significantly. Reduced levels of soluble and insoluble amyloid beta 1-40 (Aβ 1-40) and amyloid beta 1-42 (Aβ 1-42) as well as senile plaques were observed. Moreover, donepezil treatment prevented the dendritic spine loss in hippocampus neurons. We further investigated the effects of donepezil on the hippocampal protein of 3×Tg-AD mice by quantitative proteomics technology. Proteomic results indicated that donepezil significantly elevated the levels of PINK1, NFASC, MYLK2, and RASN in the hippocampus, and modulated axon guidance, mitophagy, mTOR signaling, and MAPK pathway. The results suggested that donepezil induced neuroprotective effects through multiple mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed after intraperitoneal injections with 1% pentobarbital for brain collection. Then hippocampus were dissected and lysed with 8 M urea homogenization buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail), and homogenized using ultrasonic disruption system. Tissue lysates were centrifuged at 12500 RPM for 15 min at 4 ℃. Protein concentration was measured by Pierce BCA protein assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Pooled total 100 μg of proteins form six individual sample (pre group), 16.7 μg of proteins form per mouse. The pooled samples were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 55 ℃, and then incubated with 25 mM idoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. After that, the sample were diluted with PBS to a final urea concentration of 1.0 M and digested with trypsin/Lys-C (1:25 w/w) (Promega, WI, USA) at 37 ℃ overnight. On the second day, formic acid (FA) was added to acidify the protein to achieve final pH 1-2, followed by centrifugation at 12000 RPM for 10 min at 4 ℃ to collect the supernatant. Then the sample were desalted with reversed-phase column chromatography (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 200 mM, pH8.5). Peptides were labeled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). Briefly, TMT reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl of acetonitrile) was added to the peptide solution and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine was added to terminate labeling reaction for 15 min at room temperature. Peptides were labeled with different TMT labels: TMT-126, hippocampus or cortex of wild type; TMT-127, hippocampus or cortex of 3×Tg-AD. The peptides solution from wild type and 3×Tg-AD group were mixed, then dried under vacuum centrifuge. TMT labeled peptides mixture was fractionated with high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). Briefly, peptide were dissolved with 300 μl 0.1% FA, and loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column, followed by washing with step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations to elute bound peptides into eight different fractions collected by centrifugation. Each fraction is then dried in a vacuum centrifuge, then dissolved with 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis The lyophilized peptides fractions were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1%formic acid, and loaded on ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) trap column. The online Chromatography seperation was performed on the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D System (SCIEX, Concord, ON), the trapping, desalting procedure were carried out at 4μL/min for 5 min with 100% solvent A (water / acetonitrile / formic acid (98 /2 / 0.1%; B, 2 /98 /0.1%)). Then, an elution gradient of 5-38% solvent B in 60 min was used on an analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm C18- 3μm 120 Å, ChromXP, Eksigent). Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600+ Mass Spectrometry (SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.4 kV, curtain gas of 35 PSI, nebulizer gas of 12 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150℃. The MS was operated with TOF-MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and up to 40 product ion scans (80ms) were collected if exceeding a threshold of 160 cps with a charge state of 2-5. A Rolling collision energy setting was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 14 s.  Database searching and protein quantification  Proteins identification and relative quantification was performed by PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) .The raw mass spectra were searched against uniprot-mus musculus database containing 51697 protein entries (released in July 2017)with the following setting parameters: parent mass error tolerance of 30 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da. Setting enzyme: trypsin, fixed modifications including deamidation (NQ)、oxidation (M)、Pyro-glu from E、Pyro-glu from Q、Acetylation (Protein N-term) and max Variable PTM Per Peptide: 3；The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated at ≤1.0% at psm (Peptide-Spectrum Matches) level determined by a decoy database search as implement in PEAKS 8.5; peptide score (−10lgP) greater than 19.5, which is equivalent to a P-value of ∼1%, were regarded as confidently identified. Relative quantification of peptides and proteins were performed by the TMT 6plex method in PEAKS Q module, all TMT reporter ion spectra area of identified peptides were summed and taken as the normalized factor across different samples. Statistical analysis of differentially abundant proteins was conducted using Peaks Q algorithm, expression of peptides and proteins were considered to be significantly different between samples when the ratio ≥1.2 or＜0.83 and protein significance score ≥5. The ratios of altered proteins in each group were set as group AD/WT, group donepezil/WT. The ratio of changed proteins by donepezil treatment was set as group donepezil/AD.   Bioinformatics analysis In this study, the changed proteins were subjected to functional enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) terms of biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular components (CC) using DAVID Bioinformatics resources 6.8. The pathway analysis with change proteins were determined using KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) path database（https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/）.  Heml 1.0 and Graphpad 7.0 was used to heat map analysis. For the protein-protein interaction network analysis, we used STRING database version 10.5 (http://string-db.org/). The interaction network was mapped by Cytoscape (3.6.0).

### Publication Abstract
Donepezil is a clinically approved acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI) for cognitive improvement in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Donepezil has been used as a first-line agent for the symptomatic treatment of AD, but its ability to modify disease pathology and underlying mechanisms is not clear. We investigated the protective effects and underlying mechanisms of donepezil in AD-related triple transgenic (APP<sub>Swe</sub>/PSEN1<sub>M146V</sub>/MAPT<sub>P301L</sub>) mouse model (3&#xd7;Tg-AD). Mice (8-month old) were treated with donepezil (1.3 mg/kg) for 4 months and evaluated by behavioral tests for assessment of cognitive functions, and the hippocampal tissues were examined by protein analysis and quantitative proteomics. Behavioral tests showed that donepezil significantly improved the cognitive capabilities of 3&#xd7;Tg-AD mice. The levels of soluble and insoluble amyloid beta proteins (A&#x3b2;<sub>1-40</sub> and A&#x3b2;<sub>1-42</sub>) and senile plaques were reduced in the hippocampus. Golgi staining of the hippocampus showed that donepezil prevented dendritic spine loss in hippocampal neurons of 3&#xd7;Tg-AD mice. Proteomic studies of the hippocampal tissues identified 3131 proteins with altered expression related to AD pathology, of which 262 could be significantly reversed with donepezil treatment. Bioinformatics with functional analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network mapping showed that donepezil significantly elevated the protein levels of PINK 1, NFASC, MYLK2, and NRAS in the hippocampus, and modulated the biological pathways of axon guidance, mitophagy, mTOR, and MAPK signaling. The substantial upregulation of PINK 1 with donepezil was further verified by Western blotting. Donepezil exhibited neuroprotective effects via multiple mechanisms. In particular, PINK 1 is related to mitophagy and cellular protection from mitochondrial dysfunction, which might play important roles in AD pathogenesis and represent a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease (ad), Pink1, Donepezil, Amyloid beta (aβ), Proteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine and Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau
University of Macau

### Submitter
xinhua zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xinhua Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine and Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau


