### Accession
PXD034632

### Title
Membrane Fraction Complexome of Nitrosocaldus cavascurensis

### Description
Biomass of N. cavascurensis grown in a bioreactor was lysed and membrane fractions were harvested using an ultracentrifuge.  Membrane proteins were extracted using n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside (DDM) and loaded on a 3-12% gradient blue native PAGE gel.  Selected bands were cut out and analyzed via mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The Coomassie-stained gel bands were destained with a mixture of acetonitrile (Chromasolv®, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (Roche) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin (Promega; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 10% formic acid was used to stop the digestion and peptides were extracted twice with 5% FA for 10min in a cooled ultrasonic bath. Extracted peptides were pooled and desalted using C18 Stagetips..  Peptides were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X, equipped with a nano-spray ion source using coated emitter tips (PepSep, MSWil).  Full details can be found in publication.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.6.0) and spectra searched against a reference proteome for N. cavascurensis (Uniprot, downloaded fall 2021) and a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The output option of iBAQ with log fit was selected. All other parameters were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ammonia oxidizing archaea, Thermophile, Complexome, Archaea, Bn-page

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology University of Vienna

### Submitter
Logan Hodgskiss

### Lab Head
Dr Christa Schleper
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology University of Vienna


