### Accession
PXD012689

### Title
Sulfisoxazole inhibits exosome secretion for potential breast cancer treatment

### Description
Inhibitors of the secretion of cancer exosomes, which promote cancer progression and metastasis, can not only accelerate exosome biology research but also offer therapeutic benefits for cancer patients. We identified sulfisoxazole (SFX) which inhibits exosome secretion from breast cancer cells. SFX, an FDA-approved oral antibiotic, showed significant anti-tumor and anti-metastatic effects in mouse models of breast cancer xenografts, reduced the expression of proteins involved in exosome biogenesis and secretion, and triggered co-localization of multivesicular endosomes (MVEs) with lysosomes for degradation. These findings provide a foundation for exosome-targeted cancer therapies and the mechanistic studies on exosome biology.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomal protein digestion was performed as described previously [24]. Briefly, protein was resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC; pH 8) containing 6 M urea, 5 mM EDTA, and 2% SDS. The proteins were chemically denatured by adding 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubating at 60C for 20 min. Next, proteins were alkylated by adding 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature and incubating for 20 min. The protein solution was mixed with acrylamide/bisacrylamide solution (30% v/v, 29:1) containing 10% (w/v) ammonium persulfate and tetramethylethylenediamine. The gel was cut into small pieces and washed three times with 50 mM TEABC containing 50% acetonitrile (ACN). Proteolytic digestion was performed using trypsin (protein:trypsin = 50:1 w/w) in 50 mM TEABC and incubating overnight at 37C. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel by exchanging with two buffers: 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 50 mM TEABC and 0.1% FA in 50% ACN. The eluents were concentrated using a Speedvac and desalted using an HLB cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Exosomes were analyzed by LC–MS/MS as described previously [27]. One microgram of extracted peptide was analyzed by nano-ultra-high-performance LC (UPLC) (Waters) and tandem mass spectrometry using a Q-Tof Premier (Waters). Peptides were injected into a 2 cm × 180 μm trap column and resolved in a 25 cm × 75 μm nanoACQUITY C18 column (Waters) using the LC system. Mobile phase A was composed of water containing 0.1% FA and mobile B phase was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were resolved using a gradient of 3–45% mobile phase B over 135 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All samples were analyzed in triplicate. The method included a full sequential MS scan (m/z 150–1600, 0.6 s) and five MS/MS scans (m/z 100–1990, 0.6 s/scan) for the five most intense ions present in the full-scan mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS raw data were converted into peak lists using MASCOT Distiller version 2.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with default settings. All MS/MS raw data were analyzed using MASCOT version 2.2.1 (Matrix Science) [27]. Mascot was used to search the SwissProt database (release 2018_07) with human taxonomy. The database search against Mascot was performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and parent ion tolerance of 0.2 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were considered as variable modifications. To evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of protein identification, this analysis was repeated using identical search parameters and validation criteria against a randomized decoy database created by Mascot. Peptide identities were assigned if their Mascot ion scores corresponded to p < 0.05. Quantification was performed using PEAKS Studio version 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc, Waterloo, Canada). For Label-free protein quantification, identified peptides were filtered based on False Discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. The abundance of each peptide was determined using ion chromatography extraction and the protein ratio was calculated using the average abundance among the corresponding peptides. Protein ratios were considered acceptable when the proteins contained more than one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibitors of the secretion of cancer exosomes, which promote cancer progression and metastasis, may not only accelerate exosome biology research but also offer therapeutic benefits for cancer patients. Here we identify sulfisoxazole (SFX) as an inhibitor of small extracellular vesicles (sEV) secretion from breast cancer cells through interference with endothelin receptor A (ETA). SFX, an FDA-approved oral antibiotic, showed significant anti-tumor and anti-metastatic effects in mouse models of breast cancer xenografts, the reduced expression of proteins involved in biogenesis and secretion of sEV, and triggered co-localization of multivesicular endosomes with lysosomes for degradation. We demonstrate the important role of ETA, as target of SFX, by gain- and loss-of-function studies of the ETA protein, through a direct binding assay, and pharmacological and genetic approaches. These findings may provide a foundation for sEV-targeted cancer therapies and the mechanistic studies on sEV biology.

### Keywords
Exosome, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer, Sulfisoxazole

### Affiliations
KNU
Department of Molecular Medicine, CMRI, Exosome Convergence Research Center (ECRC), School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

### Submitter
Chan-Hyeong Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Moon-Chang Baek
Department of Molecular Medicine, CMRI, Exosome Convergence Research Center (ECRC), School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.


