### Accession
PXD030251

### Title
Proteomic profiling of cisplatin-resistant and cisplatin-sensitive germ cell tumor cell lines using quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
Testicular germ cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common malignant solid neoplasms in men between the age of 15 and 40 with an increasing incidence seen over the last four decades. Histologically, type II GCT are divided into seminomas (SEM) and non-seminomatous GCT (NSGCT) according to the WHO. NSGCT comprise distinct subentities, e.g. embry-onal carcinomas (EC), yolk sac tumors, choriocarcinomas and teratomas (TER). The distinction between SEM and NSGCT is important because of varying treatment approaches, treatment responses and patients’ prognosis. The treatment of GCTs primarily comprises a radical inguinal orchiectomy of the affected testis. Subsequent cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy is required in metastatic GCTs. The introduction of cisplatin-based com-bination chemotherapy has led to cure rates of up to 90% even in metastatic disease stages. Teratomas are of particular interest, as they are uniformly cisplatin-resistant and sur-gery is the only successful therapy. The number of patients with recurring disease that finally fail several lines of platinum-based chemotherapy is about 3-5% of all GCT patients and about 15% of patients with primary metastatic disease, but they have an exceptionally poor prognosis with a life-expectancy of only a few months. In this study, we compared cisplatin-resistant and cisplatin-sensitive cell lineages of pluripotent NTERA-2 and NCCIT as well as the nullipotent 2102EP cells (with NCCIT deriving from a TP53 mutated mixed mediastinal GCT) by high-resolution mass spectrometric analy-sis (MS) combined with stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). The NTERA-2 and NCCIT cell lines represent EC, which can develop in all other types of NSGCT. Both cell lines represent a very well-studied in vitro model for NSGCTs.

### Sample Protocol
We performed quantitative proteomic profiling by mass spectrometry in combination with sta-ble isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) as described before. NTERA-2, NCCIT and 2102EP cells and their resistant counterparts NTERA-2-R, NCCIT-R and 2102EP-R were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher GmbH, Bremen, Germany), 4 mM glutamine, antibiotics and 0.115 mM L-arginine-13C6 (Arg+6) and 0.275 mM L-lysine-D4 (Lys+4)or equimolar amounts of L-arginine-13C615N4 (Arg+10) and 0.275 mM L-lysine-13C6,15N2-Lys (Lys+8) (Eurisotop GmbH, Saarbrücken, Germany) for at least ten cell cycles. Labelled cells were lysed in 0.5% Nonidet P-40 buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 0.2% lauryl maltoside, and protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Equal amounts of SILAC-labelled proteins were mixed and separated by SDS-PAGE (4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris Gel, Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Germany). Proteins were visualized with Coomassie brilliant blue stain, and each lane cut into 11 equidistant slices irrespective of staining. Gel slices were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 55 min at 56°C, alkylated with 55 mM IAA for 20 min at 26°C, and digested with modified trypsin (Promega GmbH, Walldorf, Germany) overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were concentrated on a C18 precolumn (25 mm x 150 μm I.D., Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 5 μm, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) for 5 min at a flow rate of 10 μl/min, and separated on a C18 capillary column (200 mm x 75 μm I.D., Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 3 μm, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with a gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid over 90 min using a Proxeon nano LC cou-pled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germa-ny). MS conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.8 kV; heated capillary temperature, 270°C; and normalized collision-energy (NCE) 28. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with a resolution setting of 70,000 at m/z 200, a target fill value of 1e6 and a max-imum fill time of 60 ms. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for HCD MS/MS fragmentation and detection at a resolution setting of 17,500, a target fill value of 2e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) against the UniprotKB human reference proteome revision 02-2017 containing 92,928 sequence entries. Up to two missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal protein acetyla-tion and the respective isotope-labelled arginine and lysine residues were searched as varia-ble modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The false dis-covery rates at the protein and peptide levels were both set to 1%, respectively. Perseus Software version 1.5.2.6 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for statistical evaluation.

### Data Protocol
The mean of the biological replicates was calculated for each cell line (mean re-sistant/parental ratio). In order to compare Log2 ratios of quantification to the intensity, Log10 values were calculated for intensities of each mean value. Afterwards, significance B analysis using a Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <5% was performed by Perseus software to calculate the p values of outlier proteins from the 1/1 ratio. Log10 intensity was plotted against Log2 ratios of quantified resistant/parental ratios. Proteins were colored according to their p values where blue color means > 0.05, red color 0.05 to 0.01, yellow between 0.01 and 0.001 and light green colored proteins mean that they have p values less than 0.001.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Germ cell tumor, Proteomic analysis, Silac, Cisplatin resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University MEdical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Core Facility Proteomics
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University MEdical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Core Facility Proteomics


