### Accession
PXD017605

### Title
SWATH proteome for the coral reef fish, Acanthochromis polyacanthus, under ocean acidification and ocean warming

### Description
Construction of a comprehensive spectral library for the coral reef fish, Acanthochromis polyacanthus, from both DIA and DDA MS runs. The spectral library was then used to quantify proteomes of individual fish exposed to different environmental conditions including ocean acidification and ocean warming. Proteomes were measured for both liver and brain tissue and differential expression between environmental conditions was analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Acanthochromis polyacanthus offspring were reared in control conditions (29°C, 400atm), elevated pCO2 (750atm or 1000atm), elevated temperature (31°C), and combined elevated temperature and elevated pCO2 (31°C, 1000atm). Fish were euthanized between 3-5 months of age and brain and liver tissues of the fish were dissected out. Protein samples were purified using the chloroform-methanol precipitation method. Protein alkylation, reduction, and digestion were done using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. For DIA analysis samples were injected individually into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) attached to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For DDA analysis samples from different conditions were pooled and fractionated using high pH reversed fractionation on a Accela liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). A total of 110 fractions were collected and then pooled into 25 fractions. These samples were then injected into the same Orbitrap Fusion Lumos setup as above.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were processed and the library generated with Spectronaut Pulsar X (Version 12, Biognosys) using default settings. Peptide identity was achieved via sequence alignment against the Acanthochromis polyacanthus proteome with 36,741 entries.  DIA data were then loaded into Spectronaut Pulsar X and mapped against the generated spectral libraries leading to protein and peptide identification and quantification. Default settings of the program were applied for analysis. Upon completion peptide quantities for all samples were exported as a data matrix containing all non-redundant protein identifications for further analysis. Data matrices were loaded into the program Perseus v1.6.2.1 for differential expression analysis. Protein names and functions were identified with the A. polyacanthus genome annotation.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics via mass spectrometry can provide valuable insight into molecular and phenotypic characteristics of a living system. Recent mass spectrometry developments include data-independent acquisition (SWATH/DIA-MS), an accurate, sensitive and reproducible method for analysing the whole proteome. The main requirement for this method is the creation of a comprehensive spectral library. New technologies have emerged producing larger and more accurate species-specific libraries leading to a progressive collection of proteome references for multiple molecular model species. Here, for the first time, we set out to compare different spectral library constructions using multiple tissues from a coral reef fish to demonstrate its value and feasibility for nonmodel organisms. We created a large spectral library composed of 12,553 protein groups from liver and brain tissues. Via identification of differentially expressed proteins under fish exposure to elevated pCO<sub>2</sub> and temperature, we validated the application and usefulness of these different spectral libraries. Successful identification of significant differentially expressed proteins from different environmental exposures occurred using the library with a combination of data-independent and data-dependent acquisition methods as well as both tissue types. Further analysis revealed expected patterns of significantly up-regulated heat shock proteins in a dual condition of ocean warming and acidification indicating the biological accuracy and relevance of the method. This study provides the first reference spectral library for a nonmodel organism. It represents a useful guide for future building of accurate spectral library references in nonmodel organisms allowing the discovery of ecologically relevant changes in the proteome.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Swath, Fish, Coral reef, Proteome, Differential expression

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Marine Climate Change Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan

### Submitter
Alison Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy Ravasi
Marine Climate Change Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan


