### Accession
PXD014273

### Title
Response of Galleria to co-infection by Candida and Staphylococcus.

### Description
Polymicrobial infections are intrinsically less susceptible to antimicrobial therapy, are more invasive and can induce enhanced inflammatory responses leading to negative clinical outcomes. The importance of studying the interaction between microbes themselves and their interactions with their host in combination has only been realised in recent years. However, there is a lack of simple, effective and low cost in vivo models to study these interactions with the host immune response. This study details the responses of Galleria mellonella larvae to disseminated combination infection by C. albicans and S. aureus and demonstrates the efficacy of antimicrobial chemotherapy on treating co-infected larvae.  Doses of C. albicans (1 × 105 larva-1) and S. aureus (1 × 104 larva-1) which were non-lethal in mono-infection, when combined significantly lowered larval survival  at (70 ± 3.33% [p < 0.01]), 48 (10 ± 3.33% [p < 0.0001]) and 72h (5 ± 6.66% [p < 0.0001]) h relative to larvae receiving S. aureus 2 × 104 larva-1  mono-infection. Co-infected larvae with S. aureus 2 × 104 larva-1 resulted in an increase in the density of circulating hemocytes relative to S. aureus mono-infected larvae. Co-infected larvae displayed a significantly higher overall S. aureus c.f.u larva-1 compared to larvae only infected with S. aureus. Co-infection resulted in dissemination throughout the host and the appearance of large nodules. Proteomic analysis of co-infected larval hemolymph revealed specific immune responses to bacterial and fungal infection by the increased abundance of a range of antimicrobial peptides, peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide and β-glucan recognition proteins and proteins associated with tissue invasion and nodule formation.  The in vitro and in vivo efficacy of empirical antimicrobial drugs (amphotericin B & meropenem) was examined against C. albicans and S. aureus was also examined. meropenem was more effective than amphotericin B but a combination was most effective at improving survival of co-infected larvae. The effect of antimicrobial therapy on symptoms associated with co-infection was also assessed using Cryo-imaging. The processes of polymicrobial co-infection in G. mellonella are compared to those in mice models and larvae provide an easy to use and ethically acceptable in vivo system to assess polymicrobial interactions with their host.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics was conducted on hemocyte-free hemolymph from larvae (n = 10) at 0, 6 and 24  h  post co-infection (C. albicans [1 × 105 larva-1]  S. aureus [2 × 104 larva-1]. Protein (75 μg) was prepared according to established protocols [25]. Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella [29,30] or the proteome for C. albicans or S. aureus (Uniprot).

### Data Protocol
Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the hemolymph proteomes of 0, 6 and 24 h S. aureus treated larvae was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
This study detailed the responses of <i>Galleria mellonella</i> larvae to disseminated infection caused by co-infection with <i>Candida albicans</i> and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>. Doses of <i>C. albicans</i> (1&#xd7;10<sup>5</sup> larva<sup>-1</sup>) and <i>S. aureus</i> (1&#xd7;10<sup>4</sup> larva<sup>-1</sup>) were non-lethal in mono-infection but when combined significantly (<i>P</i>&lt;0.05) reduced larval survival at 24, 48 and 72&#x2009;h relative to larvae receiving <i>S. aureus</i> (2&#xd7;10<sup>4</sup> larva<sup>-1</sup>) alone. Co-infected larvae displayed a significantly higher density of <i>S. aureus</i> larva<sup>-1</sup> compared to larvae infected solely with <i>S. aureus</i>. Co-infection resulted in dissemination throughout the host and the appearance of large nodules. Co-infection of larvae with <i>C. albicans</i> and <i>S. aureus</i> (2&#xd7;10<sup>4</sup> larva<sup>-1</sup>) resulted in an increase in the density of circulating haemocytes compared to that in larvae infected with only <i>S. aureus</i>. Proteomic analysis of co-infected larval haemolymph revealed increased abundance of proteins associated with immune responses to bacterial and fungal infection such as cecropin-A (+45.4-fold), recognition proteins [e.g. peptidoglycan-recognition protein LB (+14-fold)] and proteins associated with nodule formation [e.g. Hdd11 (+33.3-fold)]. A range of proteins were also decreased in abundance following co-infection, including apolipophorin (-62.4-fold), alpha-esterase 45 (-7.7-fold) and serine proteinase (-6.2-fold). Co-infection of larvae resulted in enhanced proliferation of <i>S. aureus</i> compared to mono-infection and an immune response showing many similarities to the innate immune response of mammals to infection. The utility of <i>G. mellonella</i> larvae for studying polymicrobial infection is highlighted.

### Keywords
Infection, Galleria, Mini-model, Candida, Co-infection. anti-microbial, Immunity, Staphylococcus

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


