### Accession
PXD026922

### Title
Differential impact of LPS and LTA stimulation on differentiated bone marrow and Yolk sac Hoxb8 macrophages

### Description
The impact of LPS and LTA stimulation on differentiated bone marrow and Yolk sac Hoxb8 macrophages in comparison to untreated control cells was studied by global protein profiling using a bottom-up approach.

### Sample Protocol
Hoxb8 progenitors cells were differentiated for 5 days, tissue culture plates were then washed twice with PBS. For stimulation experiments cells were incubated for 5 hours in 5 ml of differentiation medium supplemented with LPS or LTA. After stimulation, cells were washed, pelleted and resuspended in 500 µl of 8M urea/ 2 M thiourea buffer.Three µg protein of each sample was reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) before digestion with trypsin at a protein to enzyme ratio 25:1 (37oC, 16 h). Peptides mixtures were desalted on C18 material (µZipTip, Merck Millipore) and separated on a nanoAcquity UPLC column in a 100 min nonlinear gradient ranging from 2 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The detection was carried out in DDA mode on a LTQ Orbitrab Velos instrument selecting TOP 20 precursor ions for CID fragmentation per cycle at an exclusion time of 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a UniProt/SwissProt database with a restriction to murine entries using the Andromeda algorithm implemented in MaxQuant v1.5.3.8. Protein identification was based on a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yolk sac, Lc-ms/ms, Bone marrow, Lta, Macrophages, Hoxb8, Lps

### Affiliations
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald Germany
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
Dr. Elke Hammer Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald Germany


