### Accession
PXD010036

### Title
Analysis of proteins in supernatant and precipitate fractions of human bronchial smooth muscle cells by 1D SDS-PAGE and quantitative LC-MS/MS

### Description
Supernatant and precipitate protein fractions of human bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC) after sonication and centrifugation were analyzed using 1D SDS-PAGE.  The gel lanes were cube-cut into thirty-three 1.1 mm x 1.1 mm x 1 mm (gel thickness) squares and each gel piece was subjected to in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS.  Totally 2552 proteins were assigned from the lane of supernatant and 2614 protein species from the lane of precipitate.  The results are being further analyzed, e.g. 1) for the comparison between the proteins species residing in the two fractions, and 2) for correlation with the nondenaturing 2DE-grid cut-quantitative LC-MS/MS results (Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723, Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 1991-2001, PRIDE project PXD001471).

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture:  Human bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC), which were isolated from human bronchi and supplied at secondary culture (or passage 1, P1), were from ScienCell Research Laboratories (Carlsbad, CA, USA) (Cat. No. 3400) and cultured as described previously (Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723).  Fractionation of HBSMC proteins was performed as follows.  The P7 cells (grown to about 90% confluence) were washed with Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) once and detached by incubating in a solution containing 0.05% w/v trypsin and 0.04 g/L EDTA for about 2 min at 37ºC.  The trypsinization was terminated by the addition of FBS (6% v/v final concentration) and the cells were collected by centrifugation at 160 x g for 5 min.  The cell pellet was washed with ice-cold DPBS for three times and ice-cold GTE buffer (50 mM glucose, 25 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) for twice, and then added with a solution of 4 mM EDTA-2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)-24% w/v glycerol (approximately equal volume of the cell pellet).  The cells were resuspended by gentle stirring with a thin glass rod and immediately subjected to sonication using a cell disruption sonicator equipped with a 3-mm-diameter titanium tip (VCX-130 Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT, USA).  Keeping the sample tube soaked in ice water, the cells were sonicated for totally 60 sec (10-sec pulse at 20% amplitude with 20-sec interval, 6 cycles).  Centrifugation was done at 4ºC for 10 min at 15,000 x g.  The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration and the protein recovery were estimated to be 15.4 ug/uL and 2.540 ug, respectively.  The precipitate was washed three times by the addition of 200 uL-aliquot of ice-cold washing solution (25 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.2) and centrifugation for 10 min at 15,000 x g, and dissolved by the addition of a 20 uL-aliquot of ice-cold dissolving solution (25 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 20% w/v glycerol, 1% w/v SDS, pH 7.2).  The protein concentration and the protein recovery of the supernatant solution were estimated to be 4.4 ug/uL and 240 ug, respectively.    1D SDS-PAGE:  Slab polyacrylamide gels (38 mm wide x 43 mm high x 1 mm thick, 4.2–17.85% T linear gradient and 5% C, containing 1% w/v SDS) were prepared with an automatic gradient gel former.  Plexiglas acrylic combs were inserted from the top of the gel molds before polymerization to form six wells of 4 mm wide and 7 mm deep.  An aliquot (2.0 uL) of the solution of the supernatant fraction was made up to 10.0 uL to contain 30 ug protein, 1% w/v SDS, and 20% w/v glycerol.  An aliquot (6.8 uL) of the precipitate fraction dissolved with an SDS solution was also made up to 10.0 uL to contain the same protein quantity and the same concentration of SDS and glycerol.  The solutions were applied on the gel wells and electrophoresis was run at 5 mA/gel constant current with an electrode buffer of 50 mM Tris-100 mM glycine-0.1% w/v SDS (pH 9.0, contains 0.5 mg/L bromophenol blue (BPB)).  Electrophoresis was continued until the BPB front reached about 3 mm from the gel bottoms (78 min).  The gel was washed in 50% v/v methanol/7% v/v acetic acid for 15 min, stained in 0.1% w/v CBB R-250/50% v/v methanol/7% v/v acetic acid for 15 min, destained in 20% v/v methanol/7% v/v acetic acid for 2 h (one change) and kept in 7% v/v acetic acid.  The color image of the CBB-stained micro slab gel was scanned with an Epson V600 professional flat-bed scanner (Seiko Epson, Suwa, Japan) at a 600 dpi resolution.  Cubic gel-cutting:  The lanes of the CBB-stained slab gel were cut into 1.1 mm x 1.1 mm squares using a laboratory-made device reported in a previous paper (Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723).  The vertical 33 gel pieces at the center of the two sample lanes were taken as shown in file “gel pattern and grid-cut.pdf”.  The gel pieces were stored in 7% v/v acetic acid at 4ºC until further treatment.  In-gel digestion:  The gel pieces were subjected to the procedures of destaining, reduction, alkylation and in-gel trypsin digestion, as described in detail in [Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2009, 30, 931-938; Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723].  The extracted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted with a 10 uL-aliquot of 1% v/v formic acid-2% v/v acetonitrile and a 2 uL-aliquot of 240 fmol/uL MassPREPTM Enolase Digest Standard in 1% v/v formic acid-2% v/v acetonitrile (tryptic peptides of ENO1_YEAST, from Waters, Milford, MA, USA).  Nano-UPLC-MS/MS:  Nano-UPLC analysis and on-line mass spectrometric measurement of the separated tryptic peptides was performed using a hybrid mass spectrometer coupling ion mobility separation (IMS) with Q-TOF analyzer (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters) and equipped with a nano-ESI source, as described previously (Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2015, 36, 1711-1723).

### Data Protocol
The nano-LC-HDMSE data were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 2.5.2 (Waters).  Data were lock-mass calibrated post acquisition.  Peak processing parameters were the low energy threshold 20 counts, high energy threshold 10 counts and intensity threshold 500 counts.  Database searching were performed using the following parameters: database, UniProtKB homo sapiens complete proteome dataset (canonical sequences only, 20251 entries, 2013-05-29); peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic (typically <10 ppm and <20 ppm, respectively [4]); maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications, oxidation at Met; false positive rate (protein level), 4%.  The criteria of protein identification were set as; at least one peptide matches per protein, at least three fragment ion matches per peptide, at least seven fragment ion matches per protein.  Protein quantities were calculated by PLGS referring to the quantity of the internal standard (ENO1_YEAST).  The summary of the results are provided in file “Summary of the search result.xlsx”.  In future analysis, the hits with only one peptide matched and protein score lower than 100 were excluded from the lists.

### Publication Abstract
The supernatant and precipitate protein fractions from human bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC) were analyzed using 1D SDS-PAGE-LC-MS/MS and the performance of the method was compared with that of nondenaturing 2DE-LC-MS/MS applied to the supernatant fraction, the methods and the results have been reported previously. The 1D gel lanes were cut into pieces of the same size, in order to enable the reproduction of digital 1D images of the individual MS-assigned proteins. When the obtained information on individual HBSMC proteins was compared between the two methods, SDS-PAGE is advantageous in visualizing the quantity differences between differently treated samples, whereas nondenatuing 2DE is advantageous in visualizing protein interactions. SDS-PAGE-MS of the supernatant fraction provided the assignment of 2552 proteins and their percent abundance ranged from 3.5% to 2&#x202f;&#xd7;&#x202f;10<sup>-4</sup>%. 2DE-MS of the supernatant fraction provided 4323 proteins with percent abundance ranged from 3.6% to 1&#x202f;&#xd7;&#x202f;10<sup>-5</sup>%, suggesting that the step of isoelectric focusing served to raise the sensitivity of the method. The proteins in the precipitate fraction, which could not be analyzed by 2DE-MS, were characterized by the abundance of proteins allocated to "membrane" within the category "Cellular component" of UniProtKB database and especially those allocated to "transmembrane" within the subcategory "membrane." On the other hand, there were about 600 "membrane" proteins which showed more than two-fold higher percent abundance in 2DE-MS than in SDS-PAGE-MS. These results showed that 1D SDS-PAGE and nondenaturing 2DE would provide complementary information on the analysis of proteins and protein interactions in cells.

### Keywords
1d sds-page, Quantitative lc-ms/ms, Bronchial smooth muscle cells, Precipitation fraction, Supernatant fraction

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 511400, P. R. China

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 511400, P. R. China


