### Accession
PXD042950

### Title
High-Content Screening Identifies A Small Molecule That Restores AP-4-dependent Protein Trafficking In Neuronal Models Of AP-4-Associated Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia

### Description
Unbiased phenotypic screens in patient-relevant disease models offer the potential to detect therapeutic targets for rare diseases. In this study, we developed a high-throughput screening assay to identify molecules that correct aberrant protein trafficking in adaptor protein complex 4 (AP-4) deficiency, a rare but prototypical form of childhood-onset hereditary spastic paraplegia, characterized by mislocalization of the autophagy protein ATG9A. Using high-content microscopy and an automated image analysis pipeline, we screened a diversity library of 28,864 small molecules and identified a lead compound, BCH-HSP-C01, that restored ATG9A pathology in multiple disease models, including patient-derived fibroblasts and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. We used multiparametric orthogonal strategies and integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to delineate potential mechanisms of action of BCH-HSP-C01. Our results define molecular regulators of intracellular ATG9A trafficking and characterize a lead compound for the treatment of AP-4 deficiency, providing important proof-of-concept data for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed for whole proteome analysis in RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 89900) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche Cat# 04693124001) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Cat# 4906845001) and sonicated in a Bioruptor® Pico Sonication System (one single 30 seconds on/off cycle at 4°C). Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 23225). Lysates were stored at -80° C until further processing. To generate peptide samples for analysis by mass spectrometry, 30-50µg protein were precipitated by overnight incubation in 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone at −20° C and pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000×g for 5 min at 4° C. All subsequent steps were performed at room temperature. Precipitated protein pellets were air-dried, resuspended for denaturation and reduction in digestion buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.3, 8M Urea, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and incubated for 15 min. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were enzymatically digested by addition of LysC (1 µg per 50 µg of protein; Wako, Cat# 129-02541) for an overnight incubation. Samples were then diluted four-fold with 50 mM Tris pH 8.3 before addition of Trypsin (1µg per 50µg of protein; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# T6567) for 3 hours. The digestion reaction was stopped by addition of 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and samples were incubated on ice for 5min to precipitate contaminants, which were pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000×g for 5min. Acidified peptides were transferred to new tubes, before purification by solid-phase extraction using poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 66886-U) StageTips. StageTips with three SDB-RPS plugs were washed with 100% acetonitrile, equilibrated with StageTip equilibration buffer (30% [v/v] methanol, 1% [v/v] TFA), and washed with 0.2% (v/v) TFA. 20μg of peptides in 1% TFA were then loaded onto the activated StageTips, washed with 100% isopropanol, and then 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were eluted in three consecutive fractions by applying a step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations: 20μL SDB-RPS-1 (100 mM ammonium formate, 40% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.5% [v/v] formic acid), then 20μL SDB-RPS-2 (150 mM ammonium formate, 60% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.5% [v/v] formic acid), then 30μL SDB-RPS-3 (5% [v/v] NH4OH, 80% [v/v] acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, resuspended in Buffer A* (0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile), and stored at −20° C until analysis by mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled online to an EASY‐nLC 1200, via a nano-electrospray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Per sample, 250 ng of peptides were loaded on a 50 cm by 75µm inner diameter column, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm silica beads (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was operated at 50° C using an in-house manufactured oven. Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 300nL/min using a linear 110min gradient employing a binary buffer system consisting of Buffer A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid). The gradient ran from 5 to 30% B in 84min, followed by an increase to 60% B in 8min, a further increase to 95% B in 4min, a constant phase at 95% B for 4min, and then a washout decreasing to 5% B in 5min, before re-equilibration at 5% B for 5min. The Exploris 480 was controlled by Xcalibur software (v.4.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method with a full scan range of 300 - 1650 Th. MS1 survey scans were acquired at 60,000 resolution, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 charges and a maximum ion injection time of 25ms. Selected precursor ions were isolated in a window of 1.4 Th and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 30. MS2 fragment scans were performed at 15,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1 × 105 charges, a maximum injection time of 28ms, and precursor dynamic exclusion for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed in MaxQuant Version 2.1.4.0, using the human SwissProt canonical and isoform protein database, retrieved from UniProt (2022_09_26; www.uniprot.org). Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Matching between runs was enabled to match between equivalent and adjacent peptide fractions, within replicates. LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1 and default parameters were used for all other settings. All downstream analyses were performed on the ‘protein groups’ file output from MaxQuant. Differential enrichment analysis of proteomics data was done using the DEP package in R. Preprocessing and quality filtering was performed separately for SH-SY5Y cells and hiPSC-derived neurons. Proteins that were only identified by a modification site, or matched the reversed part of the decoy database, as well as commonly occurring contaminants were removed. Duplicate proteins were removed based on the corresponding gene names by keeping those with the highest total MS/MS count across all samples. All following steps were done separately for each cell type (SH-SY5Y cells (Fig. 7a and Supplementary Fig. 6a-d) and hiPSC-derived neurons (Fig. 7b and Supplementary Fig. 6 e-h) and for the pooled dataset (Fig. 7c and Supplementary Fig. 6 i-l). Low quality entries were removed by keeping only those proteins that had valid MS/MS counts in all replicate samples of at least one experimental condition. Finally, only those proteins were kept that had a maximum of one missing LFQ value in at least one experimental condition. Filtered data were normalized using variance stabilizing transformation and missing values were imputed using a manually defined left-shifted Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.3 and a left-shift of 2.2 SD. Batch effects were corrected using the method described by Johnson et al. Statistical testing for differential protein enrichment was done using protein-wise linear models and empirical Bayes statistics implemented in the limma package in R. Proteins were considered as differentially enriched with a false discovery rate of < 0.05 and a log2 fold change > 0.3. The biological information contained in differentially enriched proteins was summarized using Reactome pathway annotation in clusterProfiler. Pathways were considered differentially expressed with an FDR < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Unbiased phenotypic screens in patient-relevant disease models offer the potential to detect therapeutic targets for rare diseases. In this study, we developed a high-throughput screening assay to identify molecules that correct aberrant protein trafficking in adapter protein complex 4 (AP-4) deficiency, a rare but prototypical form of childhood-onset hereditary spastic paraplegia characterized by mislocalization of the autophagy protein ATG9A. Using high-content microscopy and an automated image analysis pipeline, we screened a diversity library of 28,864 small molecules and identified a lead compound, BCH-HSP-C01, that restored ATG9A pathology in multiple disease models, including patient-derived fibroblasts and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. We used multiparametric orthogonal strategies and integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to delineate potential mechanisms of action of BCH-HSP-C01. Our results define molecular regulators of intracellular ATG9A trafficking and characterize a lead compound for the treatment of AP-4 deficiency, providing important proof-of-concept data for future studies.

### Keywords
Human, Hsp, Ipsc, Drug screen, Autophagy, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Alexandra Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H.
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


