### Accession
PXD014435

### Title
OK-SnRK2 cascade mediates osmotic stress signaling in plant

### Description
Osmotic stress associated with drought, salinity and cold is a major factor limits plant productivity. A few signaling factors have been identified in the sensing or early signaling of osmotic stress. SNF1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) are quickly activated by osmotic stress and the snrk2 decuple are sensitive to hyperosmolality and defective in osmotic stress induced cellular responses. Mechanically activated ion channels Hyperosmolality-induced Ca2+ increases (OSCA) may involve in the sorbitol-evoked Ca2+ increase. However, how plant senses osmotic stress and quickly activates SnRK2s is still unclear. Here we report osmotic stress active protein kinases (OKs), a subfamily of Raf protein kinases, involved in early signaling of osmotic stress in plant. OKs quickly and specifically activated by multiple hyperosmolality, but not by phytohormone abscisic acid or cold stress. The high order mutants of oks were hypertensive to hyperosmolality. In addition, OKs physically interact with and phosphorylate SnRK2s in vivo and in vitro, and this phosphorylation is required for activation of SnRK2s upon osmotic stress. Our results indicated the OKs-SnRK2s kinase cascade in plant osmotic stress responses, which provide a potential molecular machinery mediates osmotic stress signaling in plant.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion was performed as previously described. Plants were lysed in lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) with 10 mM NaF, EDTA-free protease, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Disulfide bond on proteins was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein lysate was precipitated using methanol-chloroform precipitation method. Precipitated protein pellets were suspended and in digestion buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate and 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate in 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.5)) and then were 5-fold diluted with 50 mM TEAB buffer. Protein amount was quantified using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). One mg of proteins was then digested with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) in a 1:100 (v/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 hours at 37 °C, and trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to a final 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight. The detergents were separated from digested peptides by acidifying the solution using 10% TFA and then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min. The digests were then desalted using a 100 mg SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA).The tryptic peptides (400 µg) from each replicate were dissolved in 100 µL of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and incubated with ACN-dissolved 0.8 mg of TMT 6-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 1 hour at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine to the sample and incubating for 15 min. All samples labeled with each TMT channel were pooled in a new tube, and the final concentration of ACN was diluted to less than 5% before desalting. The labeled phosphopetides were desalted using a SEP-PAK C18 cartridge.Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed according to the reported IMAC StageTip protocol with some modifications. The in-house-constructed IMAC tip was made by capping the end with a 20 μm polypropylene frits disk (Agilent). The tip was packed with 5 mg of Ni-NTA silica resin by centrifugation at 200 × g for 1 min. Ni2+ ions were removed by 100 µL of 100 mM EDTA solution. The tip was then activated with 100 µL of 100 mM FeCl3 and equilibrated with 100 µL of loading buﬀer (6% (v/v) acetic acid at pH 3.0) prior to sample loading. Tryptic The TMT-labeled peptides (200 400 µg) were reconstituted in 100 µL of loading buﬀer and loaded onto the IMAC tip. After successive washes with 200 µL of washing buffer (14% (v/v) TFA, 2580% acetonitrile (ACN)) and 100 µL of loading buffer respectively, the bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 150 µL of 200 mM NH4H2PO4. The eluted phosphopeptides from six eight IMAC StageTips were directly loaded on a C18 StageTip to perform high-pH reverse phase (Hp-RP) fractionation.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against Arabidopsis Thaliana database (TAIR10) with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1) with reporter ion MS2 type. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da20 ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of (1) oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, (2) acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and (3) phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were searched. Search was performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false discovery rates of proteins, peptides and phosphosites were set at 1% FDR. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Osmoregulation is important for plant growth, development and response to environmental changes. SNF1-related protein kinase 2s (SnRK2s) are quickly activated by osmotic stress and are central components in osmotic stress and abscisic acid (ABA) signaling pathways; however, the upstream components required for SnRK2 activation and early osmotic stress signaling are still unknown. Here, we report a critical role for B2, B3 and B4 subfamilies of Raf-like kinases (RAFs) in early osmotic stress as well as ABA signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana. B2, B3 and B4 RAFs are quickly activated by osmotic stress and are required for phosphorylation and activation of SnRK2s. Analyses of high-order mutants of RAFs reveal critical roles of the RAFs in osmotic stress tolerance and ABA responses as well as in growth and development. Our findings uncover a kinase cascade mediating osmoregulation in higher plants.

### Keywords
Osmotic stress active protein kinases, Snrk2, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center of Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Pengcheng Wang
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center of Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences


