### Accession
PXD014234

### Title
Anti-tumor effects of PIM/PI3K/mTOR triple kinase inhibitor IBL-302 in neuroblastoma

### Description
The PI3K pathway is a major driver of cancer progression. However, clinical resistance to PI3K inhibition is common. IBL-302 is a novel highly specific triple PIM, PI3K and mTOR inhibitor. Screening IBL-302 in over 700 cell lines representing 47 tumor types identified neuroblastoma as a strong candidate for PIM/PI3K/mTOR inhibition. IBL-302 was more effective than single PI3K inhibition in vitro and IBL-302 treatment of neuroblastoma patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells induced apoptosis, differentiated tumor cells, and decreased N-Myc protein levels. IBL-302 further enhanced the effect of the common cytotoxic chemotherapies cisplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide. Global genome, proteome and phospho-proteome analyses identified crucial biological processes, including cell motility and apoptosis, targeted by IBL-302 treatment. While IBL-302 treatment alone reduced tumor growth in vivo, combination therapy with low-dose cisplatin inhibited neuroblastoma PDX growth. Complementing conventional chemotherapy treatment with PIM/PI3K/mTOR inhibition has the potential to improve clinical outcomes and reduce severe late effects in children with high-risk neuroblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
LU-NB-3 cells were seeded on laminin pre-coated plates and allowed to attach for 24 hours. Cells were treated with 50 nM IBL-302 or vehicle control for 48 hours before harvesting. Each sample consisted of pooled cells from plates treated equally and samples were then divided into aliquots intended for RNAseq and  mass spectrometry using a Fusion instrument (Thermo) (four samples control; three samples IBL-302).

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS/MS analyses were processed using Proteome Discoverer (2.2) and the abundance of the intensities of the proteins and peptides were further processed. A two-sided Student unpaired t-test was used for statistical analyses between two groups while one-way ANOVA was used for statistical analyses between three groups or more. Three levels of significance were used: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K pathway is a major driver of cancer progression. However, clinical resistance to PI3K inhibition is common. IBL-302 is a novel highly specific triple PIM, PI3K, and mTOR inhibitor. Screening IBL-302 in over 700 cell lines representing 47 tumor types identified neuroblastoma as a strong candidate for PIM/PI3K/mTOR inhibition. IBL-302 was more effective than single PI3K inhibition in&#xa0;vitro, and IBL-302 treatment of neuroblastoma patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells induced apoptosis, differentiated tumor cells, and decreased N-Myc protein levels. IBL-302 further enhanced the effect of the common cytotoxic chemotherapies cisplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide. Global genome, proteome, and phospho-proteome analyses identified crucial biological processes, including cell motility and apoptosis, targeted by IBL-302 treatment. While IBL-302 treatment alone reduced tumor growth in&#xa0;vivo, combination therapy with low-dose cisplatin inhibited neuroblastoma PDX growth. Complementing conventional chemotherapy treatment with PIM/PI3K/mTOR inhibition has the potential to improve clinical outcomes and reduce severe late effects in children with high-risk neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
Multikinase inhibition, Ibl-302, Pi3k, Lc-ms/ms, Neuroblastoma, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Division of Oncology and Pathology, Dept. of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Welinder
Division of Oncology and Pathology, Dept. of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


