### Accession
PXD032712

### Title
Patient-derived recombinant autoantibodies reveal the subcellular neuroglial distribution and heterogeneous interactome of leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1

### Description
Autoantibodies against leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (LGI1) occur in patients with encephalitis who present with frequent focal seizures and a pattern of amnesia consistent with focal hippocampal damage. To investigate whether the cellular and subcellular distribution of LGI1 may explain the localisation of these features, and gain broader insights into LGI1’s neurobiology, we analysed the detailed distribution of LGI1, and the diversity of its protein interactome, in mouse brains using recombinant monoclonal LGI1-antibodies derived from encephalitis patients. Combined immunofluorescence and mass spectrometry analyses showed that LGI1 is enriched in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic contact sites, most densely within CA3 regions of the hippocampus. LGI1 is secreted in both neuronal somatodendritic and axonal compartments, and occurs in oligodendrocytic, neuro-oligodendrocytic and astro-microglial protein complexes. Proteomic data support the hypothesis that destabilization of Kv1 / MAGUK complexes by autoantibodies could promote excitability, but did not reveal LGI1 complexes with postsynaptic glutamate receptors. Our results extend our understanding of regional, cellular and subcellular LGI1 expression profiles and reveal novel LGI1-associated complexes, thus providing insights into the complex biology of LGI1 and its relationship to seizures and memory loss.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and Lgi1−/− brains were extracted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until use. Brains were homogenised in HB buffer (20 mM NaP pH 7.4, 30 mM NaCl containing phosphatase inhibitors (PierceTM) and protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche Diagnostics GmbH)). Each brain was homogenised using 1 ml of HB and nuclei were eliminated by 900 x g centrifugation. Supernatants were solubilized in HB supplemented with 1% CHAPS at 5 mg/ml and subjected to 100.000 x g ultracentrifugation. The solubilised material from both wildtype and LGI1 knockout samples were precleared with rProtein A Sepharose Fast Flow (Cytiva) and immunoprecipitated in triplicates using the human autoimmune IgGs (LRR1; LRR3, EPTP1; EPTP2) (3-5 µg / immunoprecipitated sample). Immunoprecipitated samples were washed 3 times with HB containing 0.5% CHAPS before denaturation.  Immunoprecipitated proteins were concentrated on a stacking gel that was cut into small pieces, rinsed three times with 50% acetonitrile in water, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and submitted for tryptic digestion overnight at 37°C in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were extracted three times with a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid then dried using a speedvac. After resuspension with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid mixture, samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry using a hybrid Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) coupled to a nanoliquid chromatography (LC) Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). Samples were trapped with a C18 PepMap 300 trap column (300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 300 Å) and desalted with 0.1% formic acid in water for 3 min at a flow rate of 20 μl/min. Peptide separation was performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The analytical gradient was run with various percentages of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in the following manner: (1) 2.5–25% for 57 min, (2) 25–50% for 6 min, (3) 50-90% for 1 min, and (4) 90% for 10 min. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 within a mass range of 400–1,800 m/z. Ion accumulation was set at a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragmentation spectra of the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method) were acquired with high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files generated by MS were processed to generate mgf files and searched against the Swissprot database (Swissprot version june 2019, (560,118 sequence), with the taxonomy mus musculus, using the MASCOT software (www.matrixscience.com, version 2.3). Search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance: 10 ppm on parent ion and 0.02 Da on fragment ions, and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages. Methionine oxidation as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable modification. The database was searched in the decoy mode. The emPAIs were automatically calculated by the MASCOT algorithm. All samples were analyzed in triplicates. For each antibody, interactomes from wild type samples were subtracted from the background interactomes obtained from LGI1 knockout samples using Excel and homemade python scripts. Partner proteins were considered positive when the emPAIs from WT samples were above 3 compared to those from Lgi1-/- tissue. Keratins, ribosomal proteins, transcription factors and immunoglobulins were excluded from the list of candidates. name of files:  mAb01 mentioned as (1) or (01) in files names is LRR1 in the manuscript mAb07 mentioned as (7) or (07) in file names is LRR3 in the manuscript mAb6208 mentioned as (208) in file names is EPTP2 in the manuscript mAb6212 mentioned as(12) in file names is EPTP1 in the manuscript Wild type or knock out is indicated as W, WT or K, KO in file names, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Autoantibodies against leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (LGI1) occur in patients with encephalitis who present with frequent focal seizures and a pattern of amnesia consistent with focal hippocampal damage. To investigate whether the cellular and subcellular distribution of LGI1 may explain the localization of these features, and hence gain broader insights into LGI1's neurobiology, we analysed the detailed localization of LGI1 and the diversity of its protein interactome, in mouse brains using patient-derived recombinant monoclonal LGI1 antibodies. Combined immunofluorescence and mass spectrometry analyses showed that LGI1 is enriched in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic contact sites, most densely within CA3 regions of the hippocampus. LGI1 is secreted in both neuronal somatodendritic and axonal compartments, and occurs in oligodendrocytic, neuro-oligodendrocytic and astro-microglial protein complexes. Proteomic data support the presence of LGI1-Kv1-MAGUK complexes, but did not reveal LGI1 complexes with postsynaptic glutamate receptors. Our results extend our understanding of regional, cellular and subcellular LGI1 expression profiles and reveal novel LGI1-associated complexes, thus providing insights into the complex biology of LGI1 and its relationship to seizures and memory loss.

### Keywords
Adam, Auto-antibodies, Autosomal-dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy (adlte), Limbic encephalitis, Leucin-rich glioma inactivated 1 (lgi1), Kv1 channels

### Affiliations
CNRS
Inserm  UNIS UMR_S 1072 51 Boulevard Pierre Dramard 13015  Marseille FRANCE

### Submitter
Maya BELGHAZI

### Lab Head
Dr Oussama EL FAR
Inserm  UNIS UMR_S 1072 51 Boulevard Pierre Dramard 13015  Marseille FRANCE


