### Accession
PXD017379

### Title
New insights into the architecture of the human SMC5/6 complex

### Description
A family of Structural Maintenance of Chromosome (SMC) complexes is essential for key cellular processes ensuring proper cohesion, condensation and replication. They share common SMC-kleisin architecture allowing them to embrace DNA. The prokaryotic and eukaryotic SMC5/6 complexes contain additional kleisin-interacting KITE subunits which regulate SMC-kleisin dynamics. In SMC5/6, the Nse1 and Nse3 KITE proteins and Nse4 kleisin subunits form stable subcomplex which binds DNA and regulates essential processes. In addition, non-essential Nse5 and Nse6 subunits associate with the core SMC5/6 complex and recruit it to DNA repair sites.  The architecture of the SMC5/6 complex is crucial for its proper functioning and mutations within the human SMC5/6 subunits result in severe syndromes. Therefore, we aimed to analyse interactions within the human SMC5/6 complex and determine its architecture at detail levels. First, we analysed the human hNSE1-hNSE3 dimer and the hNSE1-hNSE3-hNSE4 trimer by crosslinking and MS/MS analysis. Our data suggested domain arrangements of hNSE1-hNSE3 and orientation of hNSE4 within the trimer. The crosslinking and electron microscopy analysis of the SMC5/6 core complex showed its rod-like shaped architecture with juxtaposed hSMC5-hSMC6 arms. In addition, we observed fully or partially opened hSMC5-hSMC6 shapes with the hNSE1-hNSE3-hNSE4 trimer localized at the SMC head domains. To complete mapping of the human SMC5/6 complex architecture, we analysed positions of hNSE5-hNSE6 at the hSMC5-hSMC6 arms. Interestingly, hNSE6 bound both hSMC5-hSMC6 arms, suggesting that hNSE6 may lock the arms and regulate their dynamics. All together, we gained new insights into the architecture and dynamics of the human SMC5/6 complex.

### Sample Protocol
The purified proteins were crosslinked in their respective elution buffers using DSBU crosslinker (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and loaded to SDS-PAGE gels. The gels were stained by Biosafe Coomassie (Biorad, USA), the corresponding crosslinked bands were excised and further processed for overnight trypsin digestion. Resulting peptides and dipeptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of 0.001% polyethylene glycol [52] and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS) connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted (flow rate 4 μl/min) using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, USA). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by 65 min nonlinear gradient (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and the analytical columns was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective, USA) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 5 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (resolution of 60 000 at 400 m/z, target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms). Normalized collision energies of 15, 25 and 32 were sequentially used for fragmentation of all precursors. MS/MS spectra were acquired for individual fragmentation energies and precursor with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were used to create MGF files using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4; msf files) with in-house Mascot (version 2.6; Matrixscience, UK). During MGF files generation, raw data were filtered out for MS/MS spectra matching (Mascot peptide score >20 and expectation value < 0.01) cRAP proteins (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 112 sequences in total) to exclude common protein contaminants. MGF files were generated from fragmentation energies, 15, 25 and 32 either merged into single file or processed separately in MeroX 2.0. FDR filtration of the dipeptides used by MeroX was not considered as robust enough because of relatively low number of theoretical dipeptides. Therefore, all crosslinks reported against the database containing only the expected proteins were manually validated using in-parallel performed search against cRAP database. See MeroX results (zhrm files) files for more details on the MeroX data processing settings.

### Publication Abstract
A family of Structural Maintenance of Chromosome (SMC) complexes is essential for key cellular processes ensuring proper cohesion, condensation and replication. They share a common SMC-kleisin architecture allowing them to embrace DNA. In SMC5/6, the NSE1 and NSE3 KITE and NSE4 kleisin subunits form a stable subcomplex that binds DNA and regulates essential processes. In addition, NSE5 and NSE6 subunits associate with the core SMC5/6 complex and recruit it to DNA repair sites. The architecture of the SMC5/6 complex is crucial for its proper functioning, and mutations within the human SMC5/6 subunits result in severe syndromes. Therefore, we aimed to analyze interactions within the human SMC5/6 complex and determine its detailed architecture. Firstly, we analyzed different parts of SMC5/6 by crosslinking and MS/MS analysis. Our data suggested domain arrangements of hNSE1-hNSE3 and orientation of hNSE4 within the hNSE1-hNSE3-hNSE4 subcomplex. The crosslinking and electron microscopic analysis of the SMC5/6 core complex showed its rod-like architecture with juxtaposed hSMC5-hSMC6 arms. Additionally, we observed fully or partially opened hSMC5-hSMC6 shapes with the hNSE1-hNSE3-hNSE4 trimer localized in the SMC head domains. To complete mapping of the human SMC5/6 complex architecture, we analyzed positions of hNSE5-hNSE6 at the hSMC5-hSMC6 arms. We showed that hNSE6 binding to hNSE5 and the coiled-coil arm of hSMC6 is mediated by a conserved FAM178 domain, which we therefore renamed CANIN (Coiled-coil SMC6 And NSE5 INteracting) domain. Interestingly, hNSE6 bound both hSMC5 and hSMC6 arms, suggesting that hNSE6 may lock the arms and regulate the dynamics of the human SMC5/6 complex.

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Human smc5/6 complex architecture; nse1-nse3-nse4 trimer; nse5-nse6 dimer; protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


