### Accession
PXD003226

### Title
Proteomic analysis of purified human centrosomes

### Description
Identification and comparison of protein content of 2 independently prepared fractions of human centrosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Centrosomes were isolated from human cells and resuspended in Laemmli buffer. After stacking separation and in-gel tryspin digestion, resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Homo sapiens taxonomy, September 2014 version) and classical contaminants database (249 sequences, homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases using Mascot (version 2.5.1). The Proline software was used to filter the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group) before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubules and actin filaments are the two main cytoskeleton networks supporting intracellular architecture and cell polarity. The centrosome nucleates and anchors microtubules and is therefore considered to be the main microtubule-organizing centre. However, recurring, yet unexplained, observations have pointed towards a connection between the centrosome and actin filaments. Here we have used isolated centrosomes to demonstrate that the centrosome can directly promote actin-filament assembly. A cloud of centrosome-associated actin filaments could be identified in living cells as well. Actin-filament nucleation at the centrosome was mediated by the nucleation-promoting factor WASH in combination with the Arp2/3 complex. Pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1) seemed to modulate the centrosomal actin network by regulating Arp2/3 complex and WASH recruitment to the centrosome. Hence, our results reveal an additional facet of the centrosome as an intracellular organizer and provide mechanistic insights into how the centrosome can function as an actin-filament-organizing centre.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Human centrosomes

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP


