### Accession
PXD001188

### Title
proteomics analysis of virulent and avirulent strains of mycobacterium

### Description
label free quantification analysis was performed on four strains of mycobacterium tuberculosis. The four strains are H37Rv, H37Ra, BND and JAL. The purpose of this study is to identify strain specific proteome expression pattern among the four strains.

### Sample Protocol
All the strains (H37Rv, H37Ra, BND-433 and JAL-2287) were grown in Middlebrook 7H9 media supplemented with 0.2% (v/v) glycerol, 10% albumin dextrose-catalase (ADC) and 0.05% Tween 80 at 37°C. Optical densities at 600 nm were measured and cells were inoculated at 0.5 initial OD. After 3-4 days, cells were harvested at middle-late log phase (O.D< 1 to 1.5) by centrifugation and bacterial pellets were washed twice with TBST and once with TBS and finally stored at -80oC until lysates were prepared. Mycobacterium cell pellets of all four strains were resuspended in urea lysis buffer containing 8M urea (prepared in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate) and complete protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). The cells were thoroughly resuspended and transferred to bead-beating tubes containing 0.1mm zirconium beads. The cells were disrupted in a Mini bead-beater for 10-12 cycles (45 sec. pulse with 60 sec incubation). Lysates were then clarified by centrifugation (at 15,000 rpm for 1 hr) and the protein concentration of the supernatant containing whole cell extracts was was estimated using the Bradford assay.  50 μg of each sample lysate was denatured in 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were digested with trypsin (1:50, trypsin:lysate) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 16 hrs at 37oC. Digests were cleaned up using C18 silica cartridge (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and finally using speed vac. The dried pellet was dissolved in loading buffer  (5% acetonitrile / 0.1% FA).     Sample were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (45 minutes, 37°C) and alkylated with 50 mm iodoacetamide (60 minutes, 37°C) in the dark. Sample were diluted with 25 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin gold (1 µg, Promega USA). After digestion, peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 2.8 with Formic acid and desalted with minispin C18 columns (Nestgrp, USA). Samples were dried under vacuum and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile before mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant and perseus software using default settings. Mycobacterium tuberculosis uniprot reference proteome database was utilized for database search.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an adaptable intracellular pathogen, existing in both dormant as well as active disease-causing states. Here, we report systematic proteomic analyses of four strains, H37Ra, H37Rv, and clinical isolates BND and JAL, to determine the differences in protein expression patterns that contribute to their virulence and drug resistance. Resolution of lysates of the four strains by liquid chromatography, coupled to mass spectrometry analysis, identified a total of 2161 protein groups covering &#x223c;54% of the predicted M. tuberculosis proteome. Label-free quantification analysis of the data revealed 257 differentially expressed protein groups. The differentially expressed protein groups could be classified into seven K-means cluster bins, which broadly delineated strain-specific variations. Analysis of the data for possible mechanisms responsible for drug resistance phenotype of JAL suggested that it could be due to a combination of overexpression of proteins implicated in drug resistance and the other factors. Expression pattern analyses of transcription factors and their downstream targets demonstrated substantial differential modulation in JAL, suggesting a complex regulatory mechanism. Results showed distinct variations in the protein expression patterns of Esx and mce1 operon proteins in JAL and BND strains, respectively. Abrogating higher levels of ESAT6, an important Esx protein known to be critical for virulence, in the JAL strain diminished its virulence, although it had marginal impact on the other strains. Taken together, this study reveals that strain-specific variations in protein expression patterns have a meaningful impact on the biology of the pathogen.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Tuberculosis

### Affiliations
signal transduction lab-1 NII, New Delhi, India
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Vinay Kumar Nandicoori
signal transduction lab-1 NII, New Delhi, India


