### Accession
PXD000957

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human vitreous humor

### Description
In this study, we investigated the proteome of normal human vitreous humor using high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. We identified 1269 proteins. This largest catalog of vitreous proteins to date should facilitate biomedical research into pathological conditions of the eye including diabetic retinopathy, retinal detachment and cataract.

### Sample Protocol
Ten clinically normal appearing vitreous samples were collected from patients undergoing pars plana vitrectomy for macular hole, congenital cataract and subluxated lens. The samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4˚C for 15 minutes and archived at −80°C until further use. Pooled samples were concentrated by 3 kDa filter through low-adsorption membranes (Amicon, Milliore, Billerica, MA). Protein estimation was carried out for pooled concentrated sample using Lowry’s assay (BioRad Laboratories). A total of 4 mg protein was subjected to Agilent’s Multiple Affinity Removal System 14 (MARS 14) for depletion of abundant proteins. 460 µg of protein was recovered in the flow through. 60 µg of depleted vitreous sample was resolved on SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel digestion prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The remaining 400 µg of protein was reduced (5 mM DTT), alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide) and digested using trypsin 1:20 w/w (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C. The samples were acidified by adding 20% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using C18 macro-spin columns (Harvard apparatus, catalog no. 74-4101). 200 µg peptide digest was used for SCX fractionation as well as OFFGEL fractionation. LC-MS/MS analyses of the samples were carried out using high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometer, LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mascot, SEQUEST and X! Tandem search engines were employed to maximize peptide identification.  The mass spectrometry data was searched against NCBI RefSeq-59 human protein database containing 36,211 sequences with known contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as the fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification.  Peptide mass and fragment mass tolerance were set as 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively with 1 missed cleavage. Peptide identifications were filtered by setting 1% target false discovery rate (FDR).  Subcellular localization, molecular function and biological process of identified proteins were analyzed using gene ontology (GO) compliant databases - Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD: http://www.hprd.org) and Human Proteinpedia.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Body fluid proteomics, Retina, Protein biomarkers

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


