### Accession
PXD029621

### Title
Protein composition of Moorella thermoacetica spores formed at contrasted temperatures

### Description
Moorella thermoacetica spores are the most heat-resistant so far retrieved in food industry and we previously showed that the resistance properties of these spores to wet- heat and biocides were lower when spores were produced at low limit temperature than at optimal temperature. By electron microcopy, we observed that the ultrastructure of the spore coat differed according to the sporulation temperature, with spores produced at 55 °C mainly exhibiting lamellar inner coat tightly associated to diffuse outer coat, while spores produced at 45 °C showing an inner and outer coat separated by a less electron- dense zone. Moreover, misarranged coat structures were more frequently observed when spores were produced at low limit temperature. We analyzed the proteome of spore ob- tained at 45° and 55 °C and focused our data analysis on putative spore coat, exosporium proteins or proteins playing a role in spore resistance. Some putative spore coat proteins, such as CotSA, were only identified in spores produced at 55 °C, while some other puta- tive exosporium and coat proteins were significantly less abundant in spores produced at 45 °C. Altogether, our results suggest that sporulation temperature affects the structure and the protein composition of M. thermoacetica spores.

### Sample Protocol
A proteomic analysis was performed on total protein extracts of M. thermoacetica ATCC 39073 spores produced at 45 °C and 55 °C, allowing the identification of a total of 1,018 proteins  and among them, 92 were significantly differencially produced in spores formed at 45°C vs at 55°C . Samples were analyze in nano LC coupled to Qexactive Plus in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The proteome identification was run with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Enzymatic cleavage rules were set to trypsin digestion (“after Arg and Lys, unless Pro follows directly after”) and no semi-enzymatic cleavage rules were allowed. The fix modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation was considered as a potential modification. In a second pass, N-terminal acetylation was added as another potential modification, whereas all other previous settings were retained. The identified proteins were filtered as follows: 1) peptide E‑value < 0.05 with a minimum of 2 peptides per protein and 2) a protein E-value of < 10-4. In Table S2, number of spectra of at least 2 in at least one condition for the 45 °C and the 55°C samples and FDR peptides = 0.02 % and FDR proteins =  0.09 %.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterium <i>Moorella thermoacetica</i> produces the most heat-resistant spores of any spoilage-causing microorganism known in the food industry. Previous work by our group revealed that the resistance of these spores to wet heat and biocides was lower when spores were produced at a lower temperature than the optimal temperature. Here, we used electron microcopy to characterize the ultrastructure of the coat of the spores formed at different sporulation temperatures; we found that spores produced at 55 &#xb0;C mainly exhibited a lamellar inner coat tightly associated with a diffuse outer coat, while spores produced at 45 &#xb0;C showed an inner and an outer coat separated by a less electron-dense zone. Moreover, misarranged coat structures were more frequently observed when spores were produced at the lower temperature. We then analyzed the proteome of the spores obtained at either 45 &#xb0;C or 55 &#xb0;C with respect to proteins putatively involved in the spore coat, exosporium, or in spore resistance. Some putative spore coat proteins, such as CotSA, were only identified in spores produced at 55 &#xb0;C; other putative exosporium and coat proteins were significantly less abundant in spores produced at 45 &#xb0;C. Altogether, our results suggest that sporulation temperature affects the structure and protein composition of <i>M. thermoacetica</i> spores.

### Keywords
Moorella thermoacetica, Lc-ms/ms, Spores

### Affiliations
INRAE, UMR408 Sécurité et Qualité des Produits d'Origine Végétale
INRAE

### Submitter
Celine Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Véronique Broussolle
INRAE, UMR408 Sécurité et Qualité des Produits d'Origine Végétale


