### Accession
PXD043051

### Title
Horizontal acquisition of a DNA ligase improves DNA damage tolerance in eukaryotes

### Description
Bdelloid rotifers are part of the restricted circle of multicellular animals that can withstand a wide range of genotoxic stresses at any stage of their life cycle. In this study, bdelloid rotifer Adineta vaga was used as a model to decipher the molecular basis of their extreme tolerance. Proteomic analysis showed that a specific DNA ligase, different from those usually involved in DNA repair in eukaryotes, is strongly over-represented upon ionizing radiation. A phylogenetic analysis revealed its orthology to prokaryotic DNA ligase E, and its horizontal acquisition by bdelloid rotifers and plausibly other eukaryotes. The fungus Mortierella verticillata, having a single copy of this DNA Ligase E homolog, also exhibits an increased radiation tolerance with an over-expression of this DNA ligase E following X-ray exposure. We also provide evidence that A. vaga ligase E is a major contributor of DNA breaks ligation activity, which is a common step of all important DNA repair pathways. Consistently, its heterologous expression in human cell lines significantly improved their radio-tolerance. Overall, this study highlights the potential of horizontal gene transfers in eukaryotes, and their contribution to the adaptation to extreme conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Bdelloid rotifer culture All experiments were performed using isogenic A. vaga clones derived from a single individual from Meselson Laboratory. The cultures were maintained hydrated in cell flasks with natural spring water, at 25◦C and fed with lettuce filtrate. Comparative proteomic analysis upon X-ray irradiation of A. vaga Each condition of irradiation was performed in duplicate with about 100,000 hydrated A. vaga individuals starved overnight(O/N) in spring water including 1% of Penicillin/Streptomycin (ThermoFisher Scientific). X-ray radiations (0. -1 kGy) were performed using a Precision X-ray X-RAD 225 XL instrument (225 kV, 19 mA, filter 1, 30 cm). After radiation, the rotifers were incubated at 25◦C until the extraction time. The proteins were extracted at t0h, t4h, t24h, and t72h post-irradiation. For protein extraction, rotifers were collected from the plate and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm, 4◦C, 10 min. They were then washed twice in 10 ml of ice-cold PBS (centrifugation 4,000 rpm, 4◦C, 10 min). After the last wash, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 300 µl of cold lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0; 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0; 5 mM DTT; 1% CHAPS, 1 M KCl; 1 mM PMSF, 25% of glycerol and protease inhibitors). The resuspended pellet was then transferred to a cold Dounce and the rotifers were lyzed by 1,000 Dounce pulses with tight pestle B to crack the cuticle of the animals. The lysate was then recovered from the Dounce in an Eppendorf tube and stored O/N at -80◦C. The cellular debris and insoluble proteins were then pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 42,000 rpm, 3h, 4◦C. Supernatant containing soluble proteins was dialyzed against the dialysis buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8.0; 20% glycerol; 100 mM KoAc; 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0; 1 mM DTT) in Slide-A-Lyzer™ MINI Dialysis Device, 3.5K MWCO, 2 mL (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer protocol. After O/N dialysis at 4◦C, the extracted proteins were recovered, the concentration was determined using Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific), and the proteins were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before storage at -80◦C. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used to generate tryptic peptides from protein mixtures prior to mass spectral analysis. The digested proteins were analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims TOF Pro (Bruker) coupled with a UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker). Peptides were separated by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 µm ID, 25 cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Ionopticks) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min, at 50 27 °C. LC mobile phases A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and B was ACN with formic acid 0.1% (v/v). The sample was loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 800 bar. The digest (1 µl) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15% in 18 min, from 15% B to 25% in 9 min, from 25% B to 37% in 3 min and from 37% B to 95% in 5 min. Data acquisition on the tims TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.0 and otof-Control 6.0. tims TOF Pro data were acquired using 160 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.7 to 1.4 Vs/cm². Mass-spectrometric analysis were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. One MS spectra followed by six PASEF MSMS spectra per total cycle of 1.16 s. Two injections per sample were done.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X+ with ion mobility module and Q module for label-free quantification (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Protein identifications were conducted using PEAKS search engine with 15 ppm as parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance. Carbamidomethylation was allowed as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation (N-term) as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set at 2. The peak lists were searched against the protein database from Adineta vaga (NCBI, assembly ASM2161353v1) containing 33,103 entries. Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were normalized to less than 1.0% false discovery rate. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) method was based on expectation - maximization algorithm on the extracted Ion chromatograms of the three most abundant unique peptides of a protein to calculate the area under the curve. For the label-free quantitation results, peptide quality score was set to be ≥4 and protein significance score threshold was set to 20. The significance score was calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value (0.01). ANOVA was used as the significance testing method. The minimum number of peptides from a protein to be identified per condition was set to 2 and only peptides present in at least half of the samples from the same condition were considered in the analysis. Total ion current was used to calculate the normalization factors. At a threshold of 2.5 the same proteins were consistently over-represented at the different timepoints, highlighting the significance of the specific biological processes uncovered.

### Publication Abstract
Bdelloid rotifers are part of the restricted circle of multicellular animals that can withstand a wide range of genotoxic stresses at any stage of their life cycle. In this study, bdelloid rotifer Adineta vaga is used as a model to decipher the molecular basis of their extreme tolerance. Proteomic analysis shows that a specific DNA ligase, different from those usually involved in DNA repair in eukaryotes, is strongly over-represented upon ionizing radiation. A phylogenetic analysis reveals its orthology to prokaryotic DNA ligase E, and its horizontal acquisition by bdelloid rotifers and plausibly other eukaryotes. The fungus Mortierella verticillata, having a single copy of this DNA Ligase E homolog, also exhibits an increased radiation tolerance with an over-expression of this DNA ligase E following X-ray exposure. We also provide evidence that A. vaga ligase E is a major contributor of DNA breaks ligation activity, which is a common step of all important DNA repair pathways. Consistently, its heterologous expression in human cell lines significantly improves their radio-tolerance. Overall, this study highlights the potential of horizontal gene transfers in eukaryotes, and their contribution to the adaptation to extreme conditions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Dna repair, X-ray, Bdelloid rotifers

### Affiliations
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Molecular Biology and Evolution, Brussels, 1050, Belgium Université de Namur, Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Ecology, Namur, 5000, Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Karine Van
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Molecular Biology and Evolution, Brussels, 1050, Belgium Université de Namur, Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Ecology, Namur, 5000, Belgium


