### Accession
PXD019920

### Title
Spatially-targeted proteomics of S. aureus abscess formation

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a major contributor of healthcare-associated infections and able to withstand numerous frequently used antibiotics. In order to develop novel treatment approaches, a deeper understanding of the complex interaction between host and pathogen is required. This is particularly true for the processes during development of tissue abscesses, which are important contributors to acute and persistent staphylococcal infections. Notably, the formation of staphylococcal abscesses takes place in distinct stages. Consequently, studies aiming to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of abscess development have to take temporal and spatial components into account. State-of-the-art proteomic technologies offer insight into complex biological systems. However, the pairing of spatial information and deep proteomic analysis is challenging, complicating the targeted analysis of relatively small-scale and heterogeneous structures like organ abscesses. To overcome existing technical limitations, we have previously introduced the use of a spatially targeted liquid extraction surface analysis (LESA) workflow termed “microLESA”. In our current study, we perform microLESA to investigate the processes at the host-pathogen interface during development of staphylococcal kidney abscesses in a murine model of systemic infection. For this investigation, regions from the abscess community, the interface surrounding the abscess, and the cortex of infected kidneys were extracted and analyzed at both 4- and 10-days post infection. By defining the proteome of different abscess regions across the course of infection, we followed the immune response and bacterial contribution to abscess development through spatial and temporal proteomic changes. The information gathered was then mapped through pathway analysis to characterize the metabolic processes at the host-pathogen interface during staphylococcal infection.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid surface extraction was completed using a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Inc., Ithaca, NY) with the LESAplusLC modification. Digested samples were scanned using a flatbed scanner and uploaded to the Advion ChipSoft software. 5 µL of extraction solvent (2:8 acetonitrile/water with 0.1% formic acid) was aspirated into the glass capillary. The capillary was then lowered to a height of approximately 0.5 mm above the sample surface and 2.5 µL of solvent was dispensed onto ROIs. Contact with the surface was maintained for 10s and 3.0 µL of solvent was re-aspirated into the capillary. The initial 5 µL volume was dispensed into a 96-well plate containing 200 µL of water/0.1% formic acid.Flr The LESA extraction was repeated twice at the same ROI and combined. Three wash cycles of the instrument were completed between each ROI set to prevent carryover from other biological regions. Resulting extracts were then dried down under vacuum and stored at -80 ˚C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis For peptide identification, tandem mass spectra were searched using Protalizer software (Vulcan Analytic, Birmingham, Alabama) and MaxQuant against a mouse, or a S. aureus strain USA300 LAC, database created from the UniprotKB25. Modifications such as glycosylation, phosphorylation, methionine, oxidation, and deamidation were included in the Protalizer database search with an FDR of 1%. For MaxQuant analysis raw files were processed using a label-free quantification method implemented in MaxQuant version (1.6.7). Spectra were searched against mouse and Staphylococcus aureus (strain USA300) reference databases downloaded from UniProt KB. These were supplemented with the reversed sequences and common contaminants automatically and used for quality control and FDR setting by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids. Peptide and protein FDRs were both set at 1%. The resultant protein groups file from MaxQuant was analyzed for outliers by calculating z-scores for each sample based on number of protein groups identified; 3 samples out of 42 were excluded as outliers. Proteins identified as “reverse”, “only identified by site”, or “potential contaminants” were also removed.  Proteins identified by Protalizer and MaxQuant were curated based on the following criteria: 2 unique peptides contributed to the protein identification, proteins were detected in 2+ biological regions, and proteins were detected in 2+ serial sections.  High confidence bacterial proteins also met these criteria, while medium confidence bacterial proteins only met 1 of the 2 replicate requirements criteria but did meet the 2+ unique peptide criteria.  The lists generated by each dataset were cross compared, to identify proteins from protein groups generated by MaxQuant. Whether Protalizer, MaxQuant or both was used for protein identification is included with the protein identifications in Tables S1 and S2. We have also included a list of “medium confidence” bacterial protein identifications (Table S3). We believe these proteins may have not fulfilled the requirements for high confidence due to potentially relevant differences in abundance or due to heterogeneity between abscesses. Since this is the first truly unbiased study of these types of proteins, we include this data, but additional confirmation may be required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S. aureus, Lc-ms/ms, Microlesa, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Emma Guiberson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Caprioli
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA


