### Accession
PXD037186

### Title
cryo-EM study of bovine retinal pigment epithelium cell lysate

### Description
This is the proteomic analysis data of bovine retinal pigment epithelium cell lysate subjected to cryo-EM study.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine retinal pigment epithelium cell was lysed and fractionated by size exclusion chromatography. Two protein fractions were collected and subjected to protein digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all of the experimental peptide MS/MS spectra against the UniProt bovine proteome database using a database search engine, MaxQuant  (version 2.0.3.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas variable modifications included oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide and acetylation of N-terminal amino groups. For peptide/protein identification, strict trypsin specificity was applied, the minimum peptide length was set to 6, the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2, and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The use of an integrated systems biology approach to investigate tissues and organs has been thought to be impracticable in the field of structural biology, where the techniques mainly focus on determining the structure of a particular biomacromolecule of interest. Here, we report the use of cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) to define the composition of a raw bovine retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) lysate. From this sample, we simultaneously identify and solve cryo-EM structures of seven different RPE enzymes whose functions affect neurotransmitter recycling, iron metabolism, gluconeogenesis, glycolysis, axonal development, and energy homeostasis. Interestingly, dysfunction of these important proteins has been directly linked to several neurodegenerative disorders, including Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and schizophrenia. Our work underscores the importance of cryo-EM in facilitating tissue and organ proteomics at the atomic level.

### Keywords
Bovine, Cryo-em, Retinal pigment epithelium cell

### Affiliations
CWRU
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA

### Submitter
zhemin zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Yu
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA


