### Accession
PXD024727

### Title
Identification of kinase activity in ischemic heart disease

### Description
We performed discovery proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of human heart tissue to identify possibly hyperactive pathways in ischemic heart disease.

### Sample Protocol
Human heart tissue was lysed in urea buffer and subsequent sonification. 20 ug aliquots were digested and measured followingpreviously published FASP and LFQ protocols (J. R. Wiśniewski, A. Zougman, N. Nagaraj, M. Mann, Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature Methods 6, 359-362, 2009 and U. Distler, J. Kuharev, P. Navarro, S. Tenzer, Label-free quantification in ion mobility-enhanced 235 data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat Protoc 11, 795-812, 2016 ). An aliqout of 700 ug protein was digested in solution and the resulting peptides were enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2 spin tips from GL Sciences. The resulting phosphopeptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC coupled to an Exploris 480 using a 45 min gradient, Top 10 DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing of the 20 ug aliqout for whole proteome analysis was performed as descibred before (U. Distler, J. Kuharev, P. Navarro, S. Tenzer, Label-free quantification in ion mobility-enhanced 235 data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat Protoc 11, 795-812, 2016 ). Raw data obtined from the orbitrap was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using the Sequest HT algorithm and built-in LFQ nodes. In addition, the raw data was processedusing MaxQuant 1.6, which was later submitted to integrative inferred kinase activity (INKA) analysis as described before ( R. Beekhof et al., INKA, an integrative data analysis pipeline for phosphoproteomic inference of active kinases. Mol Syst Biol 15, e8250-e8250, 2019 ). The combined quantitative values were further vizualized using Cytoscape with integrated STRING app (P. Shannon et al., Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res 13, 2498-2504, 2003 and D. Szklarczyk et al., STRING v11: protein-protein association networks with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Res 47, 242 D607-d613, 2019 )

### Publication Abstract
Despite major advances in acute interventions for myocardial infarction (MI), adverse cardiac remodeling and excess fibrosis after MI causing ischemic heart failure (IHF) remain a leading cause of death worldwide. Here we identify a profibrotic coagulation signaling pathway that can be targeted for improved cardiac function following MI with persistent ischemia. Quantitative phosphoproteomics of cardiac tissue revealed an upregulated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in human IHF. Intervention in this pathway with trametinib improves myocardial function and prevents fibrotic remodeling in a murine model of non-reperfused MI. MAPK activation in MI requires myeloid cell signaling of protease-activated receptor 2 linked to the cytoplasmic domain of the coagulation initiator tissue factor (TF). They act upstream of pro-oxidant NOX2 NADPH oxidase, ERK1/2 phosphorylation, and activation of profibrotic TGF-&#x3b2;1. Specific targeting with the TF inhibitor nematode anticoagulant protein c2 (NAPc2) starting 1 day after established experimental MI averts IHF. Increased TF cytoplasmic domain phosphorylation in circulating monocytes from patients with subacute MI identifies a potential thromboinflammatory biomarker reflective of increased risk for IHF and suitable for patient selection to receive targeted TF inhibition therapy.

### Keywords
Ischemic heart disease, Phosphoproteomics, Map kinase activity, Myeloid cell coagulation

### Affiliations
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz / Institute for Immunology
University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz

### Submitter
Thomas Michna

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz


