### Accession
PXD032949

### Title
Myocardial Injury Caused by Chronic Alcohol Exposure——A Pilot Study Based on Proteomic

### Description
Chronic alcohol exposure can cause myocardial degenerative diseases, manifested as cardiac insufficiency, arrhythmia, etc. These are defined as alcoholic cardiomyopathy (ACM). Alcohol-mediated myocardial injury has previously been studied through metabolomics, and it has been proved to be involved in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway related to the biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids and oxidative phosphorylation, which tentatively explored the mechanism of ACM induced by chronic drinking. To further study the myocardial damage caused by alcohol, the mouse model of ACM successfully established previously was used to perform proteomics analysis on myocardial specimens. Fifty-six differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, and they are involved in the KEGG pathway related to fatty acid biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, oxidative stress, and the development of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). The present study further demonstrated the underlying causes of myocardial damage caused by chronic alcohol consumption and lays the foundation for further research to clarify the underlying mechanism of ACM.

### Sample Protocol
All animal experiments were performed under the review and supervision of the Animal Care and Use Committee of China Medical University, and were complied with the "Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals".The present experiment used the same batch of animal models as previous study. A total of six 7-week-old male C57BL/6 mice (purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd.) of SPF-grade were included in the experiment, and they were randomly divided into two groups. The experimental group (n=3) and the control group (n=3) were, respectively, fed with 4% alcohol Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet (TP 4030B), and alcohol-free Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet (TP 4030C). The same energy intake and other conditions between the two groups were strictly controlled. After 12 weeks, the mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and blood was collected by cardiac puncture. In addition, myocardial tissue samples were taken from three mice in each group, washed with cold phosphate balanced solution (PBS), and frozen at -80°C for proteomics analysis.Total Protein Extraction and Protein Quality Test: Myocardial tissue samples were ground, lysed, sonicated, and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The extracted supernatant was reduced, basified in the dark, and incubated with acetone at 20°C for 2 hours. The collected pellet was dissolved in solubilization buffer containing 0.1 M TEAB (pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Add different dilutions of bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution (0 to 0.5 g/L) and sample solution to 96-well plate with 20 μL. Each gradient is repeated 3 times. Add 180 μL of G250 dye solution quickly to detect and calculate the protein concentration of the sample. A total of 20 μg protein samples were loaded for 12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 and decolorized until the bands were clearly visible. Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) Labeling of Peptides: Samples were diluted in lysis buffer and mixed with trypsin and TEAB buffer. After 4 h of digestion, trypsin and CaCl2 were added overnight. Then, after adjusting the pH with formic acid, the supernatant was slowly added to a C18 desalting column for washing and elution. The eluate was collected, lyophilized, and TEAB buffer and TMT labeling reagent (Thermo Fisher, USA) were added. Separation of Fractions: Prepare a mobile phase liquid A (2% acetonitrile and ammonium hydroxide at pH=10.0) and liquid B (98% acetonitrile). Dissolve the mixed lyophilized powder in solution A and centrifuge. Elution was performed using an L-3000 HPLC system（Thermo Fisher, USA） with a Waters BEH C18 (4.6 × 250 mm, 5 μm) column set at 45°C. After freeze-drying, 0.1% formic acid was added to dissolve.LC-MS/MS Analysis: Prepare mobile phase liquid A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and liquid B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Take 1 μg supernatant of each fraction sample for liquid quality detection using EASY-nLCTM1200 UHPLC system. Finally, the raw data (. raw) of MS detection was obtained.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer 2.4 was used for database searching and spectroscopic peptide and protein quantification. The searched parameter settings are shown in Table S3. Only peptides and proteins with fault detection rate (FDR) less than 1% were retained. Proteins that were quantitatively significantly different between experimental and control groups with P-value < 0.05 and fold change (FC) > 1.2 (|log2FC| > 0.263) or < 0.83 (|log2FC|< 0.269) were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Interproscan software was used to perform Gene Ontolog (GO) and InterPro (IPR) functional analyses. And protein family and pathway analysis were performed on the identified proteins by Orthologous Group (COG) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. Volcano plot analysis, cluster heatmap analysis, and pathway enrichment analysis were performed on GO, IPR, and KEGG for DEP analysis and prediction of possible protein-protein interactions (PPIs).

### Publication Abstract
Chronic alcohol exposure can cause myocardial degenerative diseases, manifested as cardiac insufficiency, arrhythmia, etc. These are defined as alcoholic cardiomyopathy (ACM). Alcohol-mediated myocardial injury has previously been studied through metabolomics, and it has been proved to be involved in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway concerning unsaturated fatty acids biosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation, which tentatively explored the mechanism of ACM induced by chronic drinking. To further study alcohol-induced myocardial injury, myocardial specimens from a previously successfully established mouse model of ACM were subjected to histological, echocardiographic, and proteomic analyses, and validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Results of histopathology and echocardiography showed the hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes, the dilation of ventricles, and decreased cardiac function. Proteomic results, available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032949, revealed 56 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, which have the potential to be involved in the KEGG pathway related to fatty acid biosynthesis disorders, lipid metabolism disorders, oxidative stress, and, ultimately, in the development of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). The present study further elucidates the underlying effects of myocardial injury due to chronic alcohol intake, laying a foundation for further studies to clarify the potential mechanisms of ACM.

### Keywords
Alcoholic cardiomyopathy; proteomics; differentially expressed proteins; kegg pathway; myocardial injury

### Affiliations
China Medical University
China Medical University School of Forensic Medicine

### Submitter
Xiaonan Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Zhipeng Cao
China Medical University School of Forensic Medicine


