### Accession
PXD004757

### Title
Identification of novel natural substrates of fibroblast activation protein by differential degradomics and proteomics (TAILS dataset)

### Description
Fibroblast Activation Protein (FAP) is a cell-surface transmembrane-anchored anchored dimeric protease. This unique constitutively active serine protease has both dipeptidyl aminopeptidase and endopeptidase activities, and can hydrolyse post-proline bonds. FAP expression is very low in adult organs, but is greatly up regulated by activated fibroblasts in sites of tissue remodelling, including fibrosis, atherosclerosis, arthritis and tumours. Primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were isolated from FAP gene knockout (GKO) embryos, immortalised and then transduced to express either enzyme active or inactive FAP. The cell secretomes were analysed using degradomic and proteomic techniques. Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates based degradomics identified cleavage sites in collagens, many other extracellular matrix (ECM) and associated proteins, and lysyl oxidase-like-1, CCL2, IL13, C1qT6 and CSF-1 that were confirmed in vitro. In addition, differential metabolic labelling coupled with quantitative proteomic analysis also implicated FAP in ECM-cell interactions, as well as with coagulation and wound healing associated proteins. FAP GKO plasma exhibited slower that wildtype clotting times. This study greatly enhances the understanding of the roles of FAP through a significant expansion of the substrate repertoire of this protease and identifying downstream effects of its activity that support roles in pathological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to near confluence in serum-containing medium, washed three times with pre-warmed PBS, and switched to serum-free DMeM without phenol red. Cell- conditioned media were collected after 24 h, supplemented with protease inhibitors (5 mM eDta, 0.01 mM e64, 1 mM PMSF), centrifuged, and  ltered using a 0.2-μm  lter to ensure removal of dead cells Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) (Kleifeld et al., 2010) was performed as described previously (Tholen et al., 2013, 2011). Briefly, the CCM was concentrated by ultrafiltration (5 kDa MWCO) followed by precipitation with acetoneemethanol or trichloracetic acid. The protein pellet was re-solubilized in ice-cold 100 mM NaOH and 3 M guanidine hydrochloride using ultrasonication. After adjust- ing the pH to 8.0 using HEPES, the samples were reduced (5 mM DTT for 1 h at 37  C), alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at 22  C) with quenching of excess iodoacetamide (5 mM DTT for 30 min at 22  C). Samples were labeled by dimethylation using 20 mM light (12COH2; Sigma) or heavy (13COD2; Cambridge Isotopes) formaldehyde in the presence of 20 mM NaCNBH3 (for 18 h at 37  C). After quenching of excess reagents with 50 mM TriseCl, pH 7.5 (for 1 h at 37  C), samples were mixed at equal amounts, acetone precipitated and re-solubilized with 100 mM ice-cold NaOH as described for quantitative proteome comparison. The pH was adjusted to 8.0 with HEPES-free acid, trypsinized (1:100; for 18 h at 37  C), and purified using Sep-Pak C18 solid-phase extraction columns (Waters) according to manu- facturer’s instructions. Samples were eluted in 80% acetoni- trile, pH was adjusted to 7.0 and acetonitrile removed by vacuum evaporation, followed by volume adjustment with water. Internal peptides bearing free N-termini were coupled to an aldehyde-functionalized polymer (Kleifeld et al., 2010) in the presence of 50 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (Stero- gene). Excess reagents were quenched with 100 mM glycine for 1 h at room temperature. The sample was applied to a 10 kDa MWCO filter. The flow-through was desalted, fraction- ated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap LC-MS/MS data in raw format was converted to the mzXML (Pedrioli et al., 2004) format, using msconvert (Kessner et al., 2008) with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data, and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assign- ment X! Tandem (Version 2010.12.01) (Craig and Beavis, 2004) was used. X! Tandem parameters included: pre-cursor mass er- ror of `10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, semi- specific cleavage C-terminal to arginine residues (“Semi Arg- C specificity”) with up to three missed cleavages, residue mod- ifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (þ57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 34.06 Da); no variable modifica- tions. X! Tandem results were further validated by PeptidePro- phet (Keller et al., 2002) at a confidence level of >95%. For relative peptide and protein quantification XPRESS (Zhang et al., 2003) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast activation protein-alpha (FAP) is a cell-surface transmembrane-anchored dimeric protease. This unique, constitutively active serine protease has both dipeptidyl aminopeptidase and endopeptidase activities and can hydrolyze the post-proline bond. FAP expression is very low in adult organs but is upregulated by activated fibroblasts in sites of tissue remodeling, including fibrosis, atherosclerosis, arthritis and tumors. To identify the endogenous substrates of FAP, we immortalized primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from FAP gene knockout embryos and then stably transduced them to express either enzymatically active or inactive FAP. The MEF secretomes were then analyzed using degradomic and proteomic techniques. Terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS)-based degradomics identified cleavage sites in collagens, many other extracellular matrix (ECM) and associated proteins, and lysyl oxidase-like-1, CXCL-5, CSF-1, and C1qT6, that were confirmed <i>in vitro</i> In addition, differential metabolic labeling coupled with quantitative proteomic analysis also implicated FAP in ECM-cell interactions, as well as with coagulation, metabolism and wound healing associated proteins. Plasma from FAP-deficient mice exhibited slower than wild-type clotting times. This study provides a significant expansion of the substrate repertoire of FAP and provides insight into the physiological and potential pathological roles of this enigmatic protease.

### Keywords
Seprase, Proteolysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17,  D-79104 Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17,  D-79104 Freiburg, Germany


