### Accession
PXD019047

### Title
HDX-MS reveals the perturbed structural dynamics underlie inhibition and altered specificity of the multidrug efflux pump AcrB

### Description
Perturbed structural dynamics underlie inhibition and altered specificity of the multidrug efflux pump AcrB

### Sample Protocol
Protein purification, deutration, peptide digestion, MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Peptide search in PLGS, followed by data processing and analysis in DynamX and the visualisation in Deuteros.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance-nodulation-division efflux pumps play a key role in inherent and evolved multidrug resistance in bacteria. AcrB, a prototypical member of this protein family, extrudes a wide&#xa0;range of antimicrobial agents out of bacteria. Although high-resolution structures exist for AcrB, its conformational fluctuations and their putative role in function are largely unknown. Here, we determine these structural dynamics in the presence of substrates using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, complemented by molecular dynamics simulations, and bacterial susceptibility studies. We show that an efflux pump inhibitor potentiates antibiotic activity by restraining drug-binding pocket dynamics, rather than preventing antibiotic binding. We also reveal that a drug-binding pocket substitution discovered within a multidrug resistant clinical isolate modifies the plasticity of the transport pathway, which could explain its altered substrate efflux. Our results provide insight into the molecular mechanism of drug export and inhibition of a major multidrug efflux pump and the directive role of its dynamics.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Multi-drug efflux pumps, Acrb, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Research scientist
Department of Chemistry, King's College London

### Submitter
Zainab Ahdash

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
Department of Chemistry, King's College London


