### Accession
PXD003583

### Title
Genome-wide profiling of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler BRAHMA and Histone H3 lysine demethyalse Relative of Early Flowering 6 (REF6) in Arabidopsis

### Description
BRAHMA (BRM) is a conserved SWI/SNF-type chromatin remodeling ATPase implicated in many key nuclear events. Histone H3 Lysine 27 (H3K27) demethylases specifically remove the repressive histone mark, trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3). Both proteins are thought to play active roles in regulating gene activities at the chromatin level, but their genome-wide coordination remains to be determined. In Arabidopsis thaliana, RELATIVE OF EARLY FLOWERING 6 (REF6, also known as JMJ12) is the first identified plant H3K27 demethylase. Here, genome-wide analyses revealed that REF6 targets to thousands of genes across the Arabidopsis genome and co-localizes with BRM at more than 1,000 genes, many of which are genes involved in response to various stimuli, especially plant hormones. Loss of REF6 activity results in decreased BRM occupancy at hundreds of BRM-REF6 co-targets, indicating that REF6 is required for the recruitment of BRM to chromatin. Further, REF6 targets to genomic loci that contains the CTCTGTTT motif in vivo

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings of brm-1 ProBRM-BRM-GFP and Pro35S:YFP transgenic Arabidopsis lines were harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then ground into fine powder with a mortar. Ten grams of tissue powder were mixed with 20 ml of extraction buffer ((20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 40 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1x protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher)). After filtering and centrifugation, the protein extract was mixed with 50 μl of protein A magnetic beads pre-incubated with 20 μg of anti-GFP polyclonal antibody (custom made) for 2 hrs at 4oC. After incubation, the beads were washed with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 40 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100) for 3 times, then eluted by incubating with SDS loading buffer for 10 min at 95°C for two times.     The immunoprecipitated proteins were separated on a NuPAGE® Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, and the gel was stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen). Each gel lane was cut into 15 bands.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer in the data dependent mode. The spectra data were searched against TAIR10 database using Protein Prospector.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Relative of early flowering 6 (ref6), Arabidopsis, Brahma

### Affiliations
Carnegie institution for science
Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Instition for Science

### Submitter
Zhiyong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-yong Wang
Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Instition for Science


