### Accession
PXD035629

### Title
AP-MS of replisomes from S. cerevisiae in S phase and after unscheduled G1 replication

### Description
Interfering with once-per-cell-cycle regulation of DNA replication initiation generates genome instability through over-replication and has been linked to early stages of cancer development. Here, we engineered different systems in budding yeast to induce over-replication in G1 and investigated its characteristics and consequences within the same cell cycle. To study replisome composition, we immunopurified replisomes via a GFP-tag on the Psf2 subunit of the GINS complex from S phase in the presence and absence of hydroxyurea and after unscheduled replication initiation in G1.

### Sample Protocol
Washed beads were incubated for 30 min with elution buffer 1 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM DTT, 20 µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution with elution buffer 2 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM Chloroacetamide) for 5 min. Both eluates were combined and further incubated at room temperature overnight. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted with Stage Tips containing C18 reverse-phase material and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on 30 cm columns (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads ReproSil Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 LC coupled through a nano-electrospray source to a Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and separated with a non-linear gradient of 7 to 30 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 60 min followed by an increase to 60% buffer B in 15mins. The column temperature was kept at 60° C. Data acquisition switched between a full scan (60 K resolution, 100 ms max. injection time, AGC target 3e6) and 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans (15K resolution, 60 ms max. injection time, AGC target 1e5). The isolation window was set to 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 27. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v2.0.1.0). Peak lists were searched against the yeast Uniprot FASTA database combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. “Match between runs” (MBR) with a maximum matching time window of 0.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were calculated with the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of one. Calculation of iBAQ intensities was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
DNA replicates once per cell cycle. Interfering with the regulation of DNA replication initiation generates genome instability through over-replication and has been linked to early stages of cancer development. Here, we engineer genetic systems in budding yeast to induce unscheduled replication in a G1-like cell cycle state. Unscheduled G1 replication initiates at canonical S-phase origins. We quantifiy the composition of replisomes in G1- and S-phase and identified firing factors, polymerase &#x3b1;, and histone supply as factors that limit replication outside S-phase. G1 replication per se does not trigger cellular checkpoints. Subsequent replication during S-phase, however, results in over-replication and leads to chromosome breaks and chromosome-wide, strand-biased occurrence of RPA-bound single-stranded DNA, indicating head-to-tail replication collisions as a key mechanism generating genome instability upon G1 replication. Low-level, sporadic induction of G1 replication induces an identical response, indicating findings from synthetic systems are applicable to naturally occurring scenarios of unscheduled replication initiation.

### Keywords
Dna replication, Gins complex

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany Phone: +49-2203-6011-277 Email: boris.pfander@dlr.de & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany Email: bpfander@uni-koeln.de & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried,  Germany Phone:+49-89-8578-3050   Fax: +49-89-8578-2454

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Pfander
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany Phone: +49-2203-6011-277 Email: boris.pfander@dlr.de & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany Email: bpfander@uni-koeln.de & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried,  Germany Phone:+49-89-8578-3050   Fax: +49-89-8578-2454


