### Accession
PXD017901

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of different truffle species

### Description
Truffles of the Tuber species as expensive foods are predestined for food fraud. To find markers for distinguishing different truffle species the proteomes as phenotype determining basis were investigated. First, established sample preparation protocols subsequent to LC-MS/MS analysis for a bottom up proteomic approach were tested on a truffle sample. The sample preparation included protein extraction and in-solution tryptic digestion. For protein extraction sodium deoxycholate (SDC), sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) and urea were tested, followed by direct tryptic digestion in solution (SDC extracted proteins) and a tryptic digestion utilizing the FASP approach with molecular cut-off filters (SDS and urea extracted proteins). By this approach the SDC sample preparation protocol was classified as the most suited one to prepare truffle samples. It resulted in a high protein identification rate, had a high reproducibility, was cost efficient and most easy to handle. By a quantitative proteomic approach using label-free and non-targeted bottom up LC-MS/MS the species T. magnatum (n=13), T. aestivum (n=16), T. uncinatum (n=4) and T. melanosporum (n=7) were compared and truffle species specific markers were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Truffles were washed with ultrapure water and stored at -80 °C. Homogenization was done with a GM 300 knife mill (Retsch, Haan, Germany), using one part truffle and one part dry ice. The obtained powder was lyophilized for 48 h and further stored at -80 °C. Samples containing powder of sample were mixed with one of the following extraction buffers in technical triplicates: 1% SDC/ 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), in short SDC buffer, 8 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), in short urea buffer, or 5 % SDS/ 50 mM ABC, in short SDS buffer, in a ratio of 14 µl buffer to 1 mg of truffle powder. Samples mixed with SDC and SDS buffers were boiled for 10 min at 99 °C before sonication with a sonication probe (Bandelin Sonoplus, 30 % energy for 30 sec). Samples mixed with urea buffer were incubated on ice for 30 min before sonication on ice with the sonication probe. All samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g and the supernatant transferred to a new reaction tube. The supernatant was used for protein concentration estimation by Pierce™ Protein Assay Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. 20 µg of SDC buffer extracted protein was used and diluted ad 100 µl total volume with SDC buffer. For reduction of the disulfide bonds 1 µl 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) was added (final concentration 10 mM) and samples incubated for 30 min at 56 °C in a heating block. For blocking the reduced cysteines, 4 µl 0.5 M idoacetamide (IAA) was added (final concentration 20 mM). The samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark at 37 °C. For enzymatic cleavage 0.2 µg trypsin was added in order to reach a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:100. Tryptic digestion was performed over night at 37 °C. To stop the reaction and precipitate the SDC, formic acid was added to 2 % final concentration. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 g and the supernatant transferred in a new tube. Before LC-MS/MS measurement the supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended with a concentration of 1 µg/µl in 0.1 % formic acid.  The protein extracts obtained by Urea and SDS containing buffers were further processed by the FASP method. For this, 20 µg of protein extracts were taken and transferred into a centrifuge spin filter with a molecular weight cut-off of 30 kDa (Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml, Merck Millipore (Billerica, Massachusetts, USA)). Then, 200 µl of 8 M urea in 50 mM ABC, further called UA solution, were added and the samples inside the filters centrifuged 10 min at 14,000g. This step was repeated once. For reduction 50 µl 10 mM DTT was added and the samples incubated for 30 min at 56 °C. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 14, 000 g. Then 50 µl 20 mM IAA was added for alkylation. Incubation was done 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. The samples were again 5 min centrifuged at 14.000 g. The samples were washed twice by adding 100 µl UA solution and 10 min centrifugation at 14,000 g, followed by washing two times with 200 µl 50 mM ABC and centrifugation for 10 min at 14,000 g. For enzymatic cleavage, trypsin was added in a 1:100 ratio and proteolysis was done at 37 °C overnight. The generated peptides were collected in a new reaction tube by 10 min centrifugation at 14,000 g and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in a concentration of 1 µg/µl in 0.1 % formic acid. Sample preparation for the quantitative proteomic analysis of different truffle species was done according to the SDC protocol. LC-MS/MS measurements were done on a quadrupol-orbitrap (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer coupled to a UPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters). For analysis, 1 µg of peptides were injected by the autosampler onto an reversed phase trapping column (Acquity UPLC® Symmetry C18; 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle diameters, 180 µm x 20 mm) and separated on a reversed phase separation column (Acquity UPLC® Peptide BEH C18; 130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle diameters, 75 µm x 200 mm). Trapping was done for 5 min at a flow rate of 15 µl/min with 99 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and 1 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile).  The eluting peptides were infused in a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive). MS1 scans were performed in positive mode over a scan range of 400-1200 m/z. The orbitrap resolution was set to 70,000 with an AGC target of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 240 ms. Peptides with the charge states 2-5 over the intensity threshold of 100,000 were isolated with a 2 m/z isolation window in Top15 mode and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 %. The fragments were measured with an orbitrap resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 1E5 and 50 ms maximum injection time. Already fragmented peptides were excluded the next 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with the MaxQuant (Version 1.6.2.10) software. All samples were handled as individual experiments. Peptides were digested in silico with trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid. Fixed modification was the carbamidomethylation of cysteines. The error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm, for the following main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with a 20 ppm error tolerance. For identification the Perigord Black Truffle (Strain Mel28) protein database was used (downloaded from UniProt 13.07.2017, 4113 entries). False discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and proteins was set to 1 %. For protein quantification all identified razor and unique peptides were considered. The match between runs and second peptides functions were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Truffle, Food profiling, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Truffle species

### Affiliations
Universiy Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf

### Submitter
Dennis Krösser

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
Universiy Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics


