### Accession
PXD036674

### Title
MYC multimers shield stalled replication forks from RNA polymerase

### Description
Oncoproteins of the MYC family drive the development of numerous human tumors. In unperturbed cells, MYC proteins bind to virtually all active promoters and control transcription by RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII). MYC proteins can also coordinate transcription with DNA replication and promote the repair of transcription-associated DNA damage, but how they exert these mechanistically diverse functions is unknown. Here we show that MYC dissociates from many of its binding sites in active promoters and forms multimeric, often sphere-like structures in response to perturbation of transcription elongation, mRNA splicing or inhibition of the proteasome. Multimerization is accompanied by a global change in the MYC interactome towards proteins involved in transcription termination and RNA processing. MYC multimers accumulate on chromatin immediately adjacent to stalled replication forks and surround FANCD2, ATR and BRCA1 proteins, which are located at stalled forks. MYC multimerization is triggered in a HUWE1- and ubiquitylation-dependent manner. At active promoters, MYC multimers block antisense transcription and stabilize FANCD2 association with chromatin. This limits DNA double-strand break formation during S phase, suggesting that multimerization of MYC enables tumor cells to proliferate under stressful conditions.

### Sample Protocol
APEX2-MYC quantitative mass spectrometry: U2OS expressing an APEX2-MYC fusion protein were incubated with medium containing 1mM Biotin-Phenol (Iris Biotech) for 2 h at 37°C. H2O2 was added to a final concentration of 1mM and incubated for 2 min. Biotinylation was stopped by washing three times with quenching solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM L-sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox in PBS) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide and three more times in PBS. Cells were collected by centrifugation and lysed in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na-Deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich). NaCl was added to a final concentration of 1M and cells lysed for 10 min rotating at 4°C. Lysates were sonicated using a Branson Sonifier in a 10 sec: 45 sec off cycle with 3 cycles and 20% duty output and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. RIPA devoid of NaCl was used to dilute samples to a final concentration of 200mM NaCl. Biotinylated peptides were enriched using Pierce High Capacity NeutrAvidin Agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s recommendation. Samples were washed once with RIPA devoid of SDS, three times in PBS containing 2M Urea (pH 8) and one more time in RIPA. Sample processing procedure for APEX2 TMT mass spectrometry was adapted from Cho et al. All following steps were performed at room temperature, unless specified otherwise. Proteins were digested on-bead for 1 h in 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM dithiothreitol and 0.4 µg of MS-approved trypsin (Serva) per sample. Supernatants were collected, and beads were washed twice with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). Wash supernatants were collected and combined with respective peptide supernatants. Cysteines were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide. Samples were digested overnight with an additional 0.5 µg of trypsin. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 1%, and precipitates were removed by centrifugation after a 30 min incubation at 4°C. Supernatants were desalted using reversed-phase C18 StageTips and eluted in 50% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. Eluates were vacuum-centrifuged until completely dry and reconstituted in 25 µl of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 30% ACN. Samples were barcoded with 0.1 µg of acetonitrile-dissolved TMTPro labels (Thermo Scientific) for 1 h and quenched 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. An equal aliquot (5% vol) of each sample was mixed and the ratio check was performed. Samples were vacuum-centrifuged until completely dry and stored at -80°C. After the ratio check, samples were reconstituted in 1% trifluoroacetic acid and masses adjusted treatment-wise. Samples were mixed together and desalted using reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Samples were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC, Thermo Scientific). They were loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column (55 cm length, 75 mm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9-mm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a gradient from 2.4 to 36% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,650, resolution: 60,000, target value: 3 × 106, maximum injection time: 40 ms) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (normalized collision energy: 33%, resolution: 15,000, target value: 1 × 105, maximum injection time: 40 ms, isolation window: 0.8 m/z). Precursor ions with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states of +1 or higher than +6, were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 s. TurboTMT scan feature (TMTPro reagent) was implemented. SILAC-based ubiquitin remnant profiling: U2OS double SILAC-labeled cells (light and heavy) were left untreated or treated with PlaB (2 hrs, 1 µM), CBL0137 (2 hrs, 5 µM) or HU (4 hrs, 5 mM). Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). Modified peptide enrichment was done using di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology, 5562). Peptides were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For analysis of quantitative mass spectrometry, raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a reference proteome database containing human protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (version 2021_03) using Andromeda search engine.  For APEX2-MYC, TMT label correction factors were imported into MaxQuant according to manufacturer’s specifications. TMTPro labels were imported into MaxQuant by appending the modifications.xml file. TMTPro reporters were searched at the MS2 reporter ion level with a mass tolerance 0.003 Da and with PIF ≥ 0.75. Spectra were searched with a strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) were searched as variable modifications. Maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 6. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Statistical analysis and MS data visualization were performed using the R software environment (version 1.3.1093). Potential contaminants, reverse hits, hits only identified by site and hits with no unique peptides were excluded from the analysis. Corrected reporter intensities were normalized treatment-wise with the quantile normalization approach, using the Limma package. Additionally, to account for different MYC expression levels upon MG-132 treatment and allow better assessment of differential binding, intensities were normalized per TMT channel by dividing them with the MYC intensity from the respective channel. P-values and false discovery rates were calculated using a moderated t-test (Limma package). GO-term analysis was done using the gprofiler2 package for peptides increasing proximity to MYC significantly (FDR<0.05) upon MG-132 treatment.  For SILAC DiGly experiments spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to three miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation), and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Di-glycine lysine-modified peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of 6 are reported and used for the analyses. Peptide MS/MS spectra visualiziation was performed using MaxQuant Visualization tool based on the best identified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dsbs, Rnapii, Replication fork, Fancd2, Brca1, Antisense transcription, Myc, Multimerization, Huwe1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


