### Accession
PXD003212

### Title
The Trichomonas PACK proteome -  The Cytoskeleton of Parabasalian Parasites Comprises Proteins that Share Properties Common to Intermediate Filament Proteins

### Description
Certain protist lineages bear cytoskeletal structures that are germane to them and define their individual group. Trichomonadida are excavate parasites united by a unique cytoskeletal framework, which includes tubulin-based structures such as the pelta and axostyle, but also other filaments such as the striated costa whose protein composition remains unknown. We determined the proteome of the detergent-resistant cytoskeleton of Tetratrichomonas gallinarum. 203 proteins with homology to Trichomonas vaginalis were identified, which contain significantly more long coiled-coil regions than control protein sets. Five candidates were shown to associate with previously described cytoskeletal structures including the costa and the expression of a single T. vaginalis protein in T. gallinarum induced the formation of accumulated, striated filaments. Our data suggests that filament-forming proteins of protists other than actin and tubulin share common structural properties with metazoan intermediate filament proteins, while not being homologous. These filament-forming proteins might have evolved many times independently in eukaryotes, or simultaneously in a common ancestor but with different evolutionary trajectories downstream in different phyla. The broad variety of filament-forming proteins uncovered, and with no homologs outside of the Trichomonadida, once more highlights the diverse nature of eukaryotic proteins with the ability to form unique cytoskeletal filaments.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoskeletal fractions of T. gallinarum were separated in a polyacrylamide gel (~ 4 mm running distance). Protein containing bands from the silver stained gel were cut out, destained, reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) overnight at 37°C. After that, resulting peptides were extracted from the gel and subjected to liquid chromatography in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from mass spectrometric data was carried out using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded in the Proteome Discoverer environment (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) with standard parameters for spectrum selection. Searches were carried out in a T. gallinarum specific database containing 37,740 ORFs (obtained from the transcriptome analysis) with tryptic cleavage specificity allowing a maximum of one missed cleavage site. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to 0.4 Da and carbamidomethyl at cysteine as static modification. For peptide evaluation, the percolator node was used with standard parameters (strict target false discovery rate 1%, validation based on q-value). Only peptides passing the “high confidence” filter (1% false discovery rate) were used for protein assembly and only proteins reported with a minimum of two peptides were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Certain protist lineages bear cytoskeletal structures that are germane to them and define their individual group. Trichomonadida are excavate parasites united by a unique cytoskeletal framework, which includes tubulin-based structures such as the pelta and axostyle, but also other filaments such as the striated costa whose protein composition remains unknown. We determined the proteome of the detergent-resistant cytoskeleton of Tetratrichomonas gallinarum. 203 proteins with homology to Trichomonas&#xa0;vaginalis were identified, which contain significantly more long coiled-coil regions than control protein sets. Five candidates were shown to associate with previously described cytoskeletal structures including the costa and the expression of a single T.&#xa0;vaginalis protein in T.&#xa0;gallinarum induced the formation of accumulated, striated filaments. Our data suggests that filament-forming proteins of protists other than actin and tubulin share common structural properties with metazoan intermediate filament proteins, while not being homologous. These filament-forming proteins might have evolved many times independently in eukaryotes, or simultaneously in a common ancestor but with different evolutionary trajectories downstream in different phyla. The broad variety of filament-forming proteins uncovered, and with no homologs outside of the Trichomonadida, once more highlights the diverse nature of eukaryotic proteins with the ability to form unique cytoskeletal filaments.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cytoskeleton, Evolution, Tetratrichomonas gallinarum

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Heinrich Heine Universität  Universitätsstr. 1 40225 Düsseldorf
Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Heinrich Heine Universität  Universitätsstr. 1 40225 Düsseldorf


