### Accession
PXD016418

### Title
Identification of Eimeria sporozoite antigens of common immunogenicity

### Description
Whole sporozoite proteins of Eimeria acervulina were prepared and analyzed by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) followed by Western blotting using immune sera specific to E. tenella, E. acervulina, or E. necatrix.

### Sample Protocol
The purified sporozoites of the E. acervulina were mixed with lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% [w/v] CHAPS, 1% [w/v] DTT, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail [v/v] and 2% [v/v] immobilized pH gradient buffer) and sonicated in ice bath (200 W, work time 6s, intervaltime15 s, 60 cycle). Soluble proteins were obtained after centrifugation for 2 min (15,000 rpm) at 4°C. The supernatants were treated with a 2D clean-up kit and protein concentrations were quantified using PlusOne ™ 2-D Quant Kit (Amersham Pharmacia) . MTD data_processing_protocol Protein spots detected by the Western blotting were removed from the matching SDS-PAGE and treated with trypsin digestion and desalination. MS analysis of protein spots was performed by the Experimental Center of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). MS and MS/MS data for protein ID were obtained by using a MALDI-TOF-TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) data were obtained from MALDI-TOF-TOF, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein spots detected by the Western blotting were removed from the matching SDS-PAGE and treated with trypsin digestion and desalination. MS analysis of protein spots was performed by the Experimental Center of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). MS and MS/MS data for protein ID were obtained by using a MALDI-TOF-TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) data were obtained from MALDI-TOF-TOF, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eimeria, Common immunoreactive antigens, Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Sporozoite

### Affiliations
Jiangxi Agricultural University
Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory for Animal Health, College of Animal Science and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University

### Submitter
LIHENG LIU

### Lab Head
Dr Li-Heng Liu
Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory for Animal Health, College of Animal Science and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University


