### Accession
PXD022754

### Title
CKS1-dependent proteostatic regulation has dual roles in combating acute myeloid leukemia whilst protecting normal hematopoiesis

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hematological disorder comprised of a hierarchy of quiescent leukemic stem cells and fast proliferating blasts with limited self-renewal ability. Significant plasticity in the AML epigenome and metabolome results in a high rate of drug resistance and relapse, with extremely low 2-year survival rates in the poorest cytogenetic risk patients. The current backbone of clinical induction chemotherapy reduces total disease burden, but does not deplete leukemic stem cells which reconstitute the disease in vivo, and also suffers from severe toxicity of healthy hematopoietic cells. Whilst much work has been done to identify epigenetic vulnerabilities in AML, little is known about protein dynamics, and here we explored the therapeutic inhibition of highly specific CKS1-dependent protein degradation. We report a dual role for CKS1-depdent protein degradation in specifically targeting AML, whilst protecting normal hematopoietic cells from chemotherapeutic toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 AML cell lines and UCB CD34+ cells were cultured as per culture and drug treatment above. Cells were recovered for 24 hours in their respective media followed by sub-lethal AML doses of CKS1i (1uM) for 12 hours. All cells were retrieved from wells, washed three times in ice-cold PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen as dry pellets. Cell pellets were lysed in 100 µL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES, pH: 8.0), lysates were further homogenized by sonication (30 cycles of 30 s on 30 s off; Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus) and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Protein amount was quantified using BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, 100 and 20 μg of protein for THP-1 and CD34+ samples, respectively, were diluted in urea buffer to a final volume of 300 μL and subjected to cysteine alkylation using sequential incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) and 16.6 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 1 h and 30 min, respectively, at 25 °C with agitation. Trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin; Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230) were equilibrated with 3 washes with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), the urea concentration in the protein suspensions was reduced to 2 M by the addition of 900 μL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 μL of equilibrated trypsin beads were added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2000 xg at 5°C for 5 min) and the resulting peptide solutions were desalted using carbon C18 spin tips (Glygen; Cat. # TT2MC18). Briefly, spin tips were activated twice with 200 uL of Elution Solution (70% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and equilibrated twice with 200 uL of Wash Solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Samples were loaded and spin tips were washed twice with 200 uL of Wash Solution. Peptides were eluted into fresh tubes from the Column spin 4 times with 50 ul of Elution Solution. In each of the desalting steps, spin tips were centrifuged at 1,500xg at 5C for 3 min. Finally, samples were dried in a SpeedVac and peptide pellets were stored at −80°C. For mass spectrometry identification and quantification of proteins, samples were run twice in a LC-MS/MS platform. Briefly, peptide pellets were resuspended in 100 µL and 20 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) for THP-1 and CD34+ samples, respectively. Then, 2 µL were loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled to a Q Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray source (Cat. # ES081, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phases for the chromatographic separation of the peptides consisted in Solvent A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and Solvent B (99.9% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded in a μ-pre-column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC; Cat. # 160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated in an analytical column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC; Cat. # 164569, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient running from 3% to 23% B over 120 min. The UPLC system delivered a flow of 2 µL/min (loading) and 300 nL/min (gradient elution). The Q-Exactive Plus operated a duty cycle of 2.1s. Thus, it acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200–2000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A dynamic exclusion period of 30s was enabled with a m/z window of ±10 ppms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from MS data was automated using a Mascot Daemon 2.5.0 workflow in which Mascot Distiller v2.5.1.0 generated peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data and the Mascot search engine (v2.5) matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database (SwissProt_2012Oct.fasta for proteomics or uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta for phosphoproteomics). Searches had a FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. Identified peptides were quantified using Pescal software in a label free procedure based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Thus, the software constructed XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples with mass and retention time windows of ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively and calculated the area under the peak. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Data points not quantified were given a peptide intensity value equal to the minimum intensity value quantified in the sample divided by 10. Protein intensity values were calculated by adding the individual normalized intensities of all the peptides comprised in a protein and values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hematological disorder comprising a hierarchy of quiescent leukemic stem cells (LSCs) and proliferating blasts with limited self-renewal ability. AML has a dismal prognosis, with extremely low 2-year survival rates in the poorest cytogenetic risk patients, primarily due to the failure of intensive chemotherapy protocols to deplete LSCs and toxicity of therapy toward healthy hematopoietic cells. We studied the role of cyclin-dependent kinase regulatory subunit 1 (CKS1)-dependent protein degradation in primary human AML and healthy hematopoiesis xenograft models in vivo. Using a small-molecule inhibitor (CKS1i), we demonstrate a dual role for CKS1-dependent protein degradation in reducing patient-derived AML blasts in vivo and, importantly, depleting LSCs, whereas inhibition of CKS1 has the opposite effect on normal hematopoiesis, protecting normal hematopoietic stem cells from chemotherapeutic toxicity. Proteomic analysis of responses to CKS1i in our patient-derived xenograft mouse model demonstrate that inhibition of CKS1 in AML leads to hyperactivation of RAC1 and accumulation of lethal reactive oxygen species, whereas healthy hematopoietic cells enter quiescence in response to CKS1i, protecting hematopoietic stem cells. Together, these findings demonstrate that CKS1-dependent proteostasis is a key vulnerability in malignant stem cell biology.

### Keywords
Aml, Chemotherapy, Protein degradation, Proteostasis, Hematopoiesis, Cks1

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London


