### Accession
PXD000646

### Title
Wheat leaf phosphoproteome under drought stress

### Description
Waxy starch has an important influence on the qualities of breads. Generally, grain weight and yield in waxy wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) are significantly lower than in bread wheat. In this study, we performed the first proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of starch granule-binding proteins by comparing the waxy wheat cultivar Shannong 119 and the bread wheat cultivar Nongda 5181. These results indicate that reduced amylose content does not affect amylopectin synthesis, but it causes significant reduction of total starch biosynthesis, grain size, weight and grain yield. Two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis identified 40 differentially expressed protein (DEP) spots in waxy and non-waxy wheats, which belonged mainly to starch synthase (SS) I, SS IIa and granule-bound SS I. Most DEPs involved in amylopectin synthesis showed a similar expression pattern during grain development, suggesting relatively independent amylose and amylopectin synthesis pathways. Phosphoproteome analysis of starch granule-binding proteins, using TiO2 microcolumns and LC-MS/MS, showed that the total number of phosphoproteins and their phosphorylation levels in ND5181 were significantly higher than in SN119, but proteins controlling amylopectin synthesis had similar phosphorylation levels. Our results revealed the lack of amylose did not affect the expression and phosphorylation of the starch granule-binding proteins involved in amylopectin biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Under drought stress induced by 20% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 6000, with three biological replicate for the control condition and drought treatment condition, Chinese bread wheat cultivar Hanxuna10 (HX10) (Triticum aestivum L. AABBDD, 2n=6x=42) is highly drought tolerant. The seedling leaves of from the third-leaf stage were as experimental materials, and proteins were extracted and catalyzed by trypsin. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 beads and identified by liquid chromatograph–mass spectra / mass spectra (LC-MS/MS) analysis with LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer,

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (version 1.2.2.25) was used to calculate PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Finally, 2801 phosphorylated sites were detected from 1530 phosphoproteins in HX10. According to the phosphorylation residues probability, of a total of 2801 phosphorylation residues, 79.0% belongs to the class I (P ≥ 0.75), 10.1% belongs to the class II (0.75 > P ≥ 0.5), and 10.9% to the class III (P < 0.5) in HX10.To improve the reliability, the phosphoproteins of containing three replicate data at every sample were screened out. 1,272 phosphopeptides containing 1,426 phosphorylated sites were identified from 962 phosphoproteins in HX10.

### Publication Abstract
Waxy starch has an important influence on the qualities of breads. Generally, grain weight and yield in waxy wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) are significantly lower than in bread wheat. In this study, we performed the first proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of starch granule-binding proteins by comparing the waxy wheat cultivar Shannong 119 and the bread wheat cultivar Nongda 5181. These results indicate that reduced amylose content does not affect amylopectin synthesis, but it causes significant reduction of total starch biosynthesis, grain size, weight and grain yield. Two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis identified 40 differentially expressed protein (DEP) spots in waxy and non-waxy wheats, which belonged mainly to starch synthase (SS) I, SS IIa and granule-bound SS I. Most DEPs involved in amylopectin synthesis showed a similar expression pattern during grain development, suggesting relatively independent amylose and amylopectin synthesis pathways. Phosphoproteome analysis of starch granule-binding proteins, using TiO2 microcolumns and LC-MS/MS, showed that the total number of phosphoproteins and their phosphorylation levels in ND5181 were significantly higher than in SN119, but proteins controlling amylopectin synthesis had similar phosphorylation levels. Our results revealed the lack of amylose did not affect the expression and phosphorylation of the starch granule-binding proteins involved in amylopectin biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Bread wheat; drought stress; phosphoproteome; phosphorylation status

### Affiliations
school of life sciences

### Submitter
ming zhang

### Lab Head
Dr ming zhang
school of life sciences


