### Accession
PXD006624

### Title
Allergenomic discovery pipeline for allergenic proteins complemented by large-scale genomic and proteomic resources

### Description
Despite recent technological advances, novel allergen discovery is limited by the low abundance of particular allergenic proteins, the large diversity of allergen sources, and the high variability in patient IgE antibody reactivity due to study specific populations. Here we describe a comprehensive discovery pipeline for allergenic proteins that accounts for biological and molecular variability using allergenomics, high-throughput screening of genomic databases and high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from raw and heated Pacific Oyster were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis, and either stained using Coomassie Blue or transferred to PVDF membranes for IgE antibody recognition by immunoblotting (Fig. 1B). Twenty-two IgE-reactive spots were excised from the resolved raw oyster extract and five spots from the heated extract, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion and analyzed using mass spectrometry.  For identification of total proteins in the raw and heated extract, the extracts were separated in SDS-PAGE. The gels were cut into pieces and each piece was tryptic digested and analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS files were analysed using Mascot v2.4 against the in-house database of the oyster proteome downloaded from the UniProt, supplemented with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins sequences. Search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance of 200 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da (CID). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and deamidated (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was used as the cleavage enzyme. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm(14) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm(15). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pacific oyster, Allergens, Allergy, Transcriptomics, Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics, Allergenomic

### Affiliations
College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Science James Cook University
Molecular Allergy Research Lab, James Cook University

### Submitter
Roni Nugraha

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Lopata
College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Science James Cook University


