### Accession
PXD014017

### Title
Immunopeptidomics of colorectal cancer organoids

### Description
Background: Patient derived organoids (PDOs) can be established from colorectal cancers as in vitro models to interrogate cancer biology and its clinical relevance. We applied mass spectrometry (MS) immunopeptidomics to investigate neoantigen presentation and whether this can be augmented through interferon gamma (IFN) or MEK-inhibitors. Methods: Four PDOs from chemotherapy refractory and one from a treatment naïve CRC were expanded to replicates with 100 million cells each, and HLA class I and class II peptide ligands were analysed by MS. Results: We identified an average of 9,936 unique peptides per PDO which compares favourably against published immunopeptidomics studies, suggesting high sensitivity. Loss of heterozygosity of the HLA locus was associated with low peptide diversity in one PDO. Peptides from genes without detectable expression by RNA-sequencing were rarely identified by MS. Only 3 out of 612 non-silent mutations encoded for neoantigens that were detected by MS. Treatment of four PDOs with IFN upregulated HLA class I expression and qualitatively changed the immunopeptidome, with increased presentation of IFN-inducible genes. HLA class II presented peptides increased on average 16-fold with IFN treatment. MEK-inhibitor treatment showed no consistent effect on class I or II HLA expression or the peptidome. Importantly, no additional HLA class I or II presented neoantigens became detectable with any treatment.  Conclusions: Only 3 out of 612 non-synonymous mutations encoded for neoantigens that were detectable by MS. Although MS has sensitivity limits and biases, and likely underestimated the true neoantigen burden, this established a lower bound of the percentage of non-silent mutations that encode for presented neoantigens, which may be as low as 0.5%. This could be a reason for the poor responses of non-hypermutated CRCs to immune checkpoint inhibitors. MEK-inhibitors recently failed to improve checkpoint-inhibitor efficacy in CRC and the observed lack of HLA upregulation or improved peptide presentation may explain this.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HLA-I and HLA-II peptides Anti-pan-HLA-I and anti-HLA-II monoclonal antibodies were purified from the supernatant of HB95 (ATCC® HB-95™) and HB145 cells (ATCC® HB-145™), respectively, grown in CELLLine CL-1000 flasks (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) using Protein A-Sepharose 4B beads (Pro-A beads; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California). Antibodies were cross-linked to Pro-A beads at a concentration of 5 mg of antibodies per 1 mL volume of beads with Dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.2 M Sodium Borate buffer pH 9 (Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 20 mM for 30 minutes. The reaction was quenched by incubation with 0.2 M ethanolamine pH 8 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours. Cross-linked antibodies were kept at 4°C until use.  PDO cells were lysed in biological replicates of 100 million cells at 4°C for 1 hour in PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf Centrifuge, Hamburg, Germany) at 4°C at 14,200 rpm for 50 min. For the sequential purification of HLA-I and HLA-II, two stacked 96-well single-use micro-plates (3µm glass fiber, 10µm polypropylene membranes; ref number 360063, Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, Massachusetts) were used. The first contained cross-linked beads with anti HLA-I antibodies and the second contained the anti HLA-II corss-linked beads. The lysates were loaded on plates by gravity. Then the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts) was employed and the plates were washed separately with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) (Carlo-Erba, Val de Reuil, France) in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 4 times 2 mL of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and again with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, the plates were washed twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Each plate was stacked on top of a Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plate (ref number: 186002321, Waters) equilibrated with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1 % TFA and with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The HLA and peptides were eluted with 500 µL 1% TFA into the Sep-Pak plate and then the Sep-Pak plates were washed with 2 mL of 0.1 % TFA. HLA-I and HLA-II peptides were eluted with 500 µL of 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA into a collection plate. Recovered peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C. LC-MS/MS analyses Prior to MS analysis, HLA-I and HLA-II peptide samples were re-suspended in 9 µL of 0.1 % FA  and 2/3 of the sample volume were placed in the Ultra HPLC autosampler. Each sample was measured in technical duplicates. HLA peptides were separated by a nanoflow HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense) coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Self-packed 50 cm long (75 μm inner diameter) column with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). HLA-I and HLA-II peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2–30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 125 min  and 90 min, respectively. MS spectra were acquired from m/z = 300-1650 in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60’000 (m/z = 200) and ion accumulation time of 80 ms. The auto gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired on 10 most abundant precursor ions (if present) with a resolution of 15,000 (m/z = 200), ion accumulation time of 120 ms and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The AGC was set to 2e5 ions, dynamic exclusion to 20 s and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 was used for fragmentation. The peptide match option was disabled. No fragmentation was performed for HLA-I peptides in case of assigned precursor ion charge states of four and above, and for HLA-II peptides, in case of assigned precursor ion charge states of one, and also from six and above.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and Statistical analysis We searched the immunopeptidomics peak lists data with a PSM false discovery date of 1% with the MaxQuant platform (PMID 19029910) version 1.5.5.1 against a fasta file containing the human proteome (Homo_sapiens_UP000005640_9606, the reviewed part of UniProt, with no isoforms, including 21,026 entries downloaded in March 2017) and a  list of 247 frequently observed contaminants. In addition, MaxQuant version 1.5.9.4 was used for a search against a customized reference database were somatic mutations were included, with a PSM false discovery rate of 5%. Peptides with a length between 8 and 25 AA were allowed. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific and no protein FDR was set. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ analysis was set separately for all replicates per PDO, and separately for HLA class I and HLA class II samples. For analysis of unique identified peptide sequences, we utilized a simple binary criterion of present or absent. A peptide was only defined as present if it was detected in both technical replicates. A peptide was then defined as present if it was detected in any of the biological replicates, to give the highest sensitivity of detection. Venn diagrams were generated by Venny 2.1.0. The raw MS intensity values were Log2 transformed. For differential expression analyses the Perseus computational platform (PMID 27348712) was used for ‘width normalization’, and missing values were imputed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Organoids, Colorectal cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne


