### Accession
PXD034887

### Title
Resistance to ATR Inhibitors Mediated by Loss of the Nonsense-Mediated Decay Factor UPF2

### Description
Over one million cases of gastric cancer are diagnosed each year and metastatic disease continues to have a poor prognosis. A significant proportion of gastric tumors have defects in the DNA damage response pathway creating therapeutic opportunities through synthetic lethal approaches. In particular, several small molecule inhibitors of Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated and Rad3-related protein kinase (ATR), a key regulator of the DNA Damage response, are now in clinical development as targeted agents for gastric cancer. Here, we sought to discover genetic determinants of response and resistance to ATRi in gastric cancer cells. We performed a large-scale CRISPR interference screen to discover determinants of resistance to ATRi in gastric cancer. Top hits were validated and further evaluated to define mechanisms of resistance. We identified components of the nonsense-mediated decay pathway and the UPF2 gene, in particular, as mediators of sensitivity to ATRi. We show loss of UPF2 causes resistance to ATRi through the abrogation of ATRi mediated cell cycle arrest and find evidence that UPF2 regulates R-loops. Our results uncover a novel role for NMD factors in R-loop formation and resistance to ATRi in gastric cancer cells, potentially through R-loop formation.

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis, protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. IAA was added to each sample to a final concentration of 10 mM, and samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Excess IAA was quenched by the addition of dithiothreitol to 10 mM, followed by incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were then diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and digested overnight at 37°C with rotation. Following digestion, 10% TFA was added to each sample to final 0.5% (pH<2). Samples were desalted under vacuum using Sep Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was activated with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated three times with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Following sample loading, cartridges were washed four times with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, and samples were eluted four times with 0.5 mL of 50% ACN/0.25% FA. 20 μg of each sample was saved for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for phosphopeptides enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. For immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)-based phosphopeptide enrichment, 1 mg digested peptides were used. To prepare Fe-NTA beads, for each sample, 400 µL of 50% Ni-NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads (Qiagen) were transferred into Micro Bio-Spin chromatography Columns (Bio-Rad) and washed three times with 100 mM EDTA to strip nickel away and once with HPLC-grade water. To incorporate Fe, beads were resuspended in 100 mM FeCl3, pipetted to mix, and incubated for 1 minute. Excess of Fe was removed by three washes with HPLC-grade water and once with 0.5% FA. Digested peptides were resuspended in 75% ACN/0.15 % TFA and incubated with the beads. Following incubation, non-enriched peptides were washed out with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. To elute phosphopeptides from beads onto Nest Tips C18 column, beads were washed twice with 500 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0 while pipetting to mix eight times during 2 minutes incubation. Potassium phosphate was removed from the Nest Tips C18 column by washing twice with 0.5% FA. In the final step, phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 tips with 50% ACN/0.25% FA by spinning at 3,000 rpm for 1 min and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Prior to MS analysis, samples were resuspended in 3% ACN/4% FA.  Peptides (2uL) was analyzed in on a Bruke timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system equipped with a Bruker nanoElute high-pressure liquid chromatography system interfaced via a captiveSpray source. Samples were directly injected on a C18 reverse phase column (25 cm x 75 μm packed with ReprosilPur C18 AQ 1.9 um particles). Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 2 to 28% ACN at 400nl/min over the course of a 120 minacquisition.

### Data Protocol
All data-dependent PASEF files were search against the human proteome database (Downloaded March 21, 2018). Peptide and protein identification searches were performed with the Spectronaut Pulsar software (www.spectronaut.org) with a 1% false-discovery rate at the peptide and protein level. Label-free quantification and statistical testing of phosphorylation sites was performed using the artMS R-package (version 1.3.7) (https://github.com/biodavidjm/artMS), and the MSstats statistical R-package (version 3.16.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ab, Nmd, Ph, Gastric cancer, Upf2

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, QUantitative Bioscience Institute, University of California, San Francisco
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Minkyu Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, QUantitative Bioscience Institute, University of California, San Francisco


