### Accession
PXD021983

### Title
Tension mediated mechanical activation and pocket delipidation lead to an analogous MscL channel state

### Description
We present HDX-MS data of WT and L89W TbMscL to interrogate the mechanism of molecular activation in this mechanosensitive channel.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were diluted to 16 µM in equilibration buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, pH 7.4, 0.05% DDM) prior to analysis. 5 µL sample was added to 95 µl deuterated buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, 300 mM NaCl pD 7.4, 0.05% DDM) and incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 1, 2, 10 or 60 min. Following the labelling reaction, samples were quenched by adding 50 µl of the labelled solution to 100 µl quench buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, 0.1% DDM pH 2.2) giving a final quench pH ~2.5. 50 µl of quenched sample was injected on to the HDX Manger and passed through immobilized pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns connected in series (AffiPro, Czech Republic) at 115 µl min-1 (20 °C) and loaded on to a VanGuard Pre-column Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 µm, 2.1 mm X 5 mm, Waters Ltd., Wilmslow, Manchester, UK) for 3 mins in 0.3% formic acid in water. The resulting peptides were transferred to a C18 column (75 µm X 150 mm, Waters Ltd., Wilmslow, Manchester, UK) and separated by gradient elution of 0-40 % MeCN (0.1 % v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3 % v/v formic acid) over 7 mins at 40 µl min-1. Trapping and gradient elution of peptides was performed at 0 degrees to reduce back exchange. The HDX system was interfaced to a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters Ltd., Wilmslow, Manchester, UK). HDMSE and dynamic range extension modes (Data Independent Analysis (DIA) coupled with IMS separation) were used to separate peptides prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell.

### Data Protocol
HDX data were analyzed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) software supplied with the mass spectrometer. Restrictions for identified peptides in DynamX were as follows: minimum intensity: 1000, minimum products per MS/MS spectrum: 5, minimum products per amino acid: 0.3, maximum sequence length: 25, maximum ppm error: 5, file threshold: 3/3. Following manual curation of the data, PAVED and Deuteros were used to identify peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake (applying 99% or 95% confidence intervals) and to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanosensitive ion channel of large conductance MscL gates in response to membrane tension changes. Lipid removal from transmembrane pockets leads to a concerted structural and functional MscL response, but it remains unknown whether there is a correlation between the tension-mediated state and the state derived by pocket delipidation in the absence of tension. Here, we combined pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, coupled with molecular dynamics simulations under membrane tension, to investigate the structural changes associated with the distinctively derived states. Whether it is tension- or modification-mediated pocket delipidation, we find that MscL samples a similar expanded subconducting state. This is the final step of the delipidation pathway, but only an intermediate stop on the tension-mediated path, with additional tension triggering further channel opening. Our findings hint at synergistic modes of regulation by lipid molecules in membrane tension-activated mechanosensitive channels.

### Keywords
Mechanosensation, Hdx-ms, Tension, Mscl

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


