### Accession
PXD021003

### Title
Identification of human proteins interacting with locked G4 structures

### Description
G4 are noncanonical secondary structures consist in stacked tetrads of Hoogsteen hydrogen-bonded guanines bases. An essential feature of G-quadruplexes is their intrinsic polymorphic nature. Indeed, depending on the length and the composition of the sequence, as well as the environmental conditions (including the nature and concentration of metal cations, and local molecular crowding), a G-quadruplex-forming sequence can adopt different topologies in which the strands are in parallel or antiparallel conformations, with the co-existence of different types of loops (lateral, diagonal or propeller) with variable lengths. The impact of G4 on cellular metabolism is associated with protein or enzymatic factors that promote, inhibits or resolve these structures. Thus, the major impact of G4 on the human cell metabolism is associated with genetic defects affecting proteins that counteract their formation. Although a large number of proteins able to bind and/or "to resolve" G-quadruplex structures have been identified in vitro, less is known about their mode of interaction with G-quadruplex, their specificity versus the topology and finally their specificity for G4 structures relatively to G-rich single-stranded sequences. In this study we aimed to identify and characterize human proteins interacting with locked G4 structures.

### Sample Protocol
One mg of NHEJ protein extract from HeLa cells was incubated with 10µM of each constrained G4s in 100µL of binding buffer (20mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 50mM KCl, 0.01% NP40 and 0.5mM EDTA) for 1.5 hour at 4°C under cyclic shakes (10sec at 1400rpm, 2min at 0rpm). During protein-G4 binding step, 1mL of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Promega, Z5481) per condition were washed three times during 10min at 4°C (under cyclic shakes) with binding buffer. Then, 100µL of protein-G4 binding solution was put onto washed streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads for 30min at 4°C under cyclic shakes. After this step, supernatant was stored at -80°C as “unbound fraction” and beads were washed during 10min three times at 4°C (under cyclic shakes) with 0.1% NP40, 150mM NaCl PBS. Finally, beads were incubated with 100µL of 0.01% bromophenol blue, 15% glycerol, 2% SDS, 60mM Tris (pH 8) for 10min at 95°C and supernatant were collected after centrifugation. Eluted proteins were stacked in a single band in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) using the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens reference proteome, October 22nd 2018 version) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides and razor + unique peptides were set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplexes (G4) are non-canonical secondary structures consisting in stacked tetrads of hydrogen-bonded guanines bases. An essential feature of G4 is their intrinsic polymorphic nature, which is characterized by the equilibrium between several conformations (also called topologies) and the presence of different types of loops with variable lengths. In cells, G4 functions rely on protein or enzymatic factors that recognize and promote or resolve these structures. In order to characterize new G4-dependent mechanisms, extensive researches aimed at identifying new G4 binding proteins. Using G-rich single-stranded oligonucleotides that adopt non-controlled G4 conformations, a large number of G4-binding proteins have been identified in vitro, but their specificity towards G4 topology remained unknown. Constrained G4 structures are biomolecular objects based on the use of a rigid cyclic peptide scaffold as a template for directing the intramolecular assembly of the anchored oligonucleotides into a single and stabilized G4 topology. Here, using various constrained RNA or DNA G4 as baits in human cell extracts, we establish the topology preference of several well-known G4-interacting factors. Moreover, we identify new G4-interacting proteins such as the NELF complex involved in the RNA-Pol II pausing mechanism, and we show that it impacts the clastogenic effect of the G4-ligand pyridostatin.

### Keywords
Proteins, Nanolc-ms/ms, Constrained g4 structures, Rna pol ii pausing, G-quadruplex

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


