### Accession
PXD039567

### Title
Anti-Pol II pS5 co-immunoprecipitation in DIDO WT, KO and ΔSPOC HEK293T cells

### Description
The analysis of differential interactome of Pol II pS5 in DIDO WT, KO and ΔSPOC HEK293T cells using Pol II pS5 (3E8) antibody coupled to Protein G beads (no crosslinking).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 90 % confluency on 15cm cell culture dish and harvested. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 50mM Tris pH8, 150mM NaCal, 0.1% Triton, 1mM DTT, 50U/ml benzonase, EDTA-free proteinase inhibitors (Roche), 1mM PMSF, 2mM NaF, 2mM Na3VO4, 100mM ß-glycerophosphate, PhoStop phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). Dynabeads protein G were incubated with the pS5 antibody for 2 hours at RT in TBS under rotation. The beads were washed three times with TBS to remove excess antibody. Protein lysate was incubated for 2 hours with the Dynabeads coupled to the antibody at 4°C under rotation. After immunoprecipitation, beads proteins were washed 6 times in TBS (with EDTA-free proteinase inhibitors (Roche), 1mM PMSF, PhosStop tablet). Beads were three times eluted with 20 µL 100 mM glycine and the combined eluates adjusted to pH 8 using 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature before adding 25 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for another 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at 37°C overnight. The digest was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data split for each CV using FreeStyle 1.7 (Thermo Fisher), were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 2.1.0.0) with the Uniprot human reference proteome (version 2022.01, www.uniprot.org), as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” only within the sample batch and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default.  MaxQuant output tables were further processed in R 4.2.0 (https://www.R-project.org) using Cassiopeia_LFQ (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ). Reverse database identifications, contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by a modified peptide, protein groups with less than two quantitative values in one experimental group, and protein groups with less than 2 razor peptides were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution model on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, a width of the distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA 3.52.1 with batch correction at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dido, Co-immunoprecipitation, Rna pol ii ps5

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Dea Slade
Medical University of Vienna, Austria


