### Accession
PXD002479

### Title
Overexpression of catalase delays age-related cardiac disease by preventing oxidative cysteine modifications

### Description
Reactive protein cysteine thiolates are instrumental in redox regulation. Aging associated to oxidative stress, can impair redox signaling by damaging essential cysteine thiolates. Our initial study found that cardiac-specific overexpression of catalase, can protect from oxidative stress and delay cardiac aging in mice. The Project aimed to investigate differential reversible cysteine thiol oxidation in cardiac proteome of wild type and Cat transgenic (Tg) mice, using “Tandem Mass Tag” (TMT) labeling strategy and mass spectrometry.  Our results show globally decreased cysteine thiol occupancy in cardiac proteins in Cat Tg mice.  The majority of proteins with differentially modified thiols may be involved in pathways of aging and cardiac disease including cellular stress response, proteostasis and apoptosis. Overexpressed catalase may modulate these protein cysteine thiol oxidations resulting in delayed cardiac aging and related pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Male and female FVB/N mice (n=5 per group) with cardiac-specific catalase overexpression and wild-type controls were used. Mice were euthanized at 10 months of age and hearts were perfused to remove blood proteins, excised, snap frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen or at -80°C. For mitochondrial function analysis, tissues were homogenized in 2 ml of HES buffer, and the heart mitochondria were isolated by centrifuging at 9000 x g for 15 mins at 4 oC, as described previously with minor modification. H2O2 producation, ATP production and the oxygen consumption rate were measured in isolated mitochondrial followed the procedures as described in the paper.  For immunoglotting for protein-GSH aduct, the whole heart were lysed in RIPA buffer, and the tissue lysates were separated on non-reducing SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene fluride membrane, and incubated overnight with the anti-GSH antibody. Immunostained membranes were incubated with IR dye-conjugated secondary antibodies. For proteomics mass spectrometry analysis, the left heart ventricle was divided into two pieces, homogenization and extraction of individual pieces were carried out in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTPA and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) supplemented with either 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) to block free thiols or 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP) to completely reduce all reducible thiols. 100 g protein lysate was used to label the reversibly oxidized thiols or total available thiols from either control or Cat Tg mice. The excess IAM from the blocked sample were removed using 7-kDa MWCO Zeba spin columns (Pierce).  Lysates from either blocking or reducing samples, were then reduced with TCEP for 45 mins at 37 oC, prior to labeling with isobaric iodoTMT ragent at 1 mM for 2 h at room temperature.  Samples were then combined, then precipitated with acetone containing 0.1 % acetic acid overnight at -20oC. Proteins pellets was washed with ice-cold acetone, and then resuspended in 1x Tris with 0.05% preoteaseMaX and 5% can for trypsin digest at 1:20 (enzyme-to-protein ratio) overnight at 37 oC. TMT-tagged peptides were enriched with immobilized anti-TMT resin and eluted with TMT-elution buffer (Thermo Scientific). Collected peptides were desalted with C18 spin columns (NestGroup) before LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC nano-capillary high perform LC system (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive hydrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a TrisVersa NanoMate ion source (Advion). Sample concentration and desalting were performed online using a nanoAcquity UPLC™ trapping column (180 μm x 20 mm, packed with 5 μm, 100 Å Symmetry C18 material, Waters Corp.) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min for 1 min. Separation was accomplished on a nanoAcquity UPLC™ capillary column (150 μm x 100 mm, packed with 1.7 μm, 130 Å BEH C18 material, Waters Corp.). A linear gradient of A and B buffers (buffer A: 1.5% ACN/ 0.1% FA; buffer B: 98.5% ACN/ 0.1% FA) from 3% to 55% buffer B over 120 min was used at a flow rate of 0.5 μl/min to elute peptides into the mass spectrometer. MS/MS spectra were acquired  on the top 10 most abundant ions with dynamic excusion,  at a resolution of 17,500 (fwhm at m/z 100), target AGC values of 1E6, and isolation window of 3.0 m/z, using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 30% MS/MS collision energies (NCE).

### Data Protocol
TMT-tagged protein/peptide identification and relative quantification were carried out using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB mouse database (20130107/83589 sequence entries) using  Sequest HT. The search was conducted with the following constraints: full tryptic peptides with maximum four missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and fragment ion mass error 0.02 Da. IodoTMT6plex-labeled (C), di- and tri-oxidized (C), carbamidomethyl (C), deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M) were specified as dynamic modifications. Peptides assigned with high confident as the false discovery rate (FDR) <1% were selected for further analysis. For relative quantification of TMT-labeled cysteines, reporter ions were specified with the integration tolerance of 20 ppm using most confident centroid method. Thermo lot-specific reporter ion correction factors were applied for “quan value” determination. Protein GO annotations and subcellular locations were derived from open source software STRAP (Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA) [17,18]. Peptide events without iodoTMT modification or without matched protein were excluded. Each MS/MS spectrum used for quantification, PD used the intensity of each reporter ion to calculate the following ratios between biological samples: 1) changes in total available cysteines and 2) changes in reversibly oxidized cysteine thiols. Only the median ratio was reported as the change for the assigned peptide. Occupancy of cysteine thiols by reversible oxidation was calculated as the ratio of reversibly oxidized cysteine thiol to the total available cysteine thiols for the same peptide. These values were then compared between mice. TMT-tagged peptides having less than 35% coefficients of variation (CVs) among measured replicate mice, both for their change in total available cysteine and reversibly oxidized cysteines, were selected for further analysis. Fold changes between samples were expressed as log2 value of the ratios for all quantifiable peptides. The proteins with cysteine oxidation changes were submitted for functional analysis through the use of Ingenuity™ Pathway Analysis (IPA) (IPA™, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity). Direct and indirect relationship data derived from all wild type and mutant cells and tissue from mouse, rat, and human were included. Endogenous chemicals were also included in the canonical pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive protein cysteine thiolates are instrumental in redox regulation. Oxidants, such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), react with thiolates to form oxidative post-translational modifications, enabling physiological redox signaling. Cardiac disease and aging are associated with oxidative stress which can impair redox signaling by altering essential cysteine thiolates. We previously found that cardiac-specific overexpression of catalase (Cat), an enzyme that detoxifies excess H2O2, protected from oxidative stress and delayed cardiac aging in mice. Using redox proteomics and systems biology, we sought to identify the cysteines that could play a key role in cardiac disease and aging. With a 'Tandem Mass Tag' (TMT) labeling strategy and mass spectrometry, we investigated differential reversible cysteine oxidation in the cardiac proteome of wild type and Cat transgenic (Tg) mice. Reversible cysteine oxidation was measured as thiol occupancy, the ratio of total available versus reversibly oxidized cysteine thiols. Catalase overexpression globally decreased thiol occupancy by &#x2265;1.3 fold in 82 proteins, including numerous mitochondrial and contractile proteins. Systems biology analysis assigned the majority of proteins with differentially modified thiols in Cat Tg mice to pathways of aging and cardiac disease, including cellular stress response, proteostasis, and apoptosis. In addition, Cat Tg mice exhibited diminished protein glutathione adducts and decreased H2O2 production from mitochondrial complex I and II, suggesting improved function of cardiac mitochondria. In conclusion, our data suggest that catalase may alleviate cardiac disease and aging by moderating global protein cysteine thiol oxidation.

### Keywords
Post-translational protein modifications, Cardiac aging and disease, Reversible cysteine thiol oxidation, Proteomics, Tmt, Metabolism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology Section, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
Quintara Biosciences

### Submitter
Markus Bachschmid

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Cohen
Vascular Biology Section, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA


