### Accession
PXD048886

### Title
Primarily Dissecting the Autonomous and Cooperative Functions of METTL3 and METTL14 in mRNA Modification and Tumor Progression

### Description
METTL3 and METTL14 are considered to faithfully form the m6A writing complex in a 1:1 ratio, regulating the fate of mRNA by adding m6A modifications. However, recent studies have shown inconsistent expression and prognostic value of METTL3 and METTL14 in some tumors, suggesting that they may not be faithful in tumors. Pan-cancer analysis based on TCGA data reveals significant differences in expression, function, tumor burden correlation, and immune correlation between METTL3 and METTL14, especially in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Knockdown of METTL3 significantly inhibits the cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo in ESCC EC109 cells, while the impact of METTL14 knockdown on proliferation is limited, and it cannot abolish the expression of METTL3 protein. mRNA-seq results indicate that METTL3 independently regulates the expression of 1615 genes, while only 776 genes are co-regulated by METTL3 and METTL14. Furthermore, through immunofluorescence co-localization, it is observed that METTL3 and METTL14 have certain inconsistencies in cellular localization. HPLC-MS results show that METTL3 independently binds to the Nop56p-associated pre-rRNA complex and mRNA splicing complex, separate from METTL14. Through bioinformatics and various omics studies, we have preliminarily discovered that METTL3 independently regulating tumor cell proliferation, and the participation in mRNA splicing may be a critical molecular mechanism. Our study provides an experimental basis and theoretical foundation for further understanding of the m6A writing complex and tumor therapy targeting METTL3.

### Sample Protocol
The phosphoproteomic study was conducted using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Easy nLC 1200 system, paired with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a custom-packed column with buffer A and eluted over a 110-minute period at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, utilizing a linear increase of buffer B covering 2-40%. Mass spectra were collected in a range from m/z 350 to m/z 1800, at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms per scan. The top 15 most intense precursor ions from the MS scan were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS with an isolation window of 1.6 Th, dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds, and a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
This project uses the mass spectrometry database search software MaxQuant 1.6.1.0; the following protein database is used: Sourced from UniProt, species: Homo sapiens (human), a total of 202,249 protein sequences.After the mass spectrometry data retrieval, the following filtering criteria were applied: PSM FDR ≤ 0.01, Site FDR ≤ 0.01, and Protein FDR ≤ 0.01 for peptide segments, modification sites, and protein identification, respectively. To ensure the quality of the identification of modified peptides, additional criteria were included after the mass spectrometry data retrieval, such as Modified peptide Score ≥ 40 and Unmodified peptides ≥ 20 for the selection of modified peptide segments. A Localization Probability of ≥ 0.75 for the modification site indicates reliable identification of the modification site.

### Publication Abstract
Renal clear cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the world's most common form of cancer. Up to a third will develop metastases; the 5-year survival rate of the patients was only 14%. Practical prognostic markers remain to be discovered. Kinesin-like protein (KIFC1), a critical factor in maintaining the stability of the microtubule system, has significant prognostic value in some tumors. We analyzed the prognostic value, associated signaling pathways, and regulatory mechanisms of KIFC1 in ccRCC through bioinformatics and proteomics. Concretely, both mRNA and protein expression levels of KIFC1 were dramatically upregulated. KIFC1 is an independent prognostic factor for ccRCC. The expression of KIFC1 showed a significant positive correlation (Spearman coefficient&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.7) with tumor proliferation-related pathways (tumor proliferation, G2/M checkpoint, and DNA replication) and tumor inflammation. Further, intratumoral immune cell analysis revealed that high expression of KIFC1 predicted more infiltration of CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T and CD4&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cells (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). However, there was a significant positive relationship between CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cells and numerous immune checkpoint genes. CD8&#x2009;+&#x2009;T cells in tumors from the KIFC1 high expression group were at the dysregulated state. High expression of KIFC1 may predict a poor immunotherapy outcome. By proteomics, we analyzed proteins interacting with KIFC1; spliceosome proteins had the most significant enrichment, indicating the new directions for KIFC1 investigation. In conclusion, our study identified KIFC1 as an independent prognostic factor in renal clear cell carcinoma, and the associated processes involved tumor proliferation and immune infiltration. KIFC1 had a close relationship with spliceosome proteins; it may be a new research direction.

### Keywords
Independent, Splicing, Mettl3, Mettl14, Proliferation

### Affiliations
changzhi medical college

### Submitter
pu wang

### Lab Head
Dr PU WANG
changzhi medical college


