### Accession
PXD031701

### Title
Proteomic analysis on different tissues of Pteria penguin

### Description
The winged pearl oyster, Pteria penguin, is a widely distributed and economically important bivalve with unique and primitive byssus. The byssogensis of this species is largely unknown. Here we report the  lable free quantification analysis on different tissues of P. penguin.Through the analysis, we found that the process of byssogenesis requires ATP to provide energy among the differential proteins; and seven (Tenascin-X, laminin, papilin, fibrillin-1, spondin, protease inhibitors and Mucins) of the 31 proteins identified in the byssus were derived from ECM. Functions of extracellular matrix proteins can be correlated with the formation and the nature of the byssus.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 1000 individuals (shell length 6-8cm) were transported to Haichang aquaculture farm in Wenchang, Hainan Province, China. Samples with byssus were collected and cut the byssus with a clean scissor. These 300 samples were acclimated in a cement pit (4 m×3m×1.3m, approximately 15t volume) filled with aerated filtered seawater and fed 50% Chaetoceros calcitrans and 50% Isochrysis galbana (concentration: 2.5-3.0 × 104 cells ml-1). Seawater was maintained at temperature of 26±1℃ and salinity 34±1. After a week, oysters cultured in different panel nets were divided into two groups, one group was individuals with new byssus. Another group was oysters without new byssus. Individuals from the two groups were randomly selected, and different types of tissues (foot with byssus, foot without byssus, byssus, pearl pocket) were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a protein database that was constructed from the whole genome of Pteria penguin. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Minimum peptide length set at 7 residues, maximum peptide modifications were set at 5. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for parent irons and fragment ions. Alkylated carbamidomethyl on cysteine was specified as fixed modification, and variable modifications were methionine oxidation, acetylation of N-terminal protein. The accuracy of false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % at the three levels of spectrum, peptide and protein. The identified proteins requires at least one unique peptide. After the results of MaxQuant search were changed by centralization, the relative quantitative value of the protein in different samples is obtained. Three statistical analysis methods - Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Relative Standard Deviation (RSD) were used to evaluate protein quantitative repeatability. According to the protein abundance level, the difference of more than 1.5-fold change (FC) and the statistical t-test of the p-value less than 0.05 were deemed to be differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins for GO and KEGG enrichment.A corrected P-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pteria penguin, Proteomic analysis, Byssogensis

### Affiliations
Hainan University
1. College of Marine Science, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China; 2. State Key Laboratory of Marine Resource Utilization in South China Sea, Haikou 570228, China)

### Submitter
Yi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Zhan
1. College of Marine Science, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China; 2. State Key Laboratory of Marine Resource Utilization in South China Sea, Haikou 570228, China)


