### Accession
PXD007629

### Title
Characterisation of the biflavonoid hinokiflavone as a pre-mRNA splicing modulator that inhibits SENP

### Description
We have identified the plant biflavonoid hinokiflavone as an inhibitor of splicing in vitro and modulator of alternative splicing in cells. Chemical synthesis confirms hinokiflavone is the active molecule. Hinokiflavone inhibits splicing in vitro by blocking spliceosome assembly, preventing formation of the B complex. Cells treated with hinokiflavone show altered subnuclear organization specifically of splicing factors required for A complex formation, which relocalize together with SUMO1 and SUMO2 into enlarged nuclear speckles containing polyadenylated RNA. Hinokiflavone increases protein SUMOylation levels, both in in vitro splicing reactions and in cells. Hinokiflavone also inhibited a purified, E. coli expressed SUMO protease, SENP1, in vitro, indicating the increase in SUMOylated proteins results primarily from inhibition of de-SUMOylation. Using a quantitative proteomics assay we identified many SUMO2 sites whose levels increased in cells following hinokiflavone treatment, with the major targets including 6 proteins that are components of the U2 snRNP and required for A complex formation.

### Sample Protocol
Culture conditions and protein extraction:  Five 175 square-cm dishes of either light- (K0;R0), or heavy-labelled (K8;R10) HEK293 6His-SUMO2-T90K N3S cells cultured in DMEM and supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS, 1 μg/ml puromycin, 100 U/ml Pen-Strep, 2 mM L-Glu, 0.8 mM L-Lys and 0.14 mM L-Arg were transferred into correspondingly-labelled SMEM with identical supplements. Approximately 1.0 L of suspension culture was utilised per experimental condition and heavy-labelled cells were treated with 20 μM hinokiflavone in DMSO for 8 h, whereas equivalent volume of DMSO was added to the light-labelled control culture. After harvesting, 0.9 g of each cell pellet was mixed and lysed in fresh cell lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM imidazole and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol.  Affinity chromatography and protein digestion: For the identification of SUMO2 modification sites, peptides were prepared essentially as described by Tammsalu et al., 2015. Briefly, 6His-SUMO2-T90K-modified proteins were enriched using nickel affinity chromatography, concentrated on 30 kDa ultrafiltration spin column, treated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 20 min in the dark and digested overnight with Lys-C in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS-NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) at 37 °C [enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50 (wt/wt)]. Peptides were collected and high-molecular-weight peptides retained on the device were digested overnight with Glu-C in IAP buffer at 25°C [enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:100 (wt/wt)]. Peptides collected after Lys-C, or Lys-C and Glu-C digestion were kept separately, and SUMO2-T90K diGly remnant-containing peptides were enriched using K-ε-GG-specific antibody cross-linked to protein A agarose beads.  Complete proteome analysis was performed with ~120 μg of cell lysate protein dissolved in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea. Proteins were treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h and 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 1.5 h at RT in the dark, prior to 2.5-fold dilution into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digestion with Lys-C at enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50 (wt/wt) at RT for 4.5 h. After dividing Lys-C-digested samples in two, one of the samples was diluted twofold into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and supplemented with trypsin at enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50 (wt/wt). Both samples were then digested overnight at RT and peptides were fractionated into six fractions based on the pH of the solution (pH 11.0, 8.0, 6.0, 5.0, 4.0, and 3.0) used to elute the peptides from a pipette tip-based anion exchanger according to a protocol by Wisniewski et al., 2009. Mass spectrometry analysis: All peptide samples were desalted on self-made StageTips according to a protocol by Rappsilber et al., 2007, and analysed using EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system and Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (75 μm ID; 3 μm particles; 100 Å) at a constant pressure of 800 bar and separated using 50 cm EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm ID; 2 μm particles; 100 Å) maintained at 45°C. DiGly-Lys-enriched samples were analysed at least twice. Peptides were separated with 60-min linear gradient of 5−22% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 12-min linear increase of acetonitrile to 40%. Total length of the gradient including column washout and re-equilibration was 90 min. Peptides corresponding to the complete human proteome were analysed with 190-min linear gradient of 5−22% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 25-min linear increase of acetonitrile to 50%.  Total length of this gradient was 240 min. MS data were acquired online in a profile spectrum data format. Full MS scan covered an m/z mass range of either 300−1800, or 300−1600, during standard or comprehensive peptide analyses, respectively. Target value was set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms and full MS was acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to 10 or 4 most abundant ions were picked for MS/MS during standard or comprehensive analyses, respectively, and selection of molecules with peptide-like isotopic distribution was preferred. Target value for MS/MS scan was set to 500,000 ions with a maximum IT of 60 ms and resolution of 17,500 at either m/z 200 for standard, or maximum IT of 500 ms and a resolution 35,000 at m/z 200 for comprehensive peptide analyses. Precursor ions were fragmented by HCD with normalised collision energy of 30 and precursor ions with either undetermined, single, or high (>8) charge state were rejected. The sample of Lys-C digested diGly-Lys-containing peptides was analyzed twice according to the settings of the comprehensive analysis, however the 1,126 peptide ions identified with the first comprehensive LC-MS/MS analysis were added to the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and peak lists were searched with an integrated Andromeda search engine against an entire human UniprotKB proteome containing canonical and isoform sequences downloaded in April 2013 and supplemented with the primary sequence of 6His-SUMO2-T90K. Raw files were divided into parameter groups based on the specificity of the proteolysis applied during sample preparation. Hydrolysis of peptide bonds C-terminal to either Lys, or Lys and Arg, with a maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed for peptides processed with either Lys-C, or with Lys-C and Trypsin, respectively. Samples acquired after an additional Glu-C digestion were analysed with enzyme specificity set to C-terminal to Lys, Glu and Asp with a maximum of five missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-termini and where applicable, Gly-Gly adduct on internal lysine residues and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr or Tyr, were selected as variable modifications. Additional analyses were performed by including either deamidation of Gln and Asn, or conversion of N-terminal Glu or Gln to pyroglutamate as variable modifications. Maximum peptide mass of 10,000 Da was allowed, multiplicity was set to 2, and K8 and R10 were selected as heavy-labelled counterparts. A maximum of either six, or four, labelled residues were allowed per peptide during the analyses of either diGly-Lys-enriched samples, or peptides representing the entire proteome, respectively. A decoy sequence database was generated using Lys as a special amino acid when analysing diGly-Lys-containing peptides. Default values were chosen for the rest of the parameters. All datasets were filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of 1% at protein, peptide and modified site level.

### Publication Abstract
We have identified the plant biflavonoid hinokiflavone as an inhibitor of splicing in vitro and modulator of alternative splicing in cells. Chemical synthesis confirms hinokiflavone is the active molecule. Hinokiflavone inhibits splicing in vitro by blocking spliceosome assembly, preventing formation of the B complex. Cells treated with hinokiflavone show altered subnuclear organization specifically of splicing factors required for A complex formation, which relocalize together with SUMO1 and SUMO2 into enlarged nuclear speckles containing polyadenylated RNA. Hinokiflavone increases protein SUMOylation levels, both in in vitro splicing reactions and in cells. Hinokiflavone also inhibited a purified, <i>E. coli</i> expressed SUMO protease, SENP1, in vitro, indicating the increase in SUMOylated proteins results primarily from inhibition of de-SUMOylation. Using a quantitative proteomics assay we identified many SUMO2 sites whose levels increased in cells following hinokiflavone treatment, with the major targets including six proteins that are components of the U2 snRNP and required for A complex formation.

### Keywords
Human embryonic kidney (hek) suspension cells, Sumo2

### Affiliations
Gene expression and Regulation, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrea Pawellek

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Iain Lamond
Gene expression and Regulation, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK


