### Accession
PXD020745

### Title
compartmentalized protein expression in rat hippocampal neurons undergoing homeostatic plasticity

### Description
Synaptic scaling is a form of homeostatic plasticity which allows neurons to adjust their action potential firing rate in response to chronic alterations in neural activity. Synaptic scaling requires profound changes in gene expression, but the relative contribution of local and cell-wide mechanisms is controversial. Here we performed a comprehensive multi-omics characterization of the somatic and process compartments of primary rat hippocampal neurons during synaptic scaling. Thereby, we uncovered highly compartment-specific and correlated changes in the neuronal transcriptome and proteome. Specifically, we identified highly compartment-specific downregulation of crucial regulators of neuronal excitability and excitatory synapse structure. Motif analysis further suggests an important role for trans-acting post-transcriptional regulators, including RNA-binding proteins and microRNAs, in the local regulation of the corresponding mRNAs. Altogether, our study indicates that compartmentalized gene expression changes are widespread in synaptic scaling and might co-exist with neuron-wide mechanisms to allow synaptic computation and homeostasis

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Primary hippocampal compartmentalized cultures were prepared as described earlier and treated at DIV19 with either 100μM PTX or vehicle for 48 hours. Inserts were then rinsed twice with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Gibco™) and lysed using a cell scraper in home-made RIPA-buffer (150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100; 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate; 1mM EDTA; 1mM EGTA; 0.05% SDS; 50mM Tris pH8)  containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (1:1000; Check brand). Cell lysates were then homogenized by pipetting and centrifuged for 30min at 13’000xg (4°C). The supernatant was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use. Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific™) was used to quantify protein concentrations following the manufacturer’s protocol.  Protein extract processing Protein extracts were further processed with a filter assisted sample preparation protocol (3). 20ug of protein were added to 30ul SDS denaturation buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT). For denaturation, samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with 200ul UA buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) and then loaded to regenerated cellulose centrifugal filter units (Microcon 30, Merck Millipore, Billercia MA, USA). Samples were spun at 14000g at 35°C for 20 min. Filter units were washed once with 200ul of UA buffer followed by centrifugation at 14000g at 35°C for 15 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 100ul freshly prepared IAA solution (0.05M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) for 1 min at room temperature in a thermomixer at 600rpm followed by centrifugation at 14000g at 35°C for 10 min. Filter units were washed 3 times with 100ul of UA buffer then twice with a 0.5M NaCl solution in water (each washing was followed by centrifugation at 35°C and 14000g for 10 min). Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with a 1:50 ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.4ug, V511A, Promega, Fitchburg WI) in 130ul TEAB (0.05M Triethylammoniumbicarbonate in water). After protein digestion over night at room temperature, peptide solutions were spun down at 14000g at 35°C for 15 min and acidified with 3ul of 20% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid).  Peptides Clean-up. Peptides were cleaned-up using StageTip C18 silica columns (SP301, Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA). Columns were conditioned with 200ul methanol followed by 200 ul of 60% ACN (acetonitrile) / 0.1% TFA. Columns were equilibrated with 2 x 150 ul of 3% ACN / 0,1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the columns. They were then washed with 2 x 150 ul 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA and eluted with 150 ul 60% ACN / 0.1% TFA. Samples were lyophilized in a speedvac then re-solubilized in 19ul 3% ACN / 0.1% FA (formic acid) prior to LC-MS/MS measurement. 1ul of synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample for retention time calibration.  LC-MS/MS measurements: Samples were measured on a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were separated with an Eksigent NanoLC (AB Sciex, Washington, USA). We used a single-pump trapping 75-um scale configuration (Waters).  1ul of each were injected. Trapping was performed on a nanoEaseTM symmetry C18 column (pore size 100Å, particle size 5um, inner diameter 180um, length 20mm). For separation a nanoEaseTM HSS C18 T3 column was used (pore size 100Å, particle size 1.8um, inner diameter 75um, length 250mm, heated to 50°C). Peptides were separated using a 120 min long linear solvent gradient of 5-35% ACN / 0.1% FA  (using a flowrate of 300nl / min). Electronspray ionization with 2.6kV was used and a DIA method with a MS1 in each cycle followed by 35 fixed 20 Da precursor isolation windows within a precursor range of 400-1100 m/z was applied. For MS1 we used a maximum injection time of 55ms and an AGC target of 3e6 with a resolution of 30k in the range of 350-1500 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired using a maximum injection time of 55 ms an AGC target of 1e6 with a 30k resolution  in the range of 140 – (2 x the upper range of the precursor window) m/z. A collision energy of 28 was used for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
We used SpectronautTM (Biognosys, version 10) with directDIA for peak picking and sequence assignment. We used a mus musculus reference proteome for R. Norvegicus from uniprot (UP000002494). We included a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, using a Tryptic in-silico digest with a KR/P cutting profile. Sequences in a range of 7-52 AA were considered. We included carbamidomethyl as fixed modification for cysteine, oxidation as variable modification for methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. A maximum of 5 variable modifications were considered. Single hit was determined on the stripped sequence level. major grouping was done by protein group ID and minor grouping by stripped sequence. Only proteotypic peptide sequences were considered and single hit proteins excluded. For the minor and major group quantification the top 3 entries were used using the mean precursor/peptide quantity. A localized normalization strategy and interference correction were used. Machine learning was performed on a per run basis and iRT profiling was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Neurons, Ptx, Cellculture, Stimulation, Homeostatic plasticity, Dendrites, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Lab of Systems Neuroscience, Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Health Science and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology ETH, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lukas von Ziegler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Schratt
Lab of Systems Neuroscience, Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Health Science and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology ETH, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


