### Accession
PXD008747

### Title
Histone variant H2A.Z deposition and acetylation directs the canonical Notch signaling response

### Description
The study deals with the elucidation of potential interaction partners of the intracellular domain of the transmembrane receptor Notch1, termed NICD. The NICD is released from the cytoplasmic tail of the Notch receptor by gamma-secretase treatment and translocated as a transcription factor to the nucleus. Here, virally transduced recombinant NICD constructs (wild-type and deltaEP hyperactive mutant) were employed for AP-MS with the aim of identifying novel NICD interactors in a murine T cell leukemia cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis of the murine Beko cells, in vivo biotinylated (proteins harbor a biotin tag; cells express BirA ligase) NICD and NICDdEP were enriched via one-step affinity purification on streptavidin magnetic beads. The beads were thoroughly washed in AP buffer and finally washed in the buffer lacking detergents and inhibitors. An on-bead digestion protocol was employed (endoproteinase LysC cleavage followd by trypsin). Tryptic peptides were cleaned up on C18 STAGE tips and analysed by nanoLC-MS using an Agilent 1200 nanoHPLC coupled to a Thermo Fisher OrbtrapXL+ETD mass spectrometer. The samples were measured as technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed my MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) using the Uniprote mouse proteome (Swissprot plus Trembl sequences) database.

### Publication Abstract
A fundamental as yet incompletely understood feature of Notch signal transduction is a transcriptional shift from repression to activation that depends on chromatin regulation mediated by transcription factor RBP-J and associated cofactors. Incorporation of histone variants alter the functional properties of chromatin and are implicated in the regulation of gene expression. Here, we show that depletion of histone variant H2A.Z leads to upregulation of canonical Notch target genes and that the H2A.Z-chaperone TRRAP/p400/Tip60 complex physically associates with RBP-J at Notch-dependent enhancers. When targeted to RBP-J-bound enhancers, the acetyltransferase Tip60 acetylates H2A.Z and upregulates Notch target gene expression. Importantly, the Drosophila homologs of Tip60, p400 and H2A.Z modulate Notch signaling response and growth in vivo. Together, our data reveal that loading and acetylation of H2A.Z are required to assure tight control of canonical Notch activation.

### Keywords
P400, Ap-ms, Orbitrap ms, Maxquant, Tip60, Notch, Crispr, Histone variant, H2a.z

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Dr. Gerhard Mittler Proteomics Research Facility/Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Dr. Gerhard Mittler Proteomics Research Facility/Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany


