### Accession
PXD005144

### Title
Chronic pancreatitis vs pancreatic cancer LC-MS

### Description
Age-standardized incidence rates for pancreatic cancer (PC) in men have increased by 25% from 1957 to 2011 in Finland. The average age of diagnosis for PC is 69 years in Nordic males, whereas the average age of diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis (CP) is 40-50 years, but the cases overlap in age. By radiology the evaluation of a pancreatic mass, i.e. the differential diagnosis between CP and PC is often difficult. Preoperative needle biopsies are difficult to obtain and are demanding to interpret. New blood based biomarkers are needed. The accuracy of the only established biomarker for PC, CA 19-9 is rather poor in differentiating between benign and malignant mass of the pancreas.  In this study, we have performed mass spectrometry HDMSE analysis of serum samples from patients with chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. We have quantified 652 proteins and performed detailed statistical analysis such as principal component analysis, orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis and receiver operating curve analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After aliquoting equal amount of proteins (based on BCA assay) from serum samples, proteins were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol (1 hour at 65 ºC) and iodoacetamide (1 hour at 25ºC) respectively. Trypsin was added to 1:50 (trypsin to protein) ratio and incubated over night at 37ºC. Samples were cleaned by C18 cleaning cartridges and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Hi3 peptide mixture (Waters, Manchester, UK) was added (50fmol per 4µL injection) for normalization purposes post analysis by mass spectrometry.  Four µL sample, equivalent to 1.4µg total protein, was injected to nano Acquity UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography) - system (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). TRIZAIC nanoTile 85µm x 100 mm HSS-T3u wTRAP was used as separating device prior to mass spectrometer. The gradient was 90 minutes long from 1 to 85% B buffer. The data was acquired in DIA (data independent acquisition) fashion using HDMSE-mode. Ion mobility spectroscopy (IMS) was also used.

### Data Protocol
The samples were run as triplicates and further analysis was done with, Progenesis QI for Proteomics – software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The raw files were imported to Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) using lock mass correction with 785.8426 m/z, corresponding to doubly charged Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B. Default parameters for peak picking and alignment algorithm were used. The software facilitated the peptide identification with Protein Lynx Global Server and label-free quantification. The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR less to 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. These are default parameters in the software. The identified proteins are grouped as one according to parsimony principle and also peptides unique to the protein are reported. Hi3 peptides are used for normalizing the peptide abundancies and relative quantitation was based on all the non-conflicting peptides found. The peptide ranking is done across all the runs.  The abundancies of the peptides are averaged to provide a signal to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Finland ranks sixth among the countries having highest incidence rate of pancreatic cancer with mortality roughly equaling incidence. The average age of diagnosis for pancreatic cancer is 69&#xa0;years in Nordic males, whereas the average age of diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis is 40-50&#xa0;years, however, many cases overlap in age. By radiology, the evaluation of a pancreatic mass, that is, the differential diagnosis between chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer is often difficult. Preoperative needle biopsies are difficult to obtain and are demanding to interpret. New blood based biomarkers are needed. The accuracy of the only established biomarker for pancreatic cancer, CA 19-9 is rather poor in differentiating between benign and malignant mass of the pancreas. In this study, we have performed mass spectrometry analysis (High Definition MS<sup>E</sup> ) of serum samples from patients with chronic pancreatitis (13) and pancreatic cancer (22). We have quantified 291 proteins and performed detailed statistical analysis such as principal component analysis, orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis and receiver operating curve analysis. The proteomic signature of chronic pancreatitis versus pancreatic cancer samples was able to separate the two groups by multiple statistical techniques. Some of the enriched pathways in the proteomic dataset were LXR/RXR activation, complement and coagulation systems and inflammatory response. We propose that multiple high-confidence biomarker candidates in our pilot study including Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H2 (Area under the curve, AUC: 0.947), protein AMBP (AUC: 0.951) and prothrombin (AUC: 0.917), which should be further evaluated in larger patient series as potential new biomarkers for differential diagnosis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Chronic pancreatitis, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Pancreatic cancer, Label-free qunatification, Multivariate data analysis

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Finland


