### Accession
PXD001890

### Title
Glioma-derived stem-like cells (GSCs): Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Glioma-derived stem-like cells (GSCs) are hypothesized to provide a repository of cells in tumors that can self-replicate and be resistant to radiation and chemotherapeutic agents developed for the treatment of tumors. The potential lack of response of GSCs to traditional cytotoxic and radiation therapies has significant implications for tumor biology and therapeutics. At M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a large number of GSC lines representing several glioma sub-types have been isolated and characterized with respect to gene expression. In order to identify potential therapeutic targets relating to GSC phenotype, we examined protein expression in 35 GSC lines relative to an external protein standard using label-free quantitative proteomics. Samples were analyzed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo) in block-randomized groups of three GSCs plus the external standard. The resulting .raw files were aligned by group in Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics). Database searching was performed with PEAKS 6 software (BSI) against a UniprotKB/SwissProt Human database appended with the cRAP contaminant database. Peptide intensities were exported for analysis in DanteR. The resulting relative fold changes were used to drive unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the cell lines for the purpose of classifying cell lines, and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and the DAVID webtool were used to determine the biochemical pathways and biological processes impacted by protein changes in each cell line. Within IPA, Upstream Analysis was used to predict biological functions and transcriptional regulators whose increased or decreased activity was consistent with the observed fold changes, and the resulting upstream regulators with significant z-scores were exported for unsupervised hierarchical clustering. In addition to showing upstream regulators known to be associated with glioma, including Myc, tumor protein 53 (TP53), N-myc proto-oncogene protein (MYCN), two novel upstream regulators, synoviolin 1 (SYVN1) and interleukin 5 (IL5) were identified. A cluster of proteins found to be decreased relative to mixed control in mesenchymal cell lines was subjected to further bioinformatics analysis, identifying SRSF2 as a potential upstream regulator.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis of GSCs was performed as previously described [33].  2x106 cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, 25mM TrisHCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) mixed with Halt protease inhibitor EDTA-free, Halt phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and Pierce universal nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL).The protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce), and the resulting protein (100 μg total protein) was reduced and alkylated. Five microliters of 200 mM tris (2- carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) buffered with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to each sample (final TCEP concentration was 10 mM) and incubated at 55 °C for 1 h. Five microliters of 375 mM iodoacetamide (buffered with TEAB) was added and incubated in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated in four volumes (440 μL) of ice cold acetone for 2 h at -20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000× g for 30 min (4 °C) after which the supernatants were removed and discarded. Pellets were air dried and resuspended in 12.5 μL of 8 M urea. Trypsin (10 μg in 87.5 μL of TEAB buffer) was added, and the samples were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. An external standard comprised of proteins from all cell lines (“M37”) was used for relative quantitation. Block randomization (random.org) was employed and M37 was included in each block. Samples were analyzed in triplicate. Chromatographic separation and mass spectrometric analysis was performed with a nano-LC chromatography system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific), coupled on-line to a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer  (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific) through a Nano-Flex II nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN, B). After equilibrating the column in 95% solvent A and 5% solvent B, the samples (5 µL in 5% v/v ACN/0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, corresponding to 1 μg cell protein digest) were injected onto a trap column (C18, 100 µm ID×2 cm) and subsequently eluted (250 nL/min) by gradient elution onto a C18 column (10 cm x 75 μm ID,15 μm tip, ProteoPep II, 5μm, 300 Å, , New Objective). The gradient was as follows: isocratic at 5% B, 0-8 min; 5% to 30% B, 8-188 min; 30% to 95% B, 188-220 min; and isocratic at 95% B, 220-240 min. Total run time, including column equilibration, sample loading, and analysis was 260 min.  All LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur, version 2.7 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scans (m/z 350-1650) (MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution (at m/z = 400) in profile mode, followed by top 10 Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation centroid MS/MS spectra, acquired at 15K resolution in data-dependent analyses (DDA) mode. The automatic gain control targets for the Orbitrap were 1 x 106 for the MS scans and 5 x 104 for MS/MS scans. The maximum injection times for the MS1 and MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap both 200 ms. For MS/MS acquisition, the following settings were used: parent threshold = 10,000; isolation width = 4.0 Da; normalized collision energy = 30%; activation time = 100 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening, and charge state rejection were enabled, with rejection of singly charged and unassigned charge states. Dynamic exclusion was used to remove selected precursor ions (−/+10 ppm) for 90 s after MS/MS acquisition. A repeat count of 1 and a maximum exclusion list size of 500 was used. The following ion source parameters were used: capillary temperature 275 °C, source voltage 2.2 kV, source current 100 uA, and S-lens RF level 40%.

### Data Protocol
MS files (.raw) were imported into Progenesis LC-MS (version 18.214.1528, Nonlinear Dynamics) for m/z and retention time alignment. The top 5 spectra for each feature were exported (charge deconvolution, top 1000 peaks) as a combined .mgf file  for database searching in PEAKS[35, 36] (version 6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON) against the UniprotKB/Swissprot-Human database (July 2013 version, 20,264 proteins), appended with the cRAP contaminant database. PEAKS DB and Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) searches were performed with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.025 Da, fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), and deamidation (NQ). Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and a maximum of 3 PTMs per peptide. An additional search for unexpected modifications was performed with the entire Unimod database. Finally, homology searching was performed using the SPIDER algorithm[37] to identify peptides resulting from nonspecific cleavages or amino acid substitutions. Mascot and PEAKS SPIDER searches were combined (inChorus), using a 1% false discovery rate cutoff for both search engines. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches (95% peptide probability) were imported into Progenesis LC-MS. Conflict resolution was performed manually to ensure that a single peptide sequence was assigned to each feature by removing lower scoring peptides. The resulting normalized peptide intensity data were exported, and the peptide list was filtered to remove non-unique peptides, methionine-containing peptides, and all modified peptides except cysteine carbamidomethylation. For quantification, the filtered list of peptide intensities was imported into DanteR (version 0.1.1) [38, 39], and intensities for peptides of the same sequence were combined to form a single entry. The resulting peptide intensities were log2 transformed and combined to protein abundances (RRollup) using the default settings, excluding one-hit wonders (50% minimum presence of at least one peptide, minimum dataset presence 3, p-value cutoff of 0.05 for Grubbs’ test, minimum of 5 peptides for Grubbs’ test). The resulting proteins were quantified by 1-way ANOVA relative to M37; p-value adjustment for multiple testing was performed according to Benjamini and Hochberg [40]. The results from all experimental blocks were standardized to correct for analytical differences across the blocks, and the resulting standardized fold changes were imported into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Resulting Z-scores for upstream regulators and biological and disease functions for all cell lines were exported and collated. After filtering to remove entries with >20% missing values, hierarchical clustering was performed using DanteR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glioma stem cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UTMB-Galvestion
Dept. of Pharmacology and Toxicology Univ. of TX Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Carol Nilsson
Dept. of Pharmacology and Toxicology Univ. of TX Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555


