### Accession
PXD022860

### Title
Proteomic analysis of whole brains from Ndufs4-/- mice treated with doxycycline

### Description
Mice with mitochondrial complex I deficiency (Ndufs4-/-) suffer from severe energy impairment primarily affecting the brain and die at P55. A small molecule screen developed by our lab using cells harboring human mitochondrial disease mutations identified antibiotics targeting mitochondrial translation as potent inhibitors of cell death under nutrient stress conditions. Doxycycline, which was identified amongst these antibiotics, was administered in the diet of Ndufs4-/- mice after weaning at P21. Mice fed with doxycycline showed improved motor function and significantly increased lifespan relative to untreated Ndufs4-/- mice. In order to investigate the molecular changes promoted by doxycycline in the brains of these mice, Ndufs4-/- doxycycline treated (DOX), Ndufs4-/- untreated (KO), and Ndufs4+/+ (WT) control mice were sacrificed at P55 and their brains harvested. Proteomic analysis revealed doxycycline treatment largely prevented the neuroimmune and inflammatory profile identified in the Ndufs4-/- mice. These findings implicate a potentially causality of these proteins in the neuronal cell death ultimately leading to the observed brain pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative brain tissue proteomics analysis was performed as below. Protein digestion and isobaric labeling Brain tissues were extracted and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen until further use. Brain tissues were lysed with 4 mL of SDS lysis buffer (2.0% SDS (w/v), 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM TCEP, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Promega) and 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) using an Omni tissue homogenizer. Extracts were reduced at 57 °C for 30 min and cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide (14 mM) in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Extracts were purified by methanol–chloroform precipitation and pellets were washed with ice-cold methanol. Pellets were resuspended in 2 mL of 8 M urea (containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) and protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) before protease digestion. One hundred micrograms of protein was diluted to 4 M urea and digested overnight with 4 µg LysC (Wako). Digests were diluted further to a 1.5 M urea concentration and 5 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added for 6 hr at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with 50 µl of 20% formic acid and subsequently desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (50 mg, Sep-Pak, Waters). Digested brain peptides were resuspended in 100 µl of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0. Ten microliters of TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fischer) was added to each solution for 1 hr at room temperature (25 °C). After incubating, the reaction was quenched by adding 4 l of 5% (w/v) hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were combined and subsequently desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (50 mg, Sep-Pak, Waters) before basic pH reversed-phase separation. Basic pH reverse-phase separation Tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled peptides were solubilized in 500 l solution containing 5% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and separated by an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 mm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter and 220 mm in length). An Agilent 1100 binary pump coupled with a photodiode array detector (Thermo Fisher) was used to separate the peptides. A 40-min linear gradient from 20% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 (flow rate of 0.6 ml/min) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions (30 sec). A total of 96 fractions was consolidated into 12 samples in a checkerboard fashion, acidified with 20 µl of 20% formic acid and vacuum dried to completion. Each sample was re-dissolved in 5% formic acid, 5% ACN, desalted via StageTips before liquid chromatograph–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing and spectra assignment In-house developed software was used to convert acquired mass spectrometric data from the .RAW file to the mzXML format. Erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z were also corrected by the internal software. SEQUEST algorithm was used to assign MS2 spectra by searching the data against a protein sequence database including Mouse Uniprot Database (downloaded June 2018) and known contaminants such as mouse albumin and human keratins. A forward (target) database component was followed by a decoy component including all listed protein sequences. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and requiring both peptide termini to be consistent with trypsin specificity. 16-plex TMT labels on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was implemented by applying the target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra properties: XCorr and Cn, peptide ion mass accuracy, and peptide length. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the data set with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR to obtain a protein identification FDR of less than 1%. Determination of TMT reporter ion intensities  For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 m/z window centred on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for ions, and the maximum intensity of the signal to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. Reporter ion intensities were normalized by multiplication with the ion accumulation time for each MS2 or MS3 spectrum and adjusted based on the overlap of isotopic envelopes of all reporter ions. Following extraction of the reporter ion signal, the isotopic impurities of the TMT reagent were corrected using the values specified by the manufacturer’s specification. Total signal-to-noise values for all peptides were summed for each TMT channel and all values were adjusted to account for variance and a total minimum signal-to-noise value of 200 was implemented.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial diseases (MDs) are a heterogeneous group of disorders resulting from mutations in nuclear or mitochondrial DNA genes encoding mitochondrial proteins<sup>1,2</sup>. MDs cause pathologies with severe tissue damage and ultimately death<sup>3,4</sup>. There are no cures for MDs and current treatments are only palliative<sup>5-7</sup>. Here we show that tetracyclines improve fitness of cultured MD cells and ameliorate disease in a mouse model of Leigh syndrome. To identify small molecules that prevent cellular damage and death under nutrient stress conditions, we conduct a chemical high-throughput screen with cells carrying human MD mutations and discover a series of antibiotics that maintain survival of various MD cells. We subsequently show that a sub-library of tetracycline analogues, including doxycycline, rescues cell death and inflammatory signatures in mutant cells through partial and selective inhibition of mitochondrial translation, resulting in an ATF4-independent mitohormetic response. Doxycycline treatment strongly promotes fitness and survival of Ndufs4<sup>-/-</sup> mice, a preclinical Leigh syndrome mouse model<sup>8</sup>. A proteomic analysis of brain tissue reveals that doxycycline treatment largely prevents neuronal death and the accumulation of neuroimmune and inflammatory proteins in Ndufs4<sup>-/-</sup> mice, indicating a potential causal role for these proteins in the brain pathology. Our findings suggest that tetracyclines deserve further evaluation as potential drugs for the treatment of MDs.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Mitochondrial disease, Mitochondrial translation, Tetracycline

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute  Harvard Medical School Boston, Ma
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Pere Puigserver
Dana Farber Cancer Institute  Harvard Medical School Boston, Ma


