### Accession
PXD028708

### Title
Prolonged exposure to simulated microgravity promotes stemness impairing morphological, metabolic and migratory profile of pancreatic cancer cells: a comprehensive proteomic, lipidomic and trascriptomic analysis

### Description
Gravitational biology and its effects on cancer cells are of great interest, especially today that space is more accessible than ever. Despite advances in space research, little is known about the impact of microgravity on tumor and its biology and data from the literature are often contradictory due to different setup, experimental designs and analyzed time-points. Exploiting the Random Positioning machine we evaluated on pancreatic cancer cells the effects of long-term exposure to simulated microgravity (SMG) performing a large proteomic, lipidomic and transcriptional analysis at 1, 7 and 9 days.   Results indicate that SMG affects cellular morphology through a time-dependent activation of “Regulation of actin-based motility by Rho”and “Cdc42” pathways that contribute to the dynamic actin rearrangement involved in the formation of 3D spheroidal structures and in the enhancement of epithelial-to mesenchymal transition. To support energy stress remediation and counteract massive apoptosis activation and cell proliferation inhibition, induced by SMG, tumor cells downregulate the protein translational machinery, and undergo a metabolic reprogramming orchestrated by the activation of HIF-1a and PI3K/Akt pathways. These two pathways pave the way for glucose metabolism encouraging upregulation of glycolysis, mitochondrial activity, Tri-carboxylic acid cycle and fatty acid synthesis (rather than B oxidation), suggesting a de novo synthesis of triglycerides involved in the formation of membrane lipid bilayer and signaling mediators. This metabolic plasticity, typical of cancer stem cells, is in accordance with the SMG-mediated activation of PI3K/Akt/NFkB/ERK5/IL-8 signaling axis that significantly upregulates the expression of stem-associated proteins and expansion of cancer stem cells with a more mesenchymal phenotype and improved migratory capability. Altogether, our findings clearly indicate that microgravity induces cancer cell transformation towards the acquisition of cancer stem cell-like features, with a more aggressive and metastatic potential and pave the base for future study of response to anti neoplastic drugs under simulated microgravity.

### Sample Protocol
At different time points (according to the experimental setting), the cells were collected, washed in PBS and resuspended in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail 1X (Roche). To increase yields, cells were sonicated twice for 10 min; the lysate was gently mixed for 15 min on ice and then centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 4° C to pellet the cell debris. Protein concentration was measured with BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using bovine serum albumin as a standard. The cell lysates were reduced using 2.5μL of dithiothreitol (200mM DTT stock solution) (Sigma) at 90° C for 20 min, and alkylated with 10μl of Cysteine Blocking Reagent (Iodoacetamide, IAM, 200mM Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin (Promega, Sequence Grade) was added and digestion was performed overnight at 37° C. Then, the peptides digests were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well Plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) and the samples were ready for the analysis.  LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, USA) system with a stationary phase of a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7μm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0μL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The samples used to generate the SWATH-MS (Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra) spectral library were subjected to the traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). Samples were then subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window. A 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed, followed by MS/MS experiments on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). Three instrumental replicates for each sample were subjected to the DIA analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry files were searched using Protein Pilot (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). Samples were input in the Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada), with the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and False Discovery Rate at 1%. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 12/10/2018, containing 48561 sequence entries). The Mascot search was performed on Mascot v. 2.4, the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages and a search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic, Metabolism, Cancer stem cells, Microgravity, Lipidomic

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy.

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy.


