### Accession
PXD023814

### Title
Mapping AT1R biased signaling using proximity-labeling and proteomics identifies diverse actions of biased agonists

### Description
Angiotensin II type 1 receptors (AT1Rs) are one of the most widely studied G protein-coupled receptors.  To fully appreciate the diversity in cellular signaling profiles activated by AT1R transducer-biased ligands, we utilized peroxidase-catalyzed proximity labeling to capture proteins in close proximity to AT1Rs in response to six different ligands: Angiotensin II (full agonist), S1I8 (partial agonist), TRV055 and TRV056 (G protein-biased agonists), TRV026 and TRV027 (β-arrestin biased agonists) at 90s, 10min, and 60min after stimulation.  We systematically analyzed the kinetics of AT1R trafficking and determined that distinct ligands lead AT1R to different cellular compartments for downstream signaling activation and receptor degradation/recycling.  Distinct proximity labelling of proteins from a number of functional classes, including GTPases, adaptor proteins, and kinases were activated by different ligands suggesting unique signaling and physiological roles of the AT1R.  Ligands within the same class, i.e. either G protein-biased or -arrestin-biased, shared high similarity in their labelling profiles.  Comparison between ligand classes revealed distinct signaling activation such as greater labeling by G protein biased ligands on ESCRT-0 complex proteins that act as sorting machinery for ubiquitinated proteins.  Our study provides a comprehensive analysis of AT1R receptor trafficking kinetics and signaling activation profiles induced by distinct classes of ligands.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity Labeling Experiments All buffers were prepared in Milli-Q filtered water the day of use and filtered through 0.22 μm filters. When cells reached 40-50% confluency, media was replaced with fresh growth media containing 1 μg/mL doxycycline hydrochloride to induce receptor overexpression. Approximately 43 hr following induction, media was replaced with starvation media (DMEM, +4.5 g/L D-glucose, +L-glutamine, -sodium pyruvate supplemented with 0.1% BSA, 10 mM HEPES, and 10 μg/mL gentamicin) and incubated for at least 4 hrs.  During the course of the experiment, biotin tyramide was added to a final concentration of 500 μM, ligands were added to a final concentration of 10 mM except for angiotensin II which was added to a final concentration of 1 mM, and hydrogen peroxide was added to a final concentration of 1 mM (having been freshly diluted to 1M in DPBS from 30%). Biotin incubation was exactly 1 hr, hydrogen peroxide incubation was exactly 1 min, and ligand incubation was either 90 sec, 10min, or 1 hr. Following peroxide treatment, media was quickly decanted and the cells were washed three times with quench buffer (DPBS containing 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 10 mM sodium azide, and 5 mM trolox). Cells were then harvested in quench buffer with 5 mM EDTA with scraping and collected by centrifugation. Supernatant was discarded and cell pellet was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at -80 ˚C. Four independent experiments were performed for each ligand incubation time. The raw data include separate experiments that used osmotic stretch (OSM) to stimulate cells.  For technical reasons due to poor cell viability and low protein recovery, these experiments were not included in the final data analysis. Streptavidin Enrichment and Digestion All buffers were prepared in Milli-Q filtered water the day of use and filtered through 0.22 μm filters. Cell pellets were thawed and resuspended in alkaline lysis buffer (2 M NaOH, 7.5% 2-mercaptoethanol) and incubated on ice for 20 mins. TCA was added to reach 25% and the samples were vortexed thoroughly before being incubated on ice for 1.5 hr. Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation at 4 ˚C and 16,100 x g for 20 mins. Pellets were washed by adding ice cold acetone, vortexing, collected by centrifugation for 5 mins at the speed above, and the supernatant was discarded. This washing procedure was repeated for a total of four times and the pellet was air dried for approximately 5 mins. Resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 1% SDS, and 10 mM TCEP) was added to each sample and samples were sonicated for four 30 sec cycles in a bath sonicator then incubated at 37 ˚C with vortexing for 1 hr. Samples were then sonicated again as before and incubated for another 1 hr. Samples were centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 10 mins and transferred to new tubes. Freshly prepared iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and samples were incubated for 30 mins in the dark with vortexing. Alkylation was quenched by adding freshly prepared dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 50 mM and vortexing well. Each sample was then diluted by doubling the sample volume using Milli-Q water. An aliquot of each sample was saved for control western blotting. Magnetic streptavidin beads were washed three times in wash buffer (4 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8, 0.5% SDS) and before being added to each sample. Samples were then rocked at 4 ˚C for approximately 18 hr. Protein-loaded beads were then washed three times with wash buffer using a magnetic rack to collect the beads and discard the supernatant. Samples were then washed once with 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and then transferred to new tubes before being washed twice more with EPPS. Beads were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 8% HPLC-grade MeCN and digested at 37 ˚C with vortexing for 3 hr with 2 μg of LysC. An equal volume of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 was added and the samples were digested further overnight with 2 μg of trypsin. The next day, a magnetic rack was used to transfer the supernatant to new tubes and then samples flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80˚C.  Tandem Mass Tag Labeling Samples were processed using the SL-TMT protocol. In brief, a final acetonitrile concentration of ~30% (v/v) was added along with 10 μL of TMT reagent (20 ng/µL) to the 100 μg of peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1.5 hr, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v) for 15 min. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. The combined sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) via Sep-Pak (Waters, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using MSConvert. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database (April 20, 2016). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling and fully-tryptic specificity was required. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously25, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously25. PSMs with  no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Protein identification and quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biased agonism, At1r, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School 240 Longwood Ave Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Harvard Medical School 240 Longwood Ave Boston, MA 02115


