### Accession
PXD001115

### Title
Proteomics of NGF-TrkA signaling dynamics in neuroblastoma cells

### Description
We used quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to unravel global nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced TrkA signaling dynamics at the interactome, phosphoproteome and proteome level. A tetracycline-inducible system for TrkA expression was generated in the human neuroblastoma cell line, SH-SY5Y. TrkA-induced cells were stimulated with NGF for different time points to follow phosphoproteome, interactome and proteome changes on a temporal scale. In a triple SILAC setup (Light: Lys0,Arg0; Medium: Lys4,Arg6; and Heavy: Lys8,Arg10), the samples were stimulated with NGF as indicated. Phosphoproteome: 0, 10, 45 min and 0, 120, 120 min+cycloheximide. Interactome: 0, 5, 10 min. Proteome: 0, 24, 48 h. All experiments were performed as biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics cells were lysed and proteins were in-solution digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were fractionated using strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and phosphopeptides enriched using titanium dioxide (TiO2). For interactome (TrkA immunoprecipitation) and proteome analyses cells were lysed, proteins fractionated by SDS-PAGE, gel lanes were excised and cut into 5 and 10 fractions, respectively, and in-gel digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.2.6.13 or 1.4.0.6 using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells respond to nerve growth factor (NGF)-mediated activation of the tropomyosin-related kinase A (TrkA) with neurite outgrowth, thereby providing a model to study neuronal differentiation. We performed a time-resolved analysis of NGF-TrkA signaling in neuroblastoma cells using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. The combination of interactome, phosphoproteome, and proteome data provided temporal insights into the molecular events downstream of NGF binding to TrkA. We showed that upon NGF stimulation, TrkA recruits the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, which then becomes phosphorylated and ubiquitylated and decreases in abundance. We also found that recruitment of Cbl-b promotes TrkA ubiquitylation and degradation. Furthermore, the amount of phosphorylation of the kinase ERK and neurite outgrowth increased upon Cbl-b depletion in several neuroblastoma cell lines. Our findings suggest that Cbl-b limits NGF-TrkA signaling to control the length of neurites.

### Keywords
Trka, Interactome, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Silac, Neuroblastoma, Ngf, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


