### Accession
PXD002025

### Title
Liver lipid metabolism is altered by increased circulating estrogen to androgen ratio in the liver of male mouse

### Description
Estrogens are suggested to lower the risk of developing metabolic syndrome in both sexes. In this study, we investigated how the increased circulating estrogen-to-androgen ratio (E/A) alters liver lipid metabolism in males. Mice expressing human aromatase enzyme (AROM+ mice), and thus having high circulating E/A, were used as a model. Proteomics and gene expression analyses indicated an increase in the peroxisomal ß-oxidation in the liver of AROM+ mice as compared with their wild type littermates. Correspondingly, metabolomic analysis revealed a decrease in the amount of phosphatidylcholines with long-chain fatty acids in the plasma. With interest we note that the expression of Cyp4a12a enzyme, which specifically metabolizes arachidonic acid (AA) to 20-hydroxy AA, was dramatically decreased in the AROM+ liver. As a consequence, increased amounts of phospholipids having AA as a fatty acid tail were detected in the plasma of the AROM+ mice. Overall, these observations demonstrate that high circulating E/A in males is linked to indicators of higher peroxisomal ß -oxidation and lower AA metabolism in the liver. Furthermore, the plasma phospholipid profile reflects the changes in the liver lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse model The AROM+ transgenic mouse model has been described previously 9. Mice aged between 14 and 18 weeks were used for the proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics and molecular phenotyping experiments. The mice were given soy-free natural ingredient feed (Special Diets Services, Witham, UK) and tap water ad libitum, and housed in specific pathogen-free conditions at Central Animal Laboratory, University of Turku, complying with international guidelines on the care and use of laboratory animals. Animal handling was conducted in accordance with Finnish Animal Ethics Committee and the Institutional animal care policies of the University of Turku (Turku, Finland), which fully meet the requirements as defined in the NIH Guide on animal experimentation (NIH publication 86-23). For screening the general bioenergetics parameters, animals were shipped to the German Mouse Clinic (GMC) and maintained in IVC cages according to GMC housing conditions and German laws. All tests performed at the GMC were approved by the responsible authority of the government of Upper Bavaria. The GMC screen comprises extensive, standardized phenotyping of mice between the age of 9 and 21 weeks14.   Proteomics Liver samples of seven WT and five AROM+ male mice were prepared as described previously by Kanerva et al15 with minor modifications: The samples were homogenized in the presence of cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and the protein concentration was measured by DC Assay (Biorad). The proteins were precipitated by acetone and subjected to trypsin digestion with the trypsin-protein ratio of 1/60. The samples were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The 12 mouse liver peptide samples were injected in a randomized order and a mixed sample consisting of equal amount of peptides from each liver sample was injected four times at regular intervals. Sample loading, solvent delivery and scan functions were controlled by Xcalibur software (v2.1.0 SP1.1160; Thermo Scientific).   An amount of 200 ng of peptides, as estimated by the measurement in 280nm by Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (version 3.7.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), was used in each injection. Peptide elution was accomplished by a 95 min long gradient from 98 % solvent A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN and 0.2 % HCOOH) to 35 % solvent B (95 % ACN, 5 % H2O and 0.2 % HCOOH) with a flow rate 0.3 µl/min. Peptides were subjected to reversed-phase separation by a 2.5 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter trap column and a 15 cm long 75 µm inner diameter analytical column packed in-house with C18 particles (Magic AQ C18 resin - 5 µm/200Å, Bruker-Michrom, Billerica, MA, USA). The Orbitrap mass analyzer was operated in a positive-ion mode in a mass range of 300-2000 m/z. A preview scan followed by a survey scan (MS1) at a resolution of 60 000 was executed in each cycle. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (MS/MS) by collision induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap mass analyzer, after which they were added to an exclusion list for 60 seconds.   The 12 mouse liver peptide samples and the first injection of the mixed sample were analyzed in Orbitrap Velos Pro in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, where the 15 most intense doubly or triply charged parent masses were automatically selected for fragmentation. To minimize the redundancy in the precursor ion identifications for the mixed sample, a directed proteomics approach was chosen16, 17. Therefore, the injections 2-4 of the mixed sample were analyzed by only fragmenting the precursors that were not identified in the previous injections of the sample. This was accomplished by the construction of inclusion lists consisting of unidentified and unfragmented precursor ion masses by Progenesis 4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). In Progenesis the precursor ions were first recognized by an automatic feature detection algorithm and those precursors (2+, 3+) that were eluted in a window of 6 seconds or more and were not identified in Mascot (2≤hits, 5≥mass error [ppm]), were exported to an inclusion list. The variations in retention time were compensated by expanding the retention time window for each precursor by 1 minute in the inclusion list.

### Data Protocol
The database searches were performed in Proteome Discoverer (v1.3.0.339; Thermo Scientific). Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for the construction of inclusion lists for the mixed peptide sample, whereas in the final collective search of all 16 analyzed samples, both Mascot and Sequest18 were used. The spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database (16,686 sequences, accessed 130215), appended with protein contaminants from cRAP (the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, accessed 110403). The data was searched for tryptic peptides with Percolator decoy search mode, allowing maximum two missed cleavage sites, 5 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance and 1% FDR. Finally, those proteins that had at least two peptide spectral matches and at least one unique identified peptide were exported to Progenesis.   Spectral data from the 16 mass spectrometry runs were imported to Progenesis 4.0 for feature detection and data analysis. All LC-MS maps were aligned to the second injection of the mixed sample and the feature detection was performed by automatic peak picking algorithm in default sensitivity mode. In peak picking, the maximum charge of precursor was restricted to 3+ and the retention time window to 12 seconds. The linear section of the gradient was used in the analysis and the threshold for accepted normalization was 0.5-1.75 within all peptide features. The contaminants and features that were identified by less than two hits or had precursor mass tolerance higher than 5 ppm were removed. Significant differences in protein abundances between the AROM+ and WT mice were identified using the reproducibility optimized test statistic (ROTS); 19, 20. Proteins with FDR<0.05 were defined as changed.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogens are suggested to lower the risk of developing metabolic syndrome in both sexes. In this study, we investigated how the increased circulating estrogen-to-androgen ratio (E/A) alters liver lipid metabolism in males. The cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom) is an enzyme converting androgens to estrogens. Male mice overexpressing human aromatase enzyme (AROM+ mice), and thus have high circulating E/A, were used as a model in this study. Proteomics and gene expression analyses indicated an increase in the peroxisomal &#x3b2;-oxidation in the liver of AROM+ mice as compared with their wild type littermates. Correspondingly, metabolomic analysis revealed a decrease in the amount of phosphatidylcholines with long-chain fatty acids in the plasma. With interest we noted that the expression of Cyp4a12a enzyme, which specifically metabolizes arachidonic acid (AA) to 20-hydroxy AA, was dramatically decreased in the AROM+ liver. As a consequence, increased amounts of phospholipids having AA as a fatty acid tail were detected in the plasma of the AROM+ mice. Overall, these observations demonstrate that high circulating E/A in males is linked to indicators of higher peroxisomal &#x3b2;-oxidation and lower AA metabolism in the liver. Furthermore, the plasma phospholipid profile reflects the changes in the liver lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Aromatase, Liver, Label free quantitative proteomics, Phospholipid, Male mouse

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Current: Van 't Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Previous: Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Anni Vehmas

### Lab Head
Dr Garry L. Corthals
Current: Van 't Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Previous: Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


