### Accession
PXD022435

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome of human bladder cancer tissue

### Description
The proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of bladder cancer samples was performed following a guanidine isothyocyanate method and using a super-SILAC spike-in standard for confident quantification. The phosphorylated peptides were enriched through a titanium dioxide protocol for the investigation of signaling cascades within cancer specimens.

### Sample Protocol
Bladder tumors were fast frozen upon collection. Proteins were extracted in guanidine isothyocyanate buffer (4M guanidinium thiocyanate, 5mM sodium citrate pH 7, 0.1M b-mercaptoethanol, 0.5% sarkosyl), purified by ultracentrifugation over cesium chloride and cleaned through dialysis against 100mM ABC for 24 hours. The protein extracts were subjected to complete freezing at -80°C followed by lyophilization for at least 48 hours, to discard chemical reagents that may interfere with subsequent processing and analysis. Dried TE-obtained proteins were resuspended using 8M urea, 50mM ABC supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were afterwards quantified through BCA, spiked with a heavy-labeled (Arg10, Lys8) super-SILAC standard in 1:1 manner, reduced using 5mM DTT, alkylated with 10mM CAA and digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega). Peptides were desalted through Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). For proteome analysis, peptides were fractionated (8 fractions) with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase fractionation kit (Cat number 84868). Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using Titansphere TM Phos-TiO Kit (GL Sciences, Cat number 5010-21312). Each proteome fraction was analyzed in a single run at the mass spectrometer and in two runs for phospho-peptide enriched samples. Peptides from HpH and enriched phospho-peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips, eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database using Sequest-HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites was allowed. Oxidized methionine, Carbamidomethyl cysteines, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 13C6-15N2-Lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg10) were set as variable modifications. For phospho-enriched samples, we also included Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks respectively for proteomic and phosphoproteomic samples.  The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.9. FDR was computed by Percolator (The, 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer. Only proteins containing at least one proteotypic peptides were quantified using all available peptide data. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. Proteins were selected if they have at least three peptides quantified.  Phosphosites were quantified at the peptide level. The phosphosite localization accuracy was estimated in myProMS (Poullet et al., 2007) using the PhosphoRS algorithm (Taus et al., 2011). Only phosphosites with a localization probability greater than 95% were considered. Due to the phospho-enrichment procedure, the vast majority of phosphorylated sites were on serine and threonine residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Super-silac, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the mass spectrometry laboratory of the Institut Curie

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the mass spectrometry laboratory of the Institut Curie


