### Accession
PXD038394

### Title
AKI DIA samples for generalized peakgroup scoring model application

### Description
The statistical validation of peptide and protein identifications in mass spectrometry proteomics is a critical step in the analytical workflow. This is particularly important in discovery experiments to ensure only confident identifications are accumulated for downstream analysis and biomarker consideration. However, the inherent nature of discovery proteomics experiments leads to scenarios where the search space will inflate substantially due to the increased number of potential proteins that are being queried in each sample. In these cases, issues will begin to arise when the machine learning algorithms that are trained on an experiment specific basis cannot accurately distinguish between correct and incorrect identifications and will struggle to accurately control the false discovery rate. Here, we propose an alternative validation algorithm trained on a curated external data set of 2.8 million extracted peakgroups that leverages advanced machine learning techniques to create a generalizable peakgroup scoring (GPS) method for data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry. By breaking the reliance on the experimental data at hand and instead training on a curated external dataset, GPS can confidently control the false discovery rate while increasing the number of identifications and providing more accurate quantification in different search space scenarios. To first test the performance of GPS in a standard experimental environment and to provide a benchmark against other methods, a novel spike-in data set with known varying concentrations was analyzed. When compared to existing methods GPS increased the nunmber of identifications by 5-18% and was able to provide more accurate quantification by increasing the number of ratio validated identifications by 24-74%. To evaluate GPS in a larger search space, a novel data set of 141 blood plasma samples from patients developing acute kidney injury after sepsis was searched with a human tissue spectral library (10000+ proteins). Using GPS, we were able to provide a 207-377% increase in the number of candidate differentially abundant proteins compared to the existing methods while maintaining competitive numbers of global identifications. Finally, using an optimized human tissue library and workflow we were able to identify 1205 proteins from the 141 plasma samples and increase the number of candidate differentially abundant proteins by 70.87%. With the addition of machine learning aided differential expression, we were able to identify potential new biomarkers for stratifying subphenotypes of acute kidney injury in sepsis. These findings suggest that by using a generalized model such as GPS in tandem with a massive scale spectral library it is possible to expand the boundaries of discovery experiments in DIA proteomics. GPS is open source and freely available on github at https://github.com/InfectionMedicineProteomics/gps

### Sample Protocol
141 samples were chosen for up to 5 time points from 23 acute kidney injury patients. All sample preparation steps, including desalting and protein digestion, used the Agilent AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies, Inc.) per manufacture’s protocol. Each plasma sample was diluted 1:10 (100-mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic); Sigma-Aldrich Co, St Louis, MO, USA), and 10 l of each diluted plasma sample were transferred to a 96-well plate (Greiner G650201) where 40 microL of 4 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM AmBic was manually added with a pipette for a final volume of 50 microliter. The proteins were reduced with 10 microliter of 60 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration of 10 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for one hour at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 20 microL of 80 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration of 20 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min in a dark at room temperature. The plasma samples were digested with 2 microgram Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation) for five hours at room temperature and further digested with 2 microgram trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at room temperature (Betancourt et. all 2018). The digestion was stopped by pipetting 20 microliter of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) and the digested peptides were desalted on Bravo platform. To prime and equilibrate the AssayMAP C18 cartridges (Agilent, PN: 5190-6532), 90% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA were used, respectively. The samples were loaded into the cartridges at the flow rate of 5 microliter/min. The cartridges were washed with 0.1% TFA before the peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Concentrator plus Eppendorf) and resuspended in 25 microliter of 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The samples, 10 microliter, were diluted with 10 microliter 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and spiked with synthetic iRT peptides (JPT Peptide Technologies, GmbH, Berlin, Germany) before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. .

### Data Protocol
To augment the Pan Human Library with additional identifications and correct the retention time to the experiment at hand, we first searched the 141 AKI plasma samples using MSFragger-DIA (v3.5). Using the resulting set of identifications, shared precursors between the PHL and direct search were selected for retention time alignment. LOWESS was first used to smooth the correlation between the direct search results and the PHL and then an interpolated univariate spline function was fit on top of this to adjust the retention time in the direct search to the scale of the PHL. The shared proteins between the 2 libraries were replaced in the PHL with proteins, and associated precursors, from the direct search, and the proteins not contained in the PHL were appended to the library. 10 spiked-in retention time peptides (iRT) were used for alignment and retention time correction for each sample. We adapted the previously published DIAnRT workflow (De Marchi et all 2021) to optimize signal extraction at the sample level before combining the analysis to control for the global FDR. To do this, a first iteration is performed where sub-optimal retention time peptides are provided to align the experimental chromatograms to the spectral library. The first pass of signal extraction is scored and validated, and then the highest scoring peakgroups from a specified number of bins are selected and written out to a sample specific retention time library. This sample specific retention time library is used to align and correct the retention time to the spectral library with more stringent parameters in a second pass. Again, the second pass analysis is scored and validated and the highest scoring peakgroups for a specified number of bins are extracted and used as sample specific retention time libraries for a final pass. The final pass uses these sample specific retention time libraries to additionally correct mz and rentention time in an even more stringent manner. These final validated peakgroups are then used to infer peptide and proteins in a global manner to control for FDR and are finally combined in an output matrix that can be used for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) has recently emerged as an important method for the identification of blood-based biomarkers. However, the large search space required to identify novel biomarkers from the plasma proteome can introduce a high rate of false positives that compromise the accuracy of false discovery rates (FDR) using existing validation methods. We developed a generalized precursor scoring (GPS) method trained on 2.75 million precursors that can confidently control FDR while increasing the number of identified proteins in DIA-MS independent of the search space. We demonstrate how GPS can generalize to new data, increase protein identification rates, and increase the overall quantitative accuracy. Finally, we apply GPS to the identification of blood-based biomarkers and identify a panel of proteins that are highly accurate in discriminating between subphenotypes of septic acute kidney injury from undepleted plasma to showcase the utility of GPS in discovery DIA-MS proteomics.

### Keywords
Human, Machine learning, Sepsis, Proteome, Software, Dia, Aki

### Affiliations
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden
Faculty of Medicine, Lund University

### Submitter
Aaron Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Malmström
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden


