### Accession
PXD023344

### Title
Pancreatic cancer cells treated with anlotinib

### Description
Aberrant regulation of angiogenesis involves in the growth and metastasis of tumors, but angiogenesis inhibitors fail to improve overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients in previous phase III clinical trials. A comprehensive knowledge of the mechanism of angiogenesis inhibitors against pancreatic cancer is helpful for clinical purpose and for the selection of patients who might benefit from the inhibitors. In this work, multi-omics analyses (transcriptomics, proteomics and phosphoproteomics profiling) were carried to delineate the mechanism of anlotinib, a novel angiogenesis inhibitor, against pancreatic cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
PANC-1 cells were treated with anlotinib or DSMO as control for 48h. Proteins were extracted and used for subsequent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Pancreatic cancer cells treated with anlotinib or DSMO (three biological replicates for each condition) for 48h were added with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). For each sample, the lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (P0012, Beyotime). 200 μg proteins for each sample were performed protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. Briefly, proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) by repeated ultrafiltration (Sartorius, 30 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 0.1M TEAB buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 0.1M TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was then labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  For Proteomic analysis, TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by RP chromatography using the Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC. The peptide mixture was diluted with buffer A (10mM HCOONH4, 5% ACN, pH 10.0) and loaded onto a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 100 mm column. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%–7% buffer B (10mM HCOONH4, 85% ACN, pH 10.0) for 5 min, 7 – 40% buffer B during 5 – 40 min, 40% – 100% buffer B during 45 - 50 min, 100% buffer B during 50 – 65 min. The elution was monitored at 214 nm based on the UV light trace, and fractions were collected every 1 min during 5-50min. The collected fractions were combined into 10 fractions and dried down via vacuum centrifugation at 45 °C.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant regulation of angiogenesis involves in the growth and metastasis of tumors, but angiogenesis inhibitors fail to improve overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients in previous phase III clinical trials. A comprehensive knowledge of the mechanism of angiogenesis inhibitors against pancreatic cancer is helpful for clinical purpose and for the selection of patients who might benefit from the inhibitors. In this work, multi-omics analyses (transcriptomics, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics profiling) were carried out to delineate the mechanism of anlotinib, a novel angiogenesis inhibitor, against pancreatic cancer cells. The results showed that anlotinib exerted noteworthy cytotoxicity on pancreatic cancer cells. Multi-omics analyses revealed that anlotinib had a profound inhibitory effect on ribosome, and regulated cell cycle, RNA metabolism and lysosome. Based on the multi-omics results and available data deposited in public databases, an anlotinib-related gene signature was further constructed to identify a subgroup of pancreatic cancer patients who had a dismal prognosis and might be responsive to anlotinib.

### Keywords
Anlotinib, Pancreatic cancer

### Affiliations
Department of oncology of the third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University
the third xiangya hospital of central south university

### Submitter
Zewen Song

### Lab Head
Dr Zewen Song
Department of oncology of the third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University


