### Accession
PXD036557

### Title
Modelling Premature Cardiac Aging with Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells From a Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome Patient

### Description
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a rare genetic disorder that causes accelerated aging and a high risk of cardiovascular complications. However, the underlying mechanisms of cardiac complications of this syndrome are not fully understood. This study modeled HGPS using cardiomyocytes (CM) derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived from a patient with HGPS and characterized the biophysical, morphological, and molecular changes found in these CM compared to CM derived from a healthy donor. Electrophysiological recordings revealed that the HGPS CM was functional and had normal electrophysiological properties. Electron tomography showed nuclear morphology alteration and 3D reconstruction of electron tomography images indicated structural abnormalities in HGPS CM mitochondria. High-resolution respirometry with isolated CM derived from three distinct cellular differentiations suggests that HGPS-CM had a tendency of lower oxygen consumption capacity. However, there was no difference in mitochondrial content as measured by Mitotracker. Telomere length was measured using qRT-PCR, and no difference was found in either the iPSCs or the CM from HGPS when compared to the control. Proteomic analysis was carried out in a high-resolution system using Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The proteomics data show distinct group separations and protein expression differences between HGPS and control-CM, highlighting changes in ribosomal, TCA cycle, and amino acid biosynthesis, among other modifications. Our findings show that iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from a Progeria Syndrome patient have significant changes in mitochondrial morphology and protein expression, implying novel mechanisms underlying premature cardiac aging

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, protein samples from iPSCs derived cardiomyocytes were precipitated with 10% (1:4 v/v) trichloroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in acetone (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) by incubation on ice overnight followed by centrifugation for 15 minutes at 4 °C and 15,000 rpm. Samples were washed three times with cold acetone and air dried. Proteins were suspended in 15 μl of 7 M urea/2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and were quantified using a Quibit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) by incubation for 1 hour at 30 °C followed by alkylation by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. After alkylation, 50 mM NH4HCO3 (10:1 v/v; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a ratio of 50:1 (protein:trypsin) were added to the proteins, and were incubated overnight at 35 °C. After digestion, the samples were acidified using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Peptides were cleaned with an in-house prepared C-18 column and eluted in 50 μL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA followed by 50 μL of 70% ACN/0.1% TFA, dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and resuspended in 15 μL of 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Peptides were quantified using a Quibit Protein Assay Kit and suspended to a final concentration of 0.25 μg/μL in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in three technical replicates by liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Briefly, 4 μL of the diluted samples were applied to an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled online to an nESI-Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (EASY-ColumnTM, 2cm, ID100μm, 5um, 120A, C18-A1 -Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and eluted in an analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptide separations were performed using a gradient from 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) to 5-20% solution B (0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) over 120 minutes followed by 20–40% solution B over 40 minutes, followed by 40–95% solution B over 7 minutes and were maintained in 95% solution B for 13 minutes. MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode using the data-dependent automatic (DDA). Each DDA consisted of a survey scan in the m/z range of 350−2000 and a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1 × 10–6 ions. The 20 most intense ions were subjected to MS2 acquisition using HCD normalized dissociation (HCD) of previously selected ions, a resolution of 17,500 and AGC of 1 × 10–6 ions. MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a Uniprot Homo sapiens database and Sequest HT algorithm. Search parameters were for tryptic peptides, two missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine, n-terminal protein acetylation, as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation as static modifications, and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. A cutoff score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, using Percolator. Proteins were grouped according to the maximum parsimony approach. To be considered as identified, the protein had to be identified in at least in three LC-MS/MS runs per group. The identified proteins were submitted to the Gene Ontology Biological Process in the STRING online database, and biological processes and protein map interaction was carried out(Szklarczyk et al., 2017). Label free quantification was performed as previously described(Nogueira et al., 2018). Multivariate analysis was performed using principal component analysis (PCA) and univariate statistics with volcano plot considering FDR<0.1, as previously described(Roumeliotis et al., 2017), with Perseus software platform (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a rare genetic disorder that causes accelerated aging and a high risk of cardiovascular complications. However, the underlying mechanisms of cardiac complications of this syndrome are not fully understood. This study modeled HGPS using cardiomyocytes (CM) derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived from a patient with HGPS and characterized the biophysical, morphological, and molecular changes found in these CM compared to CM derived from a healthy donor. Electrophysiological recordings suggest that the HGPS-CM was functional and had normal electrophysiological properties. Electron tomography showed nuclear morphology alteration, and the 3D reconstruction of electron tomography images suggests structural abnormalities in HGPS-CM mitochondria, however, there was no difference in mitochondrial content as measured by Mitotracker. Immunofluorescence indicates nuclear morphological alteration and confirms the presence of Troponin T. Telomere length was measured using qRT-PCR, and no difference was found in the CM from HGPS when compared to the control. Proteomic analysis was carried out in a high-resolution system using Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The proteomics data show distinct group separations and protein expression differences between HGPS and control-CM, highlighting changes in ribosomal, TCA cycle, and amino acid biosynthesis, among other modifications. Our findings show that iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from a Progeria Syndrome patient have significant changes in mitochondrial morphology and protein expression, implying novel mechanisms underlying premature cardiac aging.

### Keywords
Progeria, Proteomics, Ips

### Affiliations
federal university of rio de janeiro
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Gustavo Monnerat

### Lab Head
Dr Gustavo Monnerat
federal university of rio de janeiro


