### Accession
PXD010269

### Title
Recombinant extracellular vesicles as a biological reference material

### Description
Recent years have seen a tremendous increase in the study of extracellular vesicles (EV) geared towards biological understanding, diagnostics and therapy. The interpretation of EV data however remains challenging owing to the complexity of biofluids and the technical variability that are introduced during sample preparation. To understand and mitigate these errors we present the use of traceable recombinant EV (rEV) that mimic endogenous EV both physically and biochemically. The informed use of rEV ensures standardized measurements in various research and biomedical applications. In this dataset we performed mass spectrometry-based proteomics analyses to compare the protein content of endogenous EVs (eEV) and traceable recombinant EV (rEV). The analysis showed that both types of EVs are very similar and that more than 90% of proteins are equally abundant in rEV and eEV isolated from HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Volumes of rEV and mock transfected eEV samples, each containing 5E10 particles in PBS as measured with NTA, were first reduced by vacuum drying to 1.5 mL. Amphipol A8-35 at 1 mg/mL was added to the samples, vortexed and incubated for 10 min at room temperature (pH 7). Next, the samples were reduced and alkylated with respectively 15mM TCEP and 30mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark at 37 °C. The samples were acidified with 5% formic acid to pH 3 and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000 x g. The resulting protein containing pellets were re-dissolved in 0.5 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 followed by overnight digestion with 2.5 µg trypsin at 37 °C. Following trypsin digestion, the samples were acidified to pH 3 resulting in Amphipol A8-35 precipitation. The samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature to pellet precipitated Amphipol A8-35, while peptides remain in solution. The supernatant containing the peptide material was concentrated by vacuum drying to 20 µl of which 8 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3,000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in trapping solvent  (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm trapping column (5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 m I.D. x 150 mm, 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a linear increase from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 120 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (400-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 10 most intense ions above a threshold value of 17,000 were isolated (window of 2.0 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25% after filling the trap at a target value of 50,000 for maximum 60 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 in the orbitrap analyzer. The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above 5 from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human protein entries in the Swiss-Prot database (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/, version from May 2016 containing 20,195 human protein sequences) supplemented with the sequence of the gag-EGFP fusion protein.  The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 2,324 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits and contaminant proteins were removed and LFQ protein intensities were log2 transformed. Replicate samples of both conditions were grouped and proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of rEV and eEV showing equal abundance of over 90% of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Recent years have seen an increase of extracellular vesicle (EV)&#xa0;research geared towards biological understanding, diagnostics and therapy. However, EV data interpretation remains challenging owing to complexity of biofluids and technical variation introduced during sample preparation and analysis. To understand and mitigate these limitations, we generated trackable recombinant EV (rEV) as a biological reference material. Employing complementary characterization methods, we demonstrate that rEV are stable and bear physical and biochemical traits characteristic of sample EV. Furthermore, rEV can be quantified using fluorescence-, RNA- and protein-based technologies available in routine laboratories. Spiking rEV in biofluids allows recovery efficiencies of commonly implemented EV separation methods to be identified, intra-method and inter-user variability induced by sample handling to be defined, and to normalize and improve sensitivity of EV enumerations. We anticipate that rEV will aid EV-based sample preparation and analysis, data normalization, method development and instrument calibration in various research and biomedical applications.

### Keywords
Vlps, Revs, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Radiation Oncology and Experimental Cancer Research,Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr An Hendrix
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Radiation Oncology and Experimental Cancer Research,Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


