### Accession
PXD026121

### Title
Multi-omics characterization of recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis in Standardbred horses

### Description
During an episode of acute rhabdomyolysis, a microarray study identified differential expression of calcium-regulatory, mitochondrial and metabolic genes in gluteal muscle of Standardbreds. Whether this represents expression related to acute myodegeneration or a specific molecular signature of susceptibility to recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis (RER) is currently unknown. We compared gluteal muscle histopathology, gene/protein expression and antioxidant concentrations between Standardbreds with a history of, but not currently experiencing rhabdomyolysis, and race-trained controls to derive a molecular susceptibility profile.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from snap frozen gluteus medius muscle samples (5 RER-susceptible and 5 control) in fresh radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) with protease inhibitor (cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free, Roche). Sample size was based on the number of samples that could be run on proteomic plates. Protein concentration was measured by standard BCA assay (PierceTM Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) and Coomassie-stained SDS gel. LC/MS/MS was performed at the MSU-RTFS Proteomics Core. In brief, 120 ug of protein per samples were subjected to proteolytic digestion with Trypsin/LysC enzyme mix (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:100 (enzyme:protein) by volume. The resulting peptides were labeled with TMT11-131C (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA), one sample was run in duplicate as an internal control. Tagged peptides were separated and eluted with the Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column over 125 minutes at a constant flow rate. Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) using a FlexSpray spray ion source. The top 15 ions in each survey scans (Orbi trap 120,000 resolution at m/z 200) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation with fragment spectra acquired at 45,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantitate TMT-11 plex labeled peptide and to probabilistically validate protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at an FDR ≤ 0.01 and contained at least two identified peptides. A second filter was applied to remove proteins with missing values. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 5,867 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 4,775 (81%) were included in quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Certain Standardbred racehorses develop recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis (RER-STD) for unknown reasons. We compared gluteal muscle histopathology and gene/protein expression between Standardbreds with a history of, but not currently experiencing rhabdomyolysis (<i>N</i> = 9), and race-trained controls (<i>N</i> = 7). Eight RER-STD had a few mature fibers with small internalized myonuclei, one out of nine had histologic evidence of regeneration and zero out of nine degeneration. However, RER-STD versus controls had 791/13,531 differentially expressed genes (DEG). The top three gene ontology (GO) enriched pathways for upregulated DEG (<i>N</i> = 433) were inflammation/immune response (62 GO terms), cell proliferation (31 GO terms), and hypoxia/oxidative stress (31 GO terms). Calcium ion regulation (39 GO terms), purine nucleotide metabolism (32 GO terms), and electron transport (29 GO terms) were the top three enriched GO pathways for down-regulated DEG (<i>N</i> = 305). DEG regulated RYR1 and sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium stores. Differentially expressed proteins (DEP &#x2191;<i>N</i> = 50, &#x2193;<i>N</i> = 12) involved the sarcomere (24% of DEP), electron transport (23%), metabolism (20%), inflammation (6%), cell/oxidative stress (7%), and other (17%). DEP included &#x2191;superoxide dismutase, &#x2191;catalase, and DEP/DEG included several cysteine-based antioxidants. In conclusion, gluteal muscle of RER-susceptible Standardbreds is characterized by perturbation of pathways for calcium regulation, cellular/oxidative stress, inflammation, and cellular regeneration weeks after an episode of rhabdomyolysis that could represent therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
['Tying-up', 'Muscle disease', 'Equine', 'Myopathy']

### Affiliations
['Equine Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory; Mary Anne McPhail Equine Performance Center; Large Animal Clinical Sciences; Michigan State University College of Veterinary Medicine', 'Michigan State University']

### Submitter
['Stephanie Valberg']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Equine Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory; Mary Anne McPhail Equine Performance Center; Large Animal Clinical Sciences; Michigan State University College of Veterinary Medicine', 'email': 'valbergs@msu.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Stephanie Valberg', 'id': '2251907'}]

