### Accession
PXD006377

### Title
Lack of glycogenin causes glycogen accumulation and
muscle function impairment

### Description
Glycogenin is considered essential for glycogen synthesis as it acts as a primer for the initiation of the polysaccharide. In this study, we challenge this notion and demonstrate that glycogen can be synthesized in vivo in the absence of glycogenin. Glycogenin-deficient mice (Gyg KO) accumulate high amounts of the polysaccharide in skeletal and cardiac striated muscles. This glycogen shows no covalently bound protein, thereby indicating that no protein primer is essential for glycogen synthesis. Gyg KO mice show lower resting energy expenditure and lesser resistance when subjected to endurance exercise than control animals, which can be attributed to a switch of oxidative myofibers toward glycolytic metabolism. This switch is caused by the over-accumulation of glycogen, since mice overexpressing glycogen synthase specifically in skeletal muscle show a similar metabolic alteration. These results may explain the muscular defects of GSD XV patients, who show high glycogen accumulation in striated muscles.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry Frozen skeletal muscle was rapidly homogenized in 30% KOH at 4ºC for 18 seconds at increasing polytron speed. Samples were boiled for 3 min at 100ºC and quickly cooled in ice. Glycogen was precipitated with 66 % EtOH (v/v) five times, centrifuged and resuspended in water. Samples were extracted with acetonitrile: 1 % formic acid (1:1) and sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged. The supernatant was then removed. These steps were repeated three times. Samples were resuspended in water for mass spectrometry applications and parallel glycogen measurement.Sample were added to a FASP filer unit (50-kDa cutoff).  and glycogen was digested in the filter by amyloglucosidase for 96 h at 37ºC or by amylase for 72 h at 37ºC. Eluted peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. The sample volumes were reduced to approximately 15 μL in a vacuum centrifuge and were cleaned with PolyLC C18 pipette tips. The nanoLC-MS/MS was set up as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 1% FA. Samples were loaded onto a 180 μm × 2 cm C18 Symmetry trap column (Waters) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min using a nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LCTM chromatographic system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (BEH130TM C18 75 μm × 25 cm, 1.7 μm, Waters Corp.) with a 130-min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1 to 35 % B in 90 min, from 35 to 50 % B in 15 min, and from 50 to 85 % B in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 10 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo). The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Survey MS scans were acquired in the FT with the resolution (defined at 400 m/z) set to 100,000. Up to six of the most intense ions per scan were fragmented and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 1,000,000 for the survey scan and 50,000 for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. Capillary voltage and tube lens on the LTQ-FT were tuned to 40 V and 120 V. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 1000 and activation Q was 0.250. LC-MS/MS data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT search engine and SwissProt database [Mus musculus, amyloglucosidase from Aspergillus niger and amylase (release 2014_07) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP database)]. Database searches were run against targeted and decoy databases. Search parameters included no-enzyme specificity, methionine oxidation, and 1 to 3 hexoses in serine, threonine and tyrosine as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides with a FDR < 1 % were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level. Detected peptides were validated manually.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT search engine and SwissProt database [Mus musculus, amyloglucosidase from Aspergillus niger and amylase (release 2014_07) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP database)]. Database searches were run against targeted and decoy databases. Search parameters included no-enzyme specificity, methionine oxidation, and 1 to 3 hexoses in serine, threonine and tyrosine as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides with a FDR < 1 % were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level. Detected peptides were validated manually.

### Publication Abstract
Glycogenin is considered essential for glycogen synthesis, as it acts as a primer for the initiation of the polysaccharide chain. Against expectations, glycogenin-deficient mice (Gyg KO) accumulate high amounts of glycogen in striated muscle. Furthermore, this glycogen contains no covalently bound protein, thereby demonstrating that a protein primer is not strictly necessary for the synthesis of the polysaccharide in&#xa0;vivo. Strikingly, in spite of the higher glycogen content, Gyg KO mice showed lower resting energy expenditure and less resistance than control animals when subjected to endurance exercise. These observations can be attributed to a switch of oxidative myofibers toward glycolytic metabolism. Mice overexpressing glycogen synthase in the muscle showed similar alterations, thus indicating that this switch is caused by the excess of glycogen. These results may explain the muscular defects of GSD XV patients, who lack glycogenin-1 and show high glycogen accumulation in muscle.

### Keywords
Glycogenin

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, IRB Barcelona, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, BIST
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona),  The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marta Vilaseca

### Lab Head
Dr Joan J. Guinovart
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, IRB Barcelona, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, BIST


