### Accession
PXD001490

### Title
Metaproteomics analyses of three chronically petroleum-polluted sites

### Description
Crude oil is the one of the most important natural assets of humankind, yet it is a major environmental pollutant, in particular, in marine environments. One of the largest crude oil polluted areas in the word is the semi-enclosed Mediterranean Sea, where the metabolic potential of indigenous populations towards the chronic pollution at a large scale is yet to be defined, particularly in anaerobic and micro-anaerobic marine sites. Here, we provided a novel insight into the active microbial metabolism in sediments from three environments along the coastline of Italy. Microbial proteomes exhibited prevalence in anaerobic metabolism, not related to the biodegradation directly, suggesting the strong limitation by oxygen induced by the carbon overload. They also point at previously unrecognized metabolic coupling between methane and methanol utilizers as well as sulfur reducers in marine petroleum polluted sediments.

### Sample Protocol
Sediment samples (10.0 g) were collected at a water depth of 1.0 to 78.0 m. Sediment samples were subjected to protein isolation in a two-step protocol. First, microbial cells were separated from the sediment matrix by mixing 10.0 g of sediment samples with 30.0 ml of sterilised saline solution (5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 150 mM NaCl) containing Tween 80 (final concentration, 15 mg/L). After re-suspension, the samples were kept in an ice water bath and sonicated using a water bath ultra-sonicator (60W output) for 30 min at 4ºC.The samples were then centrifuged at 100 g at 4ºC for 2 min to remove the sediment material. The resulting supernatant was then centrifuged at 13000 g for 15 min at 4ºC to pellet microbial cells. Immediately after that, the whole-cell protein extraction was performed by heating a one volume of mixture of disruption buffer and one volume of the microbial cell pellet at 80ºC for 1 h, with  2 min treatments in ultrasound bath every 10 min. The disruption buffer contained 150 mM NaCl, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM ethylenediaminetatraacetic acid (EDTA), 1M Tris HCl, 100 mM 1,4-dithio-D-threitol (DTT) and a ¼ tablet of Complete protease inhibitors (Roche Applied Science, Germany) to 1 mL of buffer. Above procedure was followed by 7 cycles of 5 s sonication, 5 min centrifugation at 15,000 x g and spin filtering for 7 hours of the supernatant using Vivaspin filters (Sartorius, Germany) with a molecular weight cut off of 10,000 Da, after 100-fold SDS dilution using 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Urea was added prior to spin filtering until 4 M final concentration to accomplish a better recovery of proteins. Quantitation of the extracted protein was carried out by means of the Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) (Bradford, 1976). The protein pellets were solubilized in Laemmli-buffer prior to 1D SDS-PAGE for removal of interfering substances and pre-fractionation. Short gels of approximately 5 cm were cut into 10 slices and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion (Jehmlich et al., 2008)). Purification de-salting was performed by ZipTipC18 columns (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), resulting in ten fractions per sample. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and mass spectrometric measurement was carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were injected with the autosampler and concentrated on a trapping column (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 180 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, Waters) with water containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rates of 15 μL/min. After 6 min, the peptides were eluted into a separation column (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 75 μm × 15 cm, 1.75 μm, Waters). Chromatography was performed with 0.1% formic acid in solvent A (100% water) and B (100% acetonitrile). The solvent B gradient was set in the first 10 min from 2 to 15% solvent B and subsequently 67 min from 15 to 40% solvent B with a final switch to 85% solvent B for additional 10 min. For an unbiased analysis, continuous scanning of eluted peptide ions was carried out between 300 and 2000 m/z, automatically switching to MS/MS CID mode on ions exceeding an intensity of 2000, and ten MS/MS events per survey scan. For MS/MS CID measurements, a dynamic precursor exclusion of 120 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
To increase protein identification rates and to decrease the false negative rate, the metagenomic sequences containing a total number of 54,323 unique/non-redundant sequence entries, were complemented by a 2-step database approach (Jaqtap et al., 2013) as described elsewhere (Hansen et al., 2014). The final database was used for protein identification in MaxQuant (v. 1.5.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Oxidation of methionine was defined as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. The three different sample sets were divided into different parameter groups and matching was disabled. All remaining standard settings were kept. These included a peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%, at least 1 peptide (Gupta and Pevner, 2009; Méndez-García et al., 2014; Yakimov et al., 2014), a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Note that the database used for protein identification contains sequence entries that have been deposited in public databases: i) BioProject Ds PRJNA222659 [for MGS-HAV], PRJNA222657 [for MGS-MES], and PRJNA222658 [for MGS-PRI]at NCBI with the IDs PRJNA222659 [for MGS-HAV], PRJNA222657 [for MGS-MES], and PRJNA222658 [for MGS-PRI]; ii) AZIB00000000 [for MGS-HAV], AZIC00000000 [for MGS-MES], and AZIF00000000 [for MGS-PRI] at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank.

### Publication Abstract
Crude oil is one of the most important natural assets for humankind, yet it is a major environmental pollutant, notably in marine environments. One of the largest crude oil polluted areas in the word is the semi-enclosed Mediterranean Sea, in which the metabolic potential of indigenous microbial populations towards the large-scale chronic pollution is yet to be defined, particularly in anaerobic and micro-aerophilic sites. Here, we provide an insight into the microbial metabolism in sediments from three chronically polluted marine sites along the coastline of Italy: the Priolo oil terminal/refinery site (near Siracuse, Sicily), harbour of Messina (Sicily) and shipwreck of MT Haven (near Genoa). Using shotgun metaproteomics and community metabolomics approaches, the presence of 651 microbial proteins and 4776 metabolite mass features have been detected in these three environments, revealing a high metabolic heterogeneity between the investigated sites. The proteomes displayed the prevalence of anaerobic metabolisms that were not directly related with petroleum biodegradation, indicating that in the absence of oxygen, biodegradation is significantly suppressed. This suppression was also suggested by examining the metabolome patterns. The proteome analysis further highlighted the metabolic coupling between methylotrophs and sulphate reducers in oxygen-depleted petroleum-polluted sediments.

### Keywords
Pollution, Marine, Sediment, Hydrocarbon, Microbiology, Metaproteomics, Crude oil

### Affiliations
Head of Department for Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Germany
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Head of Department for Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Germany


