### Accession
PXD033683

### Title
Short-term blockade of pro-inflammatory alarmin S100A9 fa-vorably modulates left ventricle proteome and related signaling pathways involved in post – myocardial infarction recovery

### Description
Prognosis after myocardial infarction (MI) varies greatly depending of the extent of damaged area and the management of biological processes during recovery. Reportedly, the inhibition of the pro-inflammatory S100A9 reduces myocardial damage after MI. We hypothesize that S100A9 blockade induces changes of major signaling pathways implicated in post-MI healing. The S100A9 blocker (ABR-23890) was given for 3 days after coronary ligation. At 3- and 7-days post-MI, ventricle samples were analyzed versus control and sham-operated mice. Blockade of S100A9 modulated the expressed proteins involved in five biological processes: leu-kocyte cell-cell adhesion, regulation of muscle cell apoptotic process, regulation of intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway, sarcomere organization and cardiac muscle hypertrophy. The blocker induced regulation of 36 proteins interacting with or targeted by the cellular tumor antigen p53, prevented myocardial compensatory hypertrophy, and reduced cardiac markers of post-ischemic stress. The blockade effect was prominent at day 7 post-MI when the quantitative features of ventricle proteome were closer to controls.

### Sample Protocol
At 3 and 7 days after MI, the hearts of unoperated control, Sham, MI and MI+ABR mice were harvested and washed with PBS containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. Next, the cardiac muscle below the ligature point of the left ventricle (LV) was removed, rapidly frozen with liquid nitrogen and preserved at –80°C. LV tissue was homogenized in TRIzol Reagent using a Polytron PT 1300 D homogenizer, incubated with chloroform and centrifuged. The resulting upper aqueous phase was used for RNA precipitation and the lower organic phase was used for protein precipitation. The protein pellet was solubilized in a lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 1% sodium deoxycholate (DOC), 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and a protease inhibitor cocktail. 50µg of proteins from each sample were purified by acetone precipitation, reduced with DTT (20mM) in a buffer containing 8M urea, 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) and 0.1mM EDTA, and alkylated using 80mM iodoacetamide in 0.1M Tris-HCl and 0.1mM EDTA buffer, in the dark, under agitation. Samples were proteolyzed overnight at 37⁰C using Trypsin Gold (1:20 w/w), and formic acid was added to the resulting peptide mixtures to pH 2.5, in order to inhibit the enzymatic activity and promote DOC precipitation. The resulted peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 columns and concentrated with the Concentrator plus system.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software . The protein inference was performed using the Uni-ProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse reference protein database using the following parameters. En-zyme: trypsin; maximum miss cleavages: 2; fixed modification: cysteine carbamidometh-ylation; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. The target protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to < 0.05. Label-free relative protein quantitation on the precursor level was performed using the same software platform, which aligns chromatograms, extracts ion peaks and integrates them to compare peptide/protein spectral abundance along the different datasets. We enabled 30% of replicate features and the ANOVA hypothesis test to determine the statistical signifi-cance associated with the protein ratio calculation. The obtained P-value was adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for the FDR. Normalization was performed using the total peptide amount on controls average.

### Publication Abstract
Prognosis after myocardial infarction (MI) varies greatly depending on the extent of damaged area and the management of biological processes during recovery. Reportedly, the inhibition of the pro-inflammatory S100A9 reduces myocardial damage after MI. We hypothesize that a S100A9 blockade induces changes of major signaling pathways implicated in post-MI healing. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics and gene analyses of infarcted mice left ventricle were performed. The S100A9 blocker (ABR-23890) was given for 3 days after coronary ligation. At 3 and 7 days post-MI, ventricle samples were analyzed versus control and Sham-operated mice. Blockade of S100A9 modulated the expressed proteins involved in five biological processes: <i>leukocyte cell-cell adhesion</i>, <i>regulation of the muscle cell apoptotic process</i>, <i>regulation of the intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway</i>, <i>sarcomere organization</i> and <i>cardiac muscle hypertrophy</i>. The blocker induced regulation of 36 proteins interacting with or targeted by the cellular tumor antigen p53, prevented myocardial compensatory hypertrophy, and reduced cardiac markers of post-ischemic stress. The blockade effect was prominent at day 7 post-MI when the quantitative features of the ventricle proteome were closer to controls. Blockade of S100A9 restores key biological processes altered post-MI. These processes could be valuable new pharmacological targets for the treatment of ischemic heart. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033683.

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Cardiac repair, S100a9, Hypertrophy, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology


