### Accession
PXD038824

### Title
A simple non-invasive method to collect soft tick saliva reveals differences in Ornithodoros moubata saliva composition between ticks infected and uninfected with Borrelia duttonii spirochetes

### Description
We developed a new simple method to assess the composition of proteins in the Ornithodoros moubata saliva. To collect naturally expectorated saliva from the ticks, we employed an artificial membrane feeding technique using a simple, chemically defined diet and submitted the collected native saliva samples for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. These experiments were conducted with groups of uninfected ticks as well as with B. duttonii infected ticks. The ticks exhibited a fair feeding response to the tested diet, engorgement rates reaching between 60-100% of ticks per feeding chamber. LC-MS analysis identified a total of 17 and 15 proteins in saliva samples from the uninfected and infected ticks respectively. Importantly, the analysis was sensitive enough to detect up to 9 different proteins in the saliva containing diet upon which as few as 6 nymphal ticks fed. Some of the proteins identified are well known for their immunomodulatory activity in a vertebrate host, whereas others were structural or “housekeeping” proteins and their finding in the naturally expectorated saliva confirms that they can be secreted and having some roles at the tick-host interface. Most notably, some of the proteins that have long been suspected as important for vector-pathogen interactions of Borrelia spirochetes were detected only in the samples from infected ticks, suggesting that their expression was altered by the persistent colonization of the tick’s salivary glands by spirochetes. The simple method described herein is an important addition to the toolbox available to study the vector-host-pathogen interactions in the rapidly feeding soft ticks.

### Sample Protocol
Ticks used in experiments were O. moubata nymphal stages 2-4 and were starved for at least 2 months before the experiments. The ticks are maintained at a temperature of 28 °C and a relative humidity between 80-85% with a 14/10 light/dark period. Infected ticks were generated in the course of a different study by feeding naive N1 stage ticks on C3H mice, intraperitoneally infected with the 1120K3 strain of B. duttonii, at peak spirochaetemia, a procedure which in our experience results in 100% infection rates of engorged ticks, as confirmed by injections of homogenates prepared from molted individual ticks into susceptible animals. Ticks infected in this manner were kept under standard conditions in the laboratory colony (25±3°C; relative humidity 80-85%; 14:10 light: dark cycle) before being used in the experiments. To artificially feed the ticks we used chambers with a piece of stretched Parafilm to form a membrane at the feeding unit’s bottom. To stimulate tick feeding we used a 0.01M solution of reduced glutathione (GSH) in 0.15M NaCl containing 1 mg/ml glucose (pH 7). The solution was pipetted to cover a bottom of a well inside a sterile 6-Well Plate; each well accommodated a single feeding unit. The plate was rested on support inside a water bath warmed to 38° C. Ticks were placed inside in groups of 2-3 individuals/unit and allowed to feed to repletion for 1-1.5 hours, after which time they were retrieved and a new group was induced to feed on the same membrane. In case the integrity of the Parafilm was compromised, the membrane was carefully replaced with an extra effort being made to prevent spillage of any liquid present inside the chamber (i.e. excreted coxal fluid) from getting into the well with the GSH solution. After several feeding sessions were complete, the leftovers of the solution were collected and stored at 4°C before processing. Tick saliva samples were incubated in five fold volume excess of cold aceton supplemented with 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol at -20 °C overnight. Next day, supernatant was removed by centrifugation (10 000 g, 20 min, 4 °C). Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 20 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 4 M urea by shaking at room temperature for 20 min. Proteins were then diluted by adding 140 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the solution was shaked for 40 min. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 40 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for 20 min. The reaction was quenched by 55 mM dithiothreitol. The protein mixture was diluted to a final volume of 100 µl by adding 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then samples were digested with trypsin at the ratio 50:1 at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was terminated by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. The obtained peptide mixtures were purified using C18 Empore™ disks (3M, MN, USA). Peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The analysis was carried out on an UltiMate 3000 RLSCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled on-line to mass spectrometer timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were injected onto an Acclaim TM PepMap TM 100 C18 trapping column (300 µm i.d., 5 mm length, particle size 5 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 µl injection volume and a 2.5 µl/min flow rate for 2 min. The peptides were eluted from trapping column onto an Acclaim TM PepMap TM 100 C18 trapping column (75 µm i.d., 150 mm length, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by a 48 min long linear gradient of 5-35 % ACN/0.1 % formic acid at a constant rate of 0.3 µl/min. Column oven temperature was set at 35 °C. The MS analysis was operated in PASEF scan mode with positive polarity. Electrospray ionization was performed using a CaptiveSpray (Bruker Daltonics) with capillary voltage at 1500 V, dry gas at 3 l/min and dry temperature at 180 °C. Ions were accumulated for 100 ms and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were acquired per topN acquisition cycle. An ion mobility range (1/K0) was set at 0.6-1.6 Vs/cm 2 . Mass spectra were collected over a m/z range of 100 to 1700. A polygon filtering was applied to exclude the low m/z of singly charged ions. A target intensity was set at 20 000 to repeatedly select precursor for PASEF MS/MS repetitions. The precursors that reached the target intensity were than excluded for 0.4 min. Collision energies were changed from 20 to 59 eV in 5 steps of equal width between 0.6 and 1.6 Vs/cm 2 of 1/K0 values.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14). Database of Ornithodoros moubata downloaded from Uniprot (28. 10. 2020) and contaminant database included in MaxQant software were used to identify proteins. Default parameters for TIMS-DDA search type and Bruker TIMS instrument were applied. Trypsin/P was set as enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages in specific digestion mode; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications; the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 and 10 ppm in first and main peptide search, respectively; the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set at 40 ppm; peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was done using the algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with minimum ratio count set at 2. Protein data tables obtained from MaxQuant were analysed using Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Protein hits to the reverse database, contaminants and protein only identified with modified peptides were excluded from further analysis. Values of LFQ intensity were transformed by log base 2. Proteins with the number of identified razor peptides less than 2 along with the score lower or equal to 40 were filtered out of the data.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> We developed a new simple method to assess the composition of proteinaceous components in the saliva of <i>Ornithodoros moubata</i>, the main vehicle for pathogen transmission and a likely source of bioactive molecules acting at the tick-vertebrate host interface. To collect naturally expectorated saliva from the ticks we employed an artificial membrane feeding technique using a simple, chemically defined diet containing phagostimulants and submitted native saliva samples collected in this way for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. These experiments were conducted with groups of uninfected ticks as well as with <i>O. moubata</i> infected with <i>B. duttonii</i>. The ticks exhibited a fair feeding response to the tested diet with engorgement rates reaching as high as 60-100% of ticks per feeding chamber. The LC-MS analysis identified a total of 17 and 15 proteins in saliva samples from the uninfected and infected <i>O. moubata</i> nymphs, respectively. Importantly, the analysis was sensitive enough to detect up to 9 different proteins in the samples of saliva containing diet upon which as few as 6 nymphal ticks fed during the experiments. Some of the proteins recognized in the analysis are well known for their immunomodulatory activity in a vertebrate host, whereas others are primarily thought of as structural or "housekeeping" proteins and their finding in the naturally expectorated tick saliva confirms that they can be secreted and might serve some functions at the tick-host interface. Most notably, some of the proteins that have long been suspected for their importance in the vector-pathogen interactions of <i>Borrelia</i> spirochetes were detected only in the samples from infected ticks, suggesting that their expression was altered by the persistent colonization of the tick's salivary glands by spirochetes. The simple method described herein is an important addition to the toolbox available to study the vector-host-pathogen interactions in the rapidly feeding soft ticks.

### Keywords
Spirochetes, Artificial membrane feeding, Ornithodoros moubata, Lc-ms analysis, Borrelia duttonii, Tick, Infected, Relapsing fever borrelia, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice
Faculty of Science
Branisovska 1760
Ceske Budejovice
Institute of Parasitology, Centre for Biology, Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Filip Dyčka

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan O. Rego
Institute of Parasitology, Centre for Biology, Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic


