### Accession
PXD002843

### Title
Cellvibrio japonicus chitin secretome

### Description
Study of the secretome of Cellvibrio japonicus after growth on different chitins. Utilization of a novel plate method to enrich truly secreted proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Growth on agar plates, trypsination directly after freezing, thawing and crushing of agar. Zip-tip and LC-MS analysis (QExactive).

### Data Protocol
Quantification using MaxQuant and bioinformatics using Perseus and servers for annotation of subcellular location.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of the secretomes of microbes grown on insoluble substrates are important for the discovery of novel proteins involved in biomass conversion. However, data in literature and this study indicate that secretome samples tend to be contaminated with cytoplasmic proteins. We have examined the secretome of the Gram-negative soil bacterium Cellvibrio japonicus using a simple plate-based culturing technique that yields samples with high fractions (60-75%) of proteins that are predicted to be secreted. By combining this approach with label-free quantification using the MaxLFQ algorithm, we have mapped and quantified proteins secreted by C. japonicus during growth on &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-chitin. Hierarchical clustering of the detected protein quantities revealed groups of up-regulated proteins that include all five putative C. japonicus chitinases as well as a chitin-specific lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase (CjLPMO10A). A small set of secreted proteins were co-regulated with known chitin-specific enzymes, including several with unknown catalytic functions. These proteins provide interesting targets for further studies aimed at unraveling the enzymatic machineries used by C. japonicus for recalcitrant polysaccharide degradation. Studies of chitin degradation indicated that C. japonicus indeed produces an efficient chitinolytic enzyme cocktail. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD002843 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002843).

### Keywords
Chitin, Secretome

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Leader of the Protein Engineering and Proteomics group (PEP) at Norwegian University of Life  Sciences

### Submitter
Tina Rise Tuveng

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent G. H. Eijsink
Leader of the Protein Engineering and Proteomics group (PEP) at Norwegian University of Life  Sciences


