### Accession
PXD015512

### Title
Different osteogenic differentiation behavior of canine mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow and dental pulp: the proteomics profile

### Description
Although various sources of cMSCs show similar characteristics, they are different in osteogenic potential due to their original cellular sources. Thus, this study was designed to globally explore and analyze the in vitro differentiation potential and behavior of canine bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (cBM-MSCs) and canine dental pulp stem cells (cDPSCs) toward osteogenic lineage. Global study of an in vitro osteogenic differentiation potential of the isolated cells was performed using proteomic-based analysis through mass spectrometry with dimethyl labelling method at day 7 and 14 post-induction, comparing with undifferentiated cells. The obtained results could be used as a comprehensive data and principal knowledge of the osteogenic differentiation potential of cBM-MSCs and cDPSCs in vitro and the trend of MSC-based tissue engineering for osteogenic regenerative therapy, concentrating on cMSCs application.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis of globally expressed proteins form cBM-MSCs and cDPSCs at day 0, 7, and 14 post-induction was performed. Cells form 10 subjects (5 for cBM-MSCs and 5 for cDPSCs) at 3 different timepoints (day 0, 7, and 14) were used in this regard, 30 protein samples in total. Total proteins of the cells were extracted, in-solution digested, in-solution dimethyl labelled, fractionated, and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis of globally expressed proteins form cBM-MSCs and cDPSCs at day 0, 7, and 14 post-induction was globally cross compared using bioinformatics platform. The value transformation underlying down-regulation and up-regulation protein expression after osteogenic induction at day 7 and day 14 by normalizing with control group (day 0). Bioinformatics analyses were represented as total protein expression number, volcano plot, Wayne diagram, protein expression clustering, and global pathway analysis according to DAVID and Reactome pathway database. The Cluster map and Volcano plot were performed by Instant Clue Software. The analysis results were shown as acknowledges of cBM-MSCs and cDPSCs during osteogenic differentiation.

### Publication Abstract
Utilization of canine mesenchymal stem cells (cMSCs) for regenerating incorrigible bone diseases has been introduced. However, cMSCs harvested from different sources showed distinct osteogenicity. To clarify this, comparative proteomics-based systems biology analysis was used to analyze osteogenic differentiation behavior by cMSCs harvested from bone marrow and dental pulp. The results illustrated that canine dental pulp stem cells (cDPSCs) contained superior osteogenicity comparing with canine bone marrow-derived MSCs (cBM-MSCs) regarding alkaline phosphatase activity, matrix mineralization, and osteogenic marker expression. Global analyses by proteomics platform showed distinct protein clustering and expression pattern upon an in vitro osteogenic induction between them. Database annotation using Reactome and DAVID revealed contrast and unique expression profile of osteogenesis-related proteins, particularly on signaling pathways, cellular components and processes, and cellular metabolisms. Functional assay and hierarchical clustering for tracking protein dynamic change confirmed that cBM-MSCs required the presences of Wnt, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, and bone-morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling, while cDPSCs mainly relied on BMP signaling presentation during osteogenic differentiation in vitro. Therefore, these findings illustrated the comprehensive data regarding an in vitro osteogenic differentiation behavior by cBM-MSCs and cDPSCs which is crucial for further mechanism study and the establishment of cMSC-based bone tissue engineering (BTE) for veterinary practice.

### Keywords
Systems biology, Canine bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (cbm-mscs), Osteogenic differentiation, Canine dental pulp stem cells (cdpscs)

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Chenphop Sawangmake
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


