### Accession
PXD006849

### Title
ZMYND10 functions in a chaperone-relay during axonemal dynein assembly

### Description
Molecular chaperones are abundant cellular proteins that promote the folding, function and macromolecular assembly of a diverse set of substrate proteins, also known as clients. Regulation of chaperone specificity and function involves association with a growing set of distinct cofactors, or cochaperones. How these client, co-chaperone and chaperone interactions in vivo underpin the proteostasis network during development and disease remains unclear. We have combined mouse genetics, imaging and quantitative proteomics to systematically characterize a chaperone-cochaperone-client interaction network in mammalian motile ciliated cells. We uncover ZMYND10 to act as a specificity factor for the immunophilin cochaperone FKBP8 and HSP90 chaperone for the biosynthesis of the heavy chains of axonemal dyneins required for cilial beat. We establish a series of protein-protein interactions during cytoplasmic pre-assembly of macromolecular dynein motors, some of which are directly ZMYND10-dependent. In the absence of ZMYND10, failure of these interactions results in misfolded and unstable dynein heavy chains, which together with non-functional folding intermediates, are targeted for degradation. We propose that the motile ciliopathy Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD), such as seen in Zmynd10 mutants, be reconsidered as a disorder of protein folding, which opens new avenues for development of therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted off the beads by incubating at 27°C for 30 minutes in buffer containing 2M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 5 μg/mL Trypsin. Samples were centrifuged and supernatants collected. Bead pellets were washed twice and all supernatants were pooled and allowed to digest further overnight at room temperature. Next day, iodoacetamide was added to the samples to inhibit disulphide bond formation and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes followed by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop tryptic digestion. Digested peptide mixtures were cleaned by de-salting and pre-fractionated manually using C18 pipette stage-tips filled with 3M empore disc activated with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and then washed once with 0.1% TFA. Peptide mixtures were passed manually along to the column with a syringe to concentrate and purify the analytes. Peptides were subsequently eluted twice in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and both eluates were combined. Samples were concentrated and resuspended in 0.1% TFA followed by chromatographic separation on a reprosil column along a 3-32% acetonitrile gradient. The LC setup was attached to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer and ion mass spectra were obtained following HPLC during a tandem MS run. Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software and label-free quantification intensity values were obtained for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software and label-free quantification intensity values were obtained for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary ciliary dyskinesia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


