### Accession
PXD029704

### Title
Intricate coupling between the transactivation and basic-leucine zipper domains governs the CK2-dependent phosphorylation of ATF4

### Description
Most transcription factors possess at least one long intrinsically disordered transactivation domain that binds to a variety of co-activators and co-repressors and plays a key role in modulating the transcriptional activity. Despite the crucial importance of these mechanisms, the structural and functional basis of transactivation domain in yet poorly understood. Here, we focused on ATF4/CREB-2, an essential transcription factor for cellular stress adaptation. We found that the N-terminal region of the transactivation domain is involved in transient long-range interactions with the basic-leucine zipper domain. In vitro phosphorylation assays with the protein kinase CK2 show that the presence of the basic-leucine zipper domain is required for optimal phosphorylation of the transactivation domain. This study uncovers the intricate coupling existing between the transactivation and basic-leucine zipper domains of ATF4 and highlights its potential  functional relevance.

### Sample Protocol
ATF4 was phosphorylated in kinase buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT). The phosphorylation reactions were started by adding 2.5 mM ATP and 25,000 units of CK2 (NEB) per mg of protein sample. The phosphorylation reactions were performed for 3 hours at 25 °C. The reactions were quenched by buffer exchange (i.e., three rounds of centrifugal concentration (3K MWCO) with intervening buffer dilutions) to remove ATP and MgCl2. Phosphorylated samples were alkylated with 15 mM of iodoacetamide at 25 ̊C for 30 minutes before digesting with chymotrypsin at 25 ̊C for 20 hours followed by trypsin at 37 ̊C for 10 hours. Digested peptides were injected into EASY nLC-1200 coupled to a Nanospray FlexIon source for in-line analysis with a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with an HCD fragmentation cell (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with Mascot database containing the GST-tagged ATF4 sequence. Peptides were identified with Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.4 using the following search parameters: false discovery rate (FDR) 1% , precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance +/- 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), and phosphorylation (ST) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification.

### Publication Abstract
Most transcription factors possess at least one long intrinsically disordered transactivation domain that binds to a variety of coactivators and corepressors and plays a key role in modulating the transcriptional activity. Despite the crucial importance of these domains, the structural and functional basis of transactivation remains poorly understood. Here, we focused on activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)/cAMP response element-binding protein-2, an essential transcription factor for cellular stress adaptation. Bioinformatic sequence analysis of the ATF4 transactivation domain sequence revealed that the first 125 amino acids have noticeably less propensity for structural disorder than the rest of the domain. Using solution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy complemented by a range of biophysical methods, we found that the isolated transactivation domain is predominantly yet not fully disordered in solution. We also observed that a short motif at the N-terminus of the transactivation domain has a high helical propensity. Importantly, we found that the N-terminal region of the transactivation domain is involved in transient long-range interactions with the basic-leucine zipper domain involved in DNA binding. Finally, in&#xa0;vitro phosphorylation assays with the casein kinase 2 show that the presence of the basic-leucine zipper domain is required for phosphorylation of the transactivation domain. This study uncovers the intricate coupling existing between the transactivation and basic-leucine zipper domains of ATF4, highlighting its potential regulatory significance.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Intrinsically disordered domain, Lc-msms, Atf4

### Affiliations
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology Iowa State University Ames, Iowa, USA
Iowa State University

### Submitter
Steven Siang

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Roche
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology Iowa State University Ames, Iowa, USA


