### Accession
PXD033851

### Title
phosphoproteome of hippocampus after focal cerebral ischemia 1.5 h and reperfusion 24 h in mice

### Description
We obtained the profiles of neuronal phosphoproteome after cerebral ischemia and reperfusion by isolating mice hippocampus. Hippocampus combined from either nine sham or nine focal cerebral ischemia 1.5 h and reperfusion 24 h (IR) mice were lysed, digested, labeled with different TMT tags, then pooled and analyzed by LC/LC-MS/MS. In total, we quantified 7,865 phosphopeptides,179 phosphorylation sites of 129 proteins were upregulated and 843 phosphorylation sites of 494 proteins were downregulated in hippocampus during cerebral ischemia 2 h compare with sham operation.

### Sample Protocol
Focal Cerebral Ischemia Model Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by extracranial intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Briefly, mice (aged 8 weeks, 22-26 g of body weight) were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane and maintained with 1% isoflurane (R511-22, RWD Life Science) in an oxygen/air mixture by using a gas anesthesia mask (R580S, RWD Life Science). Under the operating stereo microscope, the left common carotid artery (CCA), the external carotid artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery (ICA) were sequentially exposed. The ECA was ligated with 5–0 silk suture, and a 2 cm length of silicon-rubber-coated monofilament (MSMC24B104PK50, RWD Life Science) was inserted from the CCA through the internal carotid artery (ICA) up to the bifurcation of left middle cerebral artery (MCA) and anterior cerebral artery to block the circulation in the left MCA territory. After 90min of occlusion, blood flow was restored (reperfusion) by the withdrawal of the inserted filament. The sham-operated mice were the same experimental procedure except for filament insertion. Animals were sacrificed at 24h after surgery.  Protein Extraction The hippocampus of ipsilateral cerebral hemispheres obtained immediately After cerebral ischemia reperfusion. Briefly washed with PBS, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Frozen sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then add four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were to the cell powder in a 5ml tube, followed by sonication three times on ice with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentrations less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion.

### Data Protocol
TMT/iTRAQ Labeling  After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Affinity Enrichment To enrich phosphorylation-modified peptides, peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microsphere suspensions with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. The IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acidto removed nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. Then, the elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was used to eluted the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC–MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and followed by loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to UPLC. The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied, and the m/z scan range from 350 to 1800 was used for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure was alternated with one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. And fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Three biological replicates of sham and cerebral ischemia reperfusion showed that the median value of RSD <0.05 which was calculated by three experiments standard deviations demonstrated the reliability of quantification measurement between biological replicates were reliability.  Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were analyzed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissPort Mouse (16964 entries) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; hippocampus; cerebral ischemia and reperfusion

### Affiliations
College of Biology, Hunan University, China
College of Biology, Hunan University

### Submitter
Wei Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Haijun Tu
College of Biology, Hunan University, China


