### Accession
PXD004687

### Title
Proteomic Quantification of Phosphorylation in Mouse HT22 Cells

### Description
The aim of this project is to use an integrated approach involving SILAC labeling, HPLC fractionation, Phospho(STY) antibody affinity enrichment, LC-MS/MS to quantify the dynamic changes of the whole phosphorylome in the control and experimental samples.

### Sample Protocol
3.1.3. Protein Extraction The harvested “heavy” , “medial” and “light” labeled cells were lysed with 2 × NETN buffer (200 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris-Cl, 2mM EDTA, 1.0 % NP-40, 1.0 % Cocktail, pH 7.2) supplemented with 0.5% Triton X-100 on ice for 30 min, respectively. The supernatants were saved after centrifuge at 20,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. After concentration measurement, equal amounts of crude proteins in supernatant labeled “heavy” or “light” were mixed and the crude proteins were precipitated by adding TCA with 15% final concentration (v/v) (soluble fraction). After washing twice with -20 oC acetone, the proteins pellets were dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) for trypsin digestion. 3.1.4. Trypsin Digestion Trypsin (Promega) was added into protein solution with ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:50 (w/w) for digestion at 37 °C for 16 hours. DTT was then added to final concentration 5 mM followed by incubation at 37 °C for 1 h. After that, IAA was added to alkylate proteins with final concentration 15 mM followed by incubation at room temperature in dark for 30 min. The alkylation reaction was quenched by 30 mM of cysteine (final concentration) at room temperature for another 30 min. Trypsin was then added again with ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:100 (w/w) for digestion at 37 oC for 4 hours to complete the digestion cycle. 3.1.5. HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt_mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.5.  Annotation Methods GO Annotation The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. More specifically, the project aims to:  1. Maintain and develop its controlled vocabulary of gene and gene product attributes; 2. Annotate genes and gene products, and assimilate and disseminate annotation data; 3. Provide tools for easy access to all aspects of the data provided by the project. Domain Annotation A protein domain is a conserved part of a given protein sequence and structure that can evolve, function and exist independently of the rest of the protein chain. Each domain forms a compact three-dimensional structure and often can be independently stable and folded.

### Publication Abstract
Propofol and dexmedetomidine are both commonly used anaesthetics. Although they employ two different mechanisms to induce anaesthesia, both compounds influence the hippocampus and the HT22 cell line. HT22 cells are broadly used in neurobiological research. In this study, we assessed the effects of propofol and dexmedetomidine on signalling in HT22 cells. Using the SILAC (stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture) labelling technique, IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry) analysis, we investigated the quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome in HT22 cells treated with propofol or dexmedetomidine. In total, 4,527 proteins and 6,824 phosphosites were quantified in cells treated with these two anaesthetics. With the assistance of intensive bioinformatics, the propofol and dexmedetomidine treatments were shown to induce distinct proteome and phosphoproteome profiles in HT22 cells. Consistent with our bioinformatics analysis, dexmedetomidine had a smaller effect than propofol on cell survival. These findings deepen our understanding of drug-induced anaesthesia.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Mouse ht22 cells, Silac

### Affiliations
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine

### Submitter
zhang hong gang

### Lab Head
Dr hong gang zhang
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine


