### Accession
PXD033042

### Title
p166 links membrane and intramitochondrial modules of the trypanosomal tripartite attachment complex

### Description
p166 is a central component of a protein complex that is essential for mitochondrial genome segregation in Trypanosoma brucei. The last 34 aa (the C-tail) of p166 are absolutely essential for its function of p166. The prupose of this experiment is to find even putative binding partners interacting with p166. For this purpose, two CoIP experiments with a truncated soluble version of p166 were performed. One uses p166 with an intact C-tail whereas the C-tail is removed in a second experiment. Differences between the two CoIPs indicate potential interactors of the C-tail.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from mini-p166-HA (n = 4) and mini-p166-ΔC-HA (n = 4) SILAC co-immunprecipitations were loaded onto SDS gels. Electrophoresis was performed until the proteins had migrated into the gel for approximately 1 cm. Protein-containing parts of the gel, visualised using colloidal Coomassie Blue, were excised, followed by reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues and tryptic in-gel digestion as described before [1]. Peptides were bound to in-house prepared 3-layer C18 stage tips, washed with 0.5% acetic acid and released with 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% acetic acid.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded and concentrated on a C18 pre-column (μPAC™ trapping column, PharmaFluidics). For peptide separation, a C18 endcapped analytical column (50 cm μPAC™ column, PharmaFluidics) and a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 30% ACN/50% methanol/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) were used. Peptides were loaded and concentrated for 6 min at 5% solvent B, and the gradient for peptide elution was 5-22% B in 100 min, 22-42% B in 50 min, and 5 min at 80 % B. MS parameters were as follows: m/z 375 - 1700 for MS1 scans; 70,000 MS1 resolution (at m/z 200); 3e6 MS1 automatic gain control (AGC) target; 60 ms MS1 maximum injection time; 28% normalised collision energy; 1e5 MS2 AGC; 120 ms MS2 maximum ion injection time; 3 m/z isolation window; 35,000 MS2 resolution; 45 sec dynamic exclusion time; and +1 charged ions rejected.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and SILAC ratios were determined using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 2.0.2). Database search was performed using the proteome of T. brucei TREU927 downloaded from the TriTrypDB (version 8.1, 11,067 entries, www.tritrypdb.org), the sequence of the respective min-p166-HA variant, mitochondrial proteins and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Arg10 and Lys8 were specified as heavy SILAC labels, theoretical peptides were generated based on the sequence specificity of trypsin and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the MaxQuant first search, to 4.5 ppm for the MaxQuant main search and to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications. The options ‘requantify’ and ‘match between runs’ were enabled. SILAC ratios (mini-p166-HA/control) were calculated based on at least two unique or razor peptides. The MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file was parsed using Python with the pandas module. Protein groups for which ratios were calculated in less than 3 replicates were removed. Proteins significantly enriched with the respective mini-p166 construct compared to the control were identified using multivariable multiple regression (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html) [4] with Benjamini-Hochberg correction of p-values. –log10 of the P values adjusted for multiple testing and log10 of the SILAC ratios were calculated for each protein group and visualised as volcano plots using matplotlib.

### Publication Abstract
The protist parasite Trypanosoma brucei has a single mitochondrion with a single unit genome termed kinetoplast DNA (kDNA). Faithfull segregation of replicated kDNA is ensured by a complicated structure termed tripartite attachment complex (TAC). The TAC physically links the basal body of the flagellum with the kDNA spanning the two mitochondrial membranes. Here, we characterized p166 as the only known TAC subunit that is anchored in the inner membrane. Its C-terminal transmembrane domain separates the protein into a large N-terminal region that interacts with the kDNA-localized TAC102 and a 34 aa C-tail that binds to the intermembrane space-exposed loop of the integral outer membrane protein TAC60. Whereas the outer membrane region requires four essential subunits for proper TAC function, the inner membrane integral p166, via its interaction with TAC60 and TAC102, would theoretically suffice to bridge the distance between the OM and the kDNA. Surprisingly, non-functional p166 lacking the C-terminal 34 aa still localizes to the TAC region. This suggests the existence of additional TAC-associated proteins which loosely bind to non-functional p166 lacking the C-terminal 34 aa and keep it at the TAC. However, binding of full length p166 to these TAC-associated proteins alone would not be sufficient to withstand the mechanical load imposed by the segregating basal bodies.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Silac, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
University of Wuerzburg
Chair of Biochemistry II
Am Hubland
97074 Würzburg

### Submitter
Julian Bender

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany


### SDRF
- organism: Trypanosoma brucei
- organism part: Cell Line
- disease: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- label: SILAC light , SILAC heavy
- label: SILAC heavy, SILAC light 
- instrument: Q Exactive Plus
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation

