### Accession
PXD044382

### Title
Non-canonical function of histone methyltransferase G9a in the translational regulation of chronic inflammation

### Description
We report a novel translation-regulatory function of G9a, a histone methyltransferase and well-understood transcriptional repressor, in promoting hyperinflammation and lymphopenia; two hallmarks of endotoxin tolerance (ET)-associated chronic inflammatory complications. Using multiple approaches, we demonstrate that G9a interacts with multiple translation regulators during ET, particularly the N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA methyltransferase METTL3, to co-upregulate expression of certain m6A-modified mRNAs that encode immune-checkpoint and anti-inflammatory proteins. Mechanistically, G9a promotes m6A methyltransferase activity of METTL3 at translational/post-translational level by regulating its expression, its methylation, and its cytosolic localization during ET. Additionally, from a broader view extended from the G9a-METTL3-m6A translation regulatory axis, our translatome proteomics approach identified numerous “G9a-translated” proteins that unite the networks associated with inflammation dysregulation, T cell dysfunction, and systemic cytokine response. In sum, we identified a previously unrecognized function of G9a in protein-specific translation that can be leveraged to treat ET-related chronic inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
See "sample_information_summary.xlsx" for experimental design. All relevant information about sample processing is provided in the STAR methods and/or supplemental information sections of the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
All relevant information is provided in the STAR methods and/or supplemental information sections of the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
We report a novel translation-regulatory function of G9a, a histone methyltransferase and well-understood transcriptional repressor, in promoting hyperinflammation and lymphopenia; two hallmarks of endotoxin tolerance (ET)-associated chronic inflammatory complications. Using multiple approaches, we demonstrate that G9a interacts with multiple translation regulators during ET, particularly the N6-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) RNA methyltransferase METTL3, to co-upregulate expression of certain m<sup>6</sup>A-modified mRNAs that encode immune-checkpoint and anti-inflammatory proteins. Mechanistically, G9a promotes m<sup>6</sup>A methyltransferase activity of METTL3 at translational/post-translational level by regulating its expression, its methylation, and its cytosolic localization during ET. Additionally, from a broader view extended from the G9a-METTL3-m<sup>6</sup>A translation regulatory axis, our translatome proteomics approach identified numerous "G9a-translated" proteins that unite the networks associated with inflammation dysregulation, T&#xa0;cell dysfunction, and systemic cytokine response. In sum, we identified a previously unrecognized function of G9a in protein-specific translation that can be leveraged to treat ET-related chronic inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Translation, Mettl3, Endo-toxin tolerance, M6a, Inflammation, G9a

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Adil Muneer

### Lab Head
Dr Xian Chen
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill


