### Accession
PXD005643

### Title
Improved Identification and Analysis of Small Open Reading Frame Encoded Polypeptides

### Description
Computational, genomic, and proteomic approaches have been used to discover nonannotated proteincoding small open reading frames (smORFs). Some novel smORFs have crucial biological roles in cells and organisms, which motivates the search for additional smORFs. Proteomic smORF discovery methods are advantageous because they detect smORF-encoded polypeptides (SEPs) to validate smORF translation and SEP stability. Because SEPs are shorter and less abundant than average proteins, SEP detection using proteomics faces unique challenges. Here, we optimize several steps in the SEP discovery workflow to improve SEP isolation and identification. These changes have led to the detection of several new human SEPs (novel human genes), improved confidence in the SEP assignments, and enabled quantification of SEPs under different cellular conditions. These improvements will allow faster detection and characterization of new SEPs and smORFs.

### Sample Protocol
Four different methods were compared for extraction of SEPs from 4 × 107 total cells: (1) 50 mM HCl, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME); 0.05% Triton X-100 at room temperature (lysis buffer); (2) 1 N acetic acid/0.1 N HCl at room temperature; (3) boiling in water; or (4) boiling in lysis buffer. Three conditions for SEP enrichment were tested: (1) acid precipitation, (2) 30-kDa molecular weight cut off (MWCO) filter, and (3) reverse-phase (C8) cartridge enrichment. An aliquot of 100 μg of enriched samples was precipitated with chloroform/methanol extraction. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris 2-carboxyethylphosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, with trypsin (Promega). Digestion was stopped with formic acid, 5% final concentration.  Digests were analyzed by LC−MS using an Easy-nLC1000 (Proxeon) and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An EASYSpray column (Thermo Scientific) 25 cm by 75 μm packed with PepMap C18 2um particles was used. Electrospray was performed directly from the tip of the analytical column. C8 SPE enriched samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The digest was injected directly onto a 50 cm, 75um ID column packed with BEH 1.7um C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on an nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 and searched with ProLuCID using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). We used two databases in these searches, a custom database created from the in silico 3-frame translation of RNA-Seq data from K562 cells (RNASeq database), and the UNIPROT Human database. The transcriptome data are deposited on GEO (GSE34740). The search space included all fully tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification.

### Publication Abstract
Computational, genomic, and proteomic approaches have been used to discover nonannotated protein-coding small open reading frames (smORFs). Some novel smORFs have crucial biological roles in cells and organisms, which motivates the search for additional smORFs. Proteomic smORF discovery methods are advantageous because they detect smORF-encoded polypeptides (SEPs) to validate smORF translation and SEP stability. Because SEPs are shorter and less abundant than average proteins, SEP detection using proteomics faces unique challenges. Here, we optimize several steps in the SEP discovery workflow to improve SEP isolation and identification. These changes have led to the detection of several new human SEPs (novel human genes), improved confidence in the SEP assignments, and enabled quantification of SEPs under different cellular conditions. These improvements will allow faster detection and characterization of new SEPs and smORFs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Smorf-encoded polypeptides (seps)

### Affiliations
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States
Salk Institute

### Submitter
Jiao Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Saghatelian
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States


