### Accession
PXD014158

### Title
Miniaturized sample preparation on a digital microfluidics device for sensitive bottom-up microproteomics of mammalian cells using magnetic beads and mass spectrometry-compatible surfactants

### Description
We used digital microfluidics (DMF) for the sample preparation of approximately 100 mammalian cells, and subsequent bottom-up proteome analysis by LC-MS. This comprised optimization of cell lysis conditions for DMF, the development of detergent-buffer systems, and adaptation of the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) approach on-chip. Application of the methodology to the proteome analysis of Jurkat T cells led to the identification of up to 2,500 proteins from approximately 500 cells, and up to 1,200 proteins from approximately 100 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cells were loaded onto DMF chips (90-pin array v3, Sci-Bots, Kitchener, ON, Canada) by means of Pluronic F68 detergent, and lysed using urea, NP-40, DDT, and Tetronic 90R4 detergent. After on-chip alkylation, on-chip SP3 cleanup was performed using a permanent magent. SP3 beads were resuspended in sulfobetaine-borate-digestion buffer containing trypsin/lys-c mix. Digested peptides were removed from the chips and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a trap column (5 µm, 0.3 mm x 5 mm, 100 Å), and an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, 100 Å), coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Eluents used for LC were eluent A: 0.05% formic acid (FA), eluent B: 80% ACN + 0.04% FA. Separation was performed over a 155-minute run. Chromatographic conditions were 5% B for 5 minutes, this was followed by a linear gradient from 5% to 50% B over 120 minutes and a 5-minute increase to 95% B, followed by 10 minutes at 95% B. An inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 15 minutes at 5% B. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was used.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (Version 2.2.0.388) and searched using the SequestHT algorithm node against a human protein database (accessed from UniProt on the 2017/04/07) and the cRAP list of common laboratory contaminants. Search parameters were Enzyme: Trypsin (full), precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Dynamic modification: Oxidation (M). The Percolator node was used for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation and a target protein target FDR of 0.01 was employed.

### Publication Abstract
While LC-MS-based proteomics with high nanograms to micrograms of total protein has become routine, the analysis of samples derived from low cell numbers is challenged by factors such as sample losses, or difficulties encountered with the manual manipulation of small liquid volumes. Digital microfluidics (DMF) is an emerging technique for miniaturized and automated droplet manipulation, which has been proposed as a promising tool for proteomic sample preparation. However, proteome analysis of samples prepared on-chip by DMF has previously been unfeasible, due to incompatibility with down-stream LC-MS instrumentation. To overcome these limitations, we here developed protocols for bottom-up LC-MS based proteomics sample preparation of as little as 100 mammalian cells on a commercially available digital microfluidics device. To this end, we developed effective cell lysis conditions optimized for DMF, as well as detergent-buffer systems compatible with downstream proteolytic digestion on DMF chips and subsequent LC-MS analysis. A major step was the introduction of the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) approach on-chip, which allowed the removal of salts and anti-fouling polymeric detergents, thus rendering sample preparation by DMF compatible with LC-MS-based proteome analysis. Application of DMF-SP3 to the proteome analysis of Jurkat T cells led to the identification of up to 2500 proteins from approximately 500 cells, and up to 1200 proteins from approximately 100 cells on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, emphasizing the high compatibility of DMF-SP3 with low protein input and minute volumes handled by DMF. Taken together, we demonstrate the first sample preparation workflow for proteomics on a DMF chip device reported so far, allowing the sensitive analysis of limited biological material.

### Keywords
Digital microfluidics, Microproteomics, Sp3, Miniaturization, Detergents

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany


