### Accession
PXD033859

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based analysis of LRBA phosphorylation

### Description
Vasopressin/cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling phosphorylates AQP2 water channels in renal collecting ducts to reabsorb water from urine for the prevention of further water loss. Lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor protein (LRBA) mediates vasopressin-induced AQP2 phosphorylation; therefore LRBA is essential for urinary concentration. LRBA is identified as the PKA substrates in a mouse cortical collecting duct principal cell line (mpkCCDcl4) whose phosphorylation levels are nearly perfectly correlated with those of AQP2. Although mouse LRBA contains several consensus PKA phosphorylation sites, their phosphorylation status in response to vasopressin remain unknown. Post-translational modification analysis revealed that RRDS1607 and RRIS2189 were phosphorylated by vasopressin.

### Sample Protocol
Myc-LRBA and HA-V2R were overexpressed in HEK293T cells. V2R agonist, [deamino-Cys1, d-Arg8]-vasopressin (dDAVP) or vehicle was added to the HEK293T cells for 1 h. The cell lysates were purified using anti-c-Myc Magnetic Beads (#88842, Pierce Biotechnology), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins bound to the beads were denatured in an SDS sample buffer (Cosmo Bio, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for 20 min at 60 °C. Equal amounts of protein were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue Stain One (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan). Stained bands were excised from gels. Liquid Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of gel bands was conducted by MS BioWorks (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) with the following protocol. Liquid Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of gel bands was conducted by MS BioWorks (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) with the following protocol. Each gel was washed with 25-mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile and reduced with 10-mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 50-mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. The proteins in gels were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 4 h, and were digested with chymotrypsin or elastase (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis of gel bands was conducted by MS BioWorks (Ann Arbor) with the following protocol. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75-µm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. Advanced Peak Determination (APD) was enabled, and the instrument was run with a 3-s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Byonic (Protein Metrics) with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P or None (Chymotrypsin/Elastase); database: SwissProt Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: Acetyl (K), Methyl (K/R), Dimethyl (K), Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), Trimethyl (K); deamidation (N/Q); mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages: 2 (Trypsin). Byonic mzIdentML files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Scaffold results were exported as mzIdentML and imported in to Scaffold PTM in order to assign site localization probabilities using Ascore (S.A. Beausoleil et al. A probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization, Nature Biotechnology 2006, 24, 1285-1292). A minimum localization probability filter of 50% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase A (PKA) directly phosphorylates aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channels in renal collecting ducts to reabsorb water from urine for the maintenance of systemic water homeostasis. More than 50 functionally distinct PKA-anchoring proteins (AKAPs) respectively create compartmentalized PKA signaling to determine the substrate specificity of PKA. Identification of an AKAP responsible for AQP2 phosphorylation is an essential step toward elucidating the molecular mechanisms of urinary concentration. PKA activation by several compounds is a novel screening strategy to uncover PKA substrates whose phosphorylation levels were nearly perfectly correlated with that of AQP2. The leading candidate in this assay proved to be an AKAP termed lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor protein (LRBA). We found that LRBA colocalized with AQP2 in&#xa0;vivo, and <i>Lrba</i> knockout mice displayed a polyuric phenotype with severely impaired AQP2 phosphorylation. Most of the PKA substrates other than AQP2 were adequately phosphorylated by PKA in the absence of LRBA, demonstrating that LRBA-anchored PKA preferentially phosphorylated AQP2 in renal collecting ducts. Furthermore, the LRBA-PKA interaction, rather than other AKAP-PKA interactions, was robustly dissociated by PKA activation. AKAP-PKA interaction inhibitors have attracted attention for their ability to directly phosphorylate AQP2. Therefore, the LRBA-PKA interaction is a promising drug target for the development of anti-aquaretics.

### Keywords
Lrba, Pka, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo 113-8510, Japan
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU)

### Submitter
YU HARA

### Lab Head
Dr Shinichi Uchida
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo 113-8510, Japan


