### Accession
PXD005075

### Title
LC-MS data sets of five sub cellular fractions of a Hodgkin lymphoma cell line (KMH2) before and after challenged with glucosamine for 24 hours

### Description
LC-MS data sets of five sub cellular fractions of a Hodgkin lymphoma cell line (KMH2) before and after challenged with glucosamine for 24 hours is provided. Each of the ten samples was run in triplicates to allow variance estimates leading to a data set of 30 LC-MS runs with high mass accuracy and resolution in MS and MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and drug treatment (protocol 1) The human Hodgkin Lymphoma derived cell line KMH2 was obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of Human and Animal Cell Cultures. KMH2 was cultured in Gibco RPMI medium 1640 GlutaMAX™ (Gibco, Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco, Invitrogen) in a humid environment of 5% CO2 at 37°C. For glucosamine (GlcN) treatment cells were cultured for 24 h and replated at 5 x105 cells/ml without or with 20 mM GlcN for 24 h. The treatment conditions were optimised by Western blot analysis and FACS cell cycle analysis. Subcellular fractionation (protocol 2)2 Cells were pellet at 300 x g, 5 min and wash twice with 50 mL PBS at room temperature. Cells were centrifuged at 1000 x g, room temperature for 15 min. The supernatant was aspirated and the cells were resuspend in a volume of medium equal six times the volume of the pellet of ice-cold cell homogenization medium containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors according to the manufacture instructions and incubated on ice for 2 min. The cells are then disrupted by passing the cell suspension ten times through a 20-gauge needle and confirming that ≥90% cell breakage has occurred by examining the homogenate under a phase-contrast microscope. One-third vol of ice-cold CHM containing 1 M sucrose (final 0.25 M) was added to the homogenate and mix gently by repeated inversion. Nuclei were pellet by centrifuging 5 min at 1000 x g, 4°C and stored at -20 ºC. The supernatant was centrifuge 10 min at 5000 x g, 4 °C. The pellet was ressuspended in 10 ml ice-cold sucrose/Mg2+ medium by gently pipetting up and down and reecentrifuge at 5000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C and the mitochondria stored at -20 ºC. The supernatant from above was centrifuged in an ultracentrifuge at 100000 x g for 60 min, 4°C. Microsomes were pelleted and the supernatant constituted the cytosol fraction. Nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal fractions were prepared using pellets previously obtained by differential centrifugation. Add four times the volume of the pellet of RIPA buffer containing Mini protease inhibitor cocktail, PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail to each pellet (nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal) and incubated on ice, vortex every 5 min, for 20 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 15 000 x g for 20 min, 4ºC. Supernatants constitute soluble nuclear fraction, mitochondrial and microsomal fractions and can be further used for proteome analysis or stored at -20ºC. RIPA buffer containing inhibitors was added to the pellet of the nuclear lysate an incubated 30 minutes on ice, vortexed every 5 min. Lysate was centrifuged at 15 000 x g for 20 min, 4ºC. The supernatant constitute the insoluble nuclear fraction and was stored at -20ºC until further analysis. Sample preparation (protocol 3) 1 μg/μL of total protein was denaturated with DTT (0.1 M final concentration) for 3 min at 40 °C, centrifuged at 14,000 × g, 2 min and loaded into filtering columns and washed with 8 M Urea, 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8.5 according to manufacter's instructions. Protein sample was further incubated for 20 min and washed with 8 M Urea, 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8.5. Add 40 μL of 40 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.5 with trypsin (0.05 μg/μL) and mix for 1 min. Incubate the filters at 37 °C O/N. Replace collection tube. Centrifuge filters for 20 min at 14,000 × g, 20 °C. Collect the flow through. Add 40 μL of 10 mM NH4HCO3 and centrifuge at 14,000 × g, 20 °C and collect the flow through. The total sample volume is approximately 80 μL in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Protein solution containing SDS and DTT were loaded into filtering columns and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer5. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega). Mass spectrometry analysis (protocol 4) Generated peptides as described above were desalted and concentrated6 prior to analysis by nano LC-MS/MS using an Q-Exactive (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex NCP3200RS HPLC setup (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). A 75 µm ID, 15 cm in length home build reversed phase column (Reprosil-pur 3 μm C18-AQ, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) was used to separate peptides. The analytical gradient was generated at 200 nL/min increasing from 5% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)/95% Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 35% Buffer B / 65% Buffer A over 110 minutes followed by an increase to 90% Buffer B / 10% Buffer A in 10 minutes. MS survey scans were scanned from m/z 350 to m/z 1400 at 70.000 resolution (AGC: 1e6 and Maximum IT: 120 ms). An upper limit of 20 most abundant ions was subjected to MS/MS and measured at a resolution of 35.000 (AGC: 5e4 and Maximum IT: 120ms) with lowest mass set to m/z 100.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative matrix for CoFRA analysis can be generated from one of the many MS data analysis pipelines.

### Publication Abstract
We present a novel data analysis strategy which combined with subcellular fractionation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based proteomics provides a simple and effective workflow for global drug profiling. Five subcellular fractions were obtained by differential centrifugation followed by high resolution LC-MS and complete functional regulation analysis. The methodology combines functional regulation and enrichment analysis into a single visual summary. The workflow enables improved insight into perturbations caused by drugs. We provide a statistical argument to demonstrate that even crude subcellular fractions leads to improved functional characterization. We demonstrate this data analysis strategy on data obtained in a MS-based global drug profiling study. However, this strategy can also be performed on other types of large scale biological data.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Lymphoma cell line, Kmh2

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CHRONIC DISEASES RESEARCH CENTER, NOVA Medical School - Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal ( lab head )

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CHRONIC DISEASES RESEARCH CENTER, NOVA Medical School - Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal ( lab head )


