### Accession
PXD000809

### Title
Lung_pY profiling - Profiling phospho-tyrosine levels in mosue tumors which were xenografted from pateint lung tumor.

### Description
Profiling phospho-tyrosine levels in mosue tumors which were xenografted from pateint lung tumor.

### Sample Protocol
30 patient lung tumors were inplanted in Non-SCID mice subcutaneously.  The xenograft tumors were harvested and the phospho-tyrosine peptides were enriched as decribed by Rush J et al., (Nat Biotechnol, 2005). 2 mg of proteins from each tumor were used for anti-pY IP and total 10 ul of anti-pY antibody beads from CST PTMScan phos-Tyrosine mouse mAB (P-Tyr-100) kit were used.For LC-MS/MS analysis, the tryptic peptides from anti-pY IP complexes were separated on a 50-cm Easy-Spray column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with 2 μm C18 resin (Thermo Scientific, Odense Denmark). The peptides were eluted over 120 min (250 nl/min) using a 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system operating at 50 °C (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The LC was coupled to a Thermo Elite mass spectrometer) by using a nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400.  Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analyzed by using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) for quantification. The Andromeda probabilistic search engine was used to search peak lists against the Uniprot database (2013.03 version). The default search parameters were used as describe by Deeb et al. except the addition of phospho-serine, -threonine and -tyrosine as variable modifications. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Bioinformatics analysis was completed with Perseus tools within the MaxQuant environment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Py profiling, Xenograft, Lung, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
Hospital for Sickkids, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Moran
Hospital for Sickkids, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


