### Accession
PXD003901

### Title
20160330_Lentinus crinitus Secretome

### Description
The analysis of fungi secreted proteins has been increasingly employed as a powerful strategy in the prospecting of new catalysts with potential biotechnological application. Since enzyme production is strongly modulated by several factors such as pH, available nutrients, water content, oxygen levels and temperature, the evaluation of growth conditions is of utmost importance to achieve optimal enzyme production. Here, a non-sequenced wood-rotting fungus, L. crinitus, was selected as a model organism for secretome analysis by means of in vitro enzymatic assays and in-depth characterization via proteomics. For enzyme production, the fungus was cultured with several types and concentrations of carbon and nitrogen sources and variable water content. Five different carbon substrates (glucose, maltose, starch, sucrose, carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), glycerol and fructose) and three nitrogen containing compounds (urea, sodium nitrate and ammonium chloride) were used as substitutes of the original carbon and nitrogen sources in culture media. Interestingly, the biomass yield as well as the array of secreted proteins differed drastically under different growing conditions. A mixture of soluble secreted extracts derived from different culture conditions was analyzed both by shotgun mass spectrometry and through protein separation by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) prior to identification via LC-MS/MS. Proteins were identified by sequence homology searches using mass spectrometry (MS)-driven BLAST. The spectrum of secreted enzymes comprised various types of CAZymes (carbohydrate-active enzymes), oxidase/reductases, proteases, lipase/esterases, proteins with non-related functions thereby classified as miscellany proteins and hypothetical or unknown predicted proteins. Although pre-separation by 2DE improved the number of identifications (protein map of 150 spots corresponding to 171 identifications) compared to the shotgun approach (98 identifications) both strategies revealed similar distribution of proteins within the functional categories described above. Culture media with reduced water content stimulated the expression of oxidases/reductases such as Lac, MnP, GMC oxidoreductases and glyoxal oxidase while hydrolases were induced during submerged fermentation. The diversity of proteins observed within both the CAZyme and oxidoreductase groups revealed in this fungus a powerful arsenal of enzymes dedicated to the breakdown and consumption of lignocellulose. Moreover, further secretome characterization after sequencing and analysis of the L. crinitus genome can potentially lead to the discovery of novel enzymes of industrial and biotechnological interest. Importantly, information on sequencing data could also reveal novel enzymes which production is strongly stimulated only in specific growing conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Lentinus crinitus was grown on plates of solid minimal medium (SMM) or liquid minimal medium (LMM). After 7–10 days of growth on SMM, three mycelial plugs collected using a 4-mm diameter biopsy punch were used to inoculate 5mL replicates of different sterilized culture media. Cultures were incubated at 28±0.2◦C for subsequent assays. Seven different carbon substrates (glucose, maltose, starch, sucrose, carboxymethilcellulose (CMC), glycerol and fructose) and three nitrogen containing compounds (urea, sodium nitrate and ammonium chloride) were used as substitutes of the original carbon and nitrogen sources in culture media. Culture supernatants were separated from the mycelium with filter paper and then sieved through 0.45 µm nitrocellulose membranes. Protein content was analyzed via 1D- and 2D-SDS-PAGE followed by LC-MS/MS analysis and by shotgun proteomics on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer operating in FullMS-ddMS2 mode coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed via analysis of acquired MS spectra using Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 software running Mascot and the Sequest HT search algorithms. Spectra were searched against a Polyporales database with the following parameters: Max. missed cleavage = 2, precursor mass tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.5 Da. For data acquired from gel bands, static modification: carbamidomethyl (C: +57.021 Da) and dynamic modifications: oxidation (M: +15.995 Da), were included. Deamidation (N,Q: 0.984 Da) was also included as dynamic modification for searches using data collected from fungi secretion. For protein spots data, static modifications were not assigned, instead, propionamide (C: +71.037 Da) was added as variable modification. Proteome Discoverer assign peptides identified with high degree of confidence as having False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01, medium confidence FDR ≤ 0.05, and low peptide confidence for FDR lower than 5%.  MS-BLAST searches were performed as described by Shevchenko et al 2001. Briefly, peptides generated from each protein spot were spaced with minus symbols (-), merged into a single string and edited according to the rules described. Searching was carried out at http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/msblast/, using default settings and the PAM30MS matrix against nrdb95 database. Matches were considered significant only if matched fungal proteins and displayed a high-scoring segment pairs value of 85 or above.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of fungal secretomes is a prospection tool for the discovery of new catalysts with biotechnological applications. Since enzyme secretion is strongly modulated by environmental factors, evaluation of growth conditions is of utmost importance to achieve optimal enzyme production. In this work, a nonsequenced wood-rotting fungus, Lentinus crinitus, was used for secretome analysis by enzymatic assays and a proteomics approach. Enzyme production was assessed after the fungus was cultured in seven different carbon sources and three nitrogen-containing compounds. The biomass yields and secreted protein arrays differed drastically among growing conditions. A mixture of secreted extracts derived from solid and liquid cultures was inspected by shotgun mass spectrometry and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) prior to analysis via LC-MS/MS. Proteins were identified using mass spectrometry (MS)-driven BLAST. The spectrum of secreted proteins comprised CAZymes, oxidase/reductases, proteases, and lipase/esterases. Although preseparation by 2-DE improved the number of identifications (162) compared with the shotgun approach (98 identifications), the two strategies revealed similar protein patterns. Culture media with reduced water content stimulated the expression of oxidases/reductases, while hydrolases were induced during submerged fermentation. The diversity of proteins observed within both the CAZyme and oxidoreductase groups revealed in this fungus a powerful arsenal of enzymes dedicated to the breakdown and consumption of lignocellulose.

### Keywords
2d-page, Lentinus, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquímica Setor de Ciências Biológicas Centro Politécnico Universidade Federal do Paraná BRAZIL
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)

### Submitter
Mirta Sousa

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Paba
Departamento de Bioquímica Setor de Ciências Biológicas Centro Politécnico Universidade Federal do Paraná BRAZIL


