### Accession
PXD006807

### Title
Shared and specific targets of Arabidopsis immune MAPKs

### Description
In Arabidopsis, mitogen-activated protein kinases MPK3, MPK4 and MPK6 constitute essential relays for a variety of functions including cell division, development and innate immunity. While some substrates of MPK3, MPK4 and MPK6 have been identified, the picture is still far from complete. To identify substrates of these MAPKs in cell division, growth and development we compared the phosphoproteomes of wild-type and mpk3, mpk4 and mpk6. To study the function of these MAPKs in innate immunity, we analyzed their phosphoproteomes following activation by a microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP). Partially overlapping substrates were retrieved for all three MAPKs, showing target specificity to one, two or all three MAPKs in different biological processes. More precisely, our results illustrate the fact that the entity to be defined as a specific or a shared substrate for MAPKs is not a phosphoprotein but a particular (S/T)P phosphorylation site in a given protein. As a whole, 152 peptides were identified to be differentially phosphorylated in response to MAMP treatment and/or when compared between genotypes and 70 of them could be classified as putative MAPK targets. Biochemical analysis of a number of putative MAPK substrates by phosphorylation and interaction assays confirmed the global phosphoproteome approach. Our study finally expands the set of MAPK substrates to involve other protein kinases, including calcium-dependent (CDPK) and sugar non-fermenting (SnRK) protein kinases.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic proteins were obtained from Arabidopsis plants (WT plants as well as mpk3, mpk4 and mpk6 deletion mutants) grown in liquid medium and treated for 15 min with the peptide flg22 or left otherwise. After trypsin digestion, phosphorylated peptides were enriched on an IMAC resin. The resulting samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD instrument, while acquiring pairs of MSA and ETD spectra on every precursor ion.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer to separate MSA and ETD spectra before interpreting them using Mascot. The database TAIR10 was explored, while specifying trypsin as the enzyme, allowing 2 missed cleavages, considering phospho(ST) and phospho(Y) as variable modifications and 5 ppm and 0.6 Da as mass errors in MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The fragment types considered for MS/MS spectra interpretation were those specified in the ESI-trap and ETD trap definitions of Mascot. Relative quantification of phosphopeptide abundance was obtained using MassChroQ. We searched for phosphopeptides being differentially abundant between the genotypes and depending on the treatment by looking for sequences specifically absent in some conditions and, using a two-way ANOVA, for species whose abundance was more subtly modulated.

### Publication Abstract
In Arabidopsis, mitogen-activated protein kinases MPK3, MPK4, and MPK6 constitute essential relays for a variety of functions including cell division, development and innate immunity. Although some substrates of MPK3, MPK4 and MPK6 have been identified, the picture is still far from complete. To identify substrates of these MAPKs likely involved in cell division, growth and development we compared the phosphoproteomes of wild-type and <i>mpk3</i>, <i>mpk4</i>, and <i>mpk6.</i> To study the function of these MAPKs in innate immunity, we analyzed their phosphoproteomes following microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP) treatment. Partially overlapping substrates were retrieved for all three MAPKs, showing target specificity to one, two or all three MAPKs in different biological processes. More precisely, our results illustrate the fact that the entity to be defined as a specific or a shared substrate for MAPKs is not a phosphoprotein but a particular (S/T)P phosphorylation site in a given protein. One hundred fifty-two peptides were identified to be differentially phosphorylated in response to MAMP treatment and/or when compared between genotypes and 70 of them could be classified as putative MAPK targets. Biochemical analysis of a number of putative MAPK substrates by phosphorylation and interaction assays confirmed the global phosphoproteome approach. Our study also expands the set of MAPK substrates to involve other protein kinases, including calcium-dependent (CDPK) and sugar nonfermenting (SnRK) protein kinases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Signaling, Phosphoproteomics, Mapkinases, Immunity

### Affiliations
CNRS
Center for Desert Agriculture, 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Heribert Hirt
Center for Desert Agriculture, 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia


