### Accession
PXD006169

### Title
Bacillus cereus proteomics, extraproteome

### Description
This project contributes to the proteomic comparison of Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579 wild-type strain without its pBClin15 plasmid, its mutant strain devoided of the methionine sulfoxide reductase AB (msrAB) protein and the corresponding msrAB complemented strain, all strains grown in aerobiosis condition and harvested at three growth stages.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared using R package LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
Aerobic respiratory growth generates endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS oxidize protein-bound methionine residues into methionine sulfoxide. Methionine sulfoxide reductases catalyze the reduction of methionine sulfoxide to methionine in proteins. Here, we use high-throughput nanoLC-MS/MS methodology to establish detailed maps of oxidized proteins from <i>Bacillus cereus</i> ATCC 14579 &#x394;pBClin15 and its mutant for which the methionine sulfoxide reductase AB gene (<i>msrAB</i>) has been inactivated (Madeira et al., 2017) [1]. Lists of oxidized peptides and proteins identified at early exponential, late exponential and stationary growth phases are supplied in this article as data files. Raw data are deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers, PXD006169 and PDX006205 (http://www.ebi.ac/uk). Given the importance of methionine oxidation in several key cellular processes and its impact in the field of medical and food microbiology, this paper should be useful for further insightful redox studies in <i>B. cereus</i> and its numerous relatives.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; exoproteome; methionine sulfoxide reductase ab

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA, DRF /Joliot, Li2D, Laboratory "Innovative technologies for Detection and Diagnostics", BP 17171 Bagnols-sur-Cèze 30207, France

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA, DRF /Joliot, Li2D, Laboratory "Innovative technologies for Detection and Diagnostics", BP 17171 Bagnols-sur-Cèze 30207, France


