### Accession
PXD017048

### Title
Tryp-N: A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Description
Identification and characterization of Tryp-N, A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Sample Protocol
Protease activity screen of orthologs:  Each gene was comercially synthesized, then expressed using an in vitro transcription/translation system.  This mixture (which now included the putative protease of interest) was unfolded then refolded.  Proteolytic activity was activated by the addition of calcium and zinc, then proteolysis of the mixture proceeded overnight at 37C overnight.  Samples were then assessed by LC/MS/MS.  The following is a complete description of the orthologs tested and corresponds to the deposited file names:  1. At = metalloproteinase [Ajellomyces dermatitidis SLH14081]; NCBI: XP_002627439.1 2. As = toxic extracellular endopeptidase [Aeromonas salmonicida subsp. achromogenes]; NCBI: AAN63381.3 3. Ct = Metalloprotease MEP1-like protein [Chaetomium thermophilum var. thermophilum DSM 1495]; NCBI: XP_006696712.1 4. Cv = protease [Chromobacterium violaceum ATCC 12472]; NCBI: NP_903176.1 5. Mt = Metalloprotease [Myceliophthora thermophila ATCC 42464]; NCBI: XP_003662375.1 6. Rc = Extracellular protease precursor, putative [Ricinus communis]; NCBI: XP_002536977.1 7. Sc = hypothetical protein SCHCODRAFT_74958 [Schizophyllum commune H4-8]; NCBI: XP_003035465.1 8. Sl = peptidyl-Lys metalloendopeptidase [Shewanella loihica PV-4]; NCBI: YP_001093372.1 9. Va = metalloproteinase [Verticillium albo-atrum VaMs.102]; NCBI: XP_003009549.1 10. Xa = extracellular protease [Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri str. 306]; NCBI: NP_643072.1

### Data Protocol
Determination of unique peptide counts followed by quantitation of amino acids at the P1' position of proteolysis (i.e. the N-terminal amino acid of each unique peptide and the amino acid immediately downstream of the mapped peptide).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics is a mainstay in protein identification and analysis. These studies typically employ proteolytic treatment of biological samples to generate suitably sized peptides for tandem mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. In MS, fragmentation of peptides is largely driven by charge localization. Consequently, peptides with basic centers exclusively on their N-termini produce mainly b-ions. Thus, it was long ago realized that proteases that yield such peptides would be valuable proteomic tools for achieving simplified peptide fragmentation patterns and peptide assignment. Work by several groups has identified such proteases, however, structural analysis of these suggested that enzymatic optimization was possible. We therefore endeavored to find enzymes that could provide enhanced activity and versatility while maintaining specificity. Using these previously described proteases as informatic search templates, we discovered and then characterized a thermophilic metalloprotease with N-terminal specificity for arginine and lysine. This enzyme, dubbed Tryp-N, affords many advantages including improved thermostability, solvent and detergent tolerance, and rapid digestion time.

### Keywords
Lys-n, Tryp-n, Trypsin, Arginine, Ulilysin, Lysine, Proteomics, Metalloprotease, Thermostable, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

### Submitter
Jonathan Ipsaro

### Lab Head
Dr Darryl J. Pappin
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory


