### Accession
PXD018100

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes upon overexpression of S. cerevisiae Ppz1 protein phosphatase

### Description
Over-expression of Ppz1 is deleterious for yeast cells. Recent studies in our laboratory demonstrated that the over-expression of a catalytically impaired version of Ppz1 (Ppz1R451L) is not toxic, suggesting that the excess of Ppz1 phosphatase activity was responsible for toxicity, possibly due to changes in yeast phosphoproteome. Because the molecular basis of this toxicity are still unknown, a global yeast phosphoproteomic assay was designed to gain insight into this phenomenon.  To identify revelant changes cuased by Ppz1 overexpression we have constructed a strain (ZCZ01) in which the PPZ1 promoter has been replaced by the GAL promotrer. Cell grown on raffinose were shifted to galactose and samples were taken after 30, 60, 120 and 240 min and changes in proteome and phosphoproteome were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast extracts for phosphoproteomic assays were prepared as follows. Two hundred fifty mL of cells (BY4741 and ZCZ01 strains) were grown from OD600 0.2 until OD600 0.6-0.8 in YP Raffinose (2%). At this point, one sample (50 mL) for each strain was collected and galactose was added to a final concentration of 2%. Then 50 mL samples were taken from each culture at 30, 60, 120 and 240 minutes. In each case, the cell suspension was mixed immediately with TCA (final concentration 6%) and put on ice for at least 10 minutes, before cells were pelleted at 1680xg for 5 minutes. The pellet was washed twice with 1 mL of cold acetone, dried at 37°C to eliminate de TCA and finally frozen at -80°C. To obtain the protein extracts for phosphoproteomic assays, one mL of the chilled (4°C) lysis Buffer (3% SDS, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5 ) with the addition of Complete protease inhibitor and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor mixtures (Roche) was added to the cell pellet together with 200 µL of acid-washed glass-beads (Sigma). The yeast cells were broken in a BeadMill at 4°C with four cycles of 1 min shaking followed by 1 min vortexing. Then, the cell suspension was sonicated in a Bioruptor for 10 min (30 sec sonication followed by 30 sec break cycles) at 4°C, heated at 90°C for 10 min in a water bath and sonicated again in a Bioruptor for 10 additional min.   Protein concentration was measured by BCA analysis (Thermo Scientific). Protein material was precipitated by the chloroform/methanol method. Protein pellets were air dried and resuspended in 100 ml of 0.1 M TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer). Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1/50 ratio and the digestion carried out at 37°C for 12 h. Then, an additional aliquot of trypsin (1/100) was added for 2 h at 37°C in order to improve the digestion. Peptide solutions were labeled by TMT (Tandem Mass Tag labelling) according to the manufacturer recommendations (TMT11plex Thermo Scientific). The TMT label was dissolved in 50 ml of acetonitrile and mixed with the sample. After 1 h incubation at RT, 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine were added to quench the reaction. Twenty mg of the mixed TMT sample was taken to obtain data for total proteins (Proteome). The sample was fractionated with high pH RP (Reverse phase) chromatography into 10 fractions, which were concatenated into 5 fractions for LC-MS analysis (fraction 1 with fraction 6, fraction 2 with fraction 7 etc.). The rest of the TMT mixed sample (800-900 mg) was enriched for phosphopeptides on an IMAC column or TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). The phosphopeptide fraction was similarly pre-fractionated with high pH RP into five final fractions.LC-MS analysis was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The system was conditioned using a BSA tryptic digest (50 fmol) in a 15 min LC gradient that was run between each fraction. Samples were loaded on a PepMap 100 C18 5 µm 0.3 x 5 mm Trap Cartridge (ThermoScientific) in loading solvent (2% Acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at a flow of 10 ml/min and separated with an 1 h gradient starting at 99.9% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and ending with 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid on a 75 mm*30 cm column custom-packed with Reprosil Pur C18AQ 1.9 sorbent.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software (v1.6.3.3) and its integrated search engine Andromeda with the following parameters: Reporter ion MS2 (TMT11plex search), PSM (peptide spectrum matches) FDR and protein FDR were set at 0.01; minimum peptide length was 7; minimum score for modified peptides was 40 and razor peptides (set to 1) were used for protein quantification. The search was executed against the S. cerevisiae orf_coding.fasta database (https://www.yeastgenome.org/). For protein abundance analysis, the ProteinGroups.txt MaxQuant file was used. For phosphoproteomic analysis the Phospho (STY) Sites.txt file was generated. To account for possible increases in specific proteins, the relevant data from the Phospho (STY) Sites.txt file was normalized with the protein abundance data extracted from the ProteinGroups.txt file. Only phosphopeptides with localization probability equal or higher than 0.5 were selected. and further processed with the Perseus software (v1.6.2.3). To evaluate changes in protein abundance, data was loaded in the Perseus software, contaminants were removed and the Ppz1 over-expression/control ratios for each experiment were calculated. Categorical annotation and grouping of samples by experiments was done. Then, mean values and SEM valued were calculated and a 2-sample T-test (p<0.05) was performed to identify consistent changes. A similar process was carried out for phosphopeptide analysis, with a p<0.05 value set for significance.

### Publication Abstract
Control of the protein phosphorylation status is a major mechanism for regulation of cellular processes, and its alteration often lead to functional disorders. Ppz1, a protein phosphatase only found in fungi, is the most toxic protein when overexpressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. To investigate the molecular basis of this phenomenon, we carried out combined genome-wide transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses. We have found that Ppz1 overexpression causes major changes in gene expression, affecting&#x2009;~&#x2009;20% of the genome, together with oxidative stress and increase in total adenylate pools. Concurrently, we observe changes in the phosphorylation pattern of near 400 proteins (mainly dephosphorylated), including many proteins involved in mitotic cell cycle and bud emergence, rapid dephosphorylation of Snf1 and its downstream transcription factor Mig1, and phosphorylation of Hog1 and its downstream transcription factor Sko1. Deletion of HOG1 attenuates the growth defect of Ppz1-overexpressing cells, while that of SKO1 aggravates it. Our results demonstrate that Ppz1 overexpression has a widespread impact in the yeast cells and reveals new aspects of the regulation of the cell cycle.

### Keywords
Yeast, Antifungal target, Phosphatase, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Universitat Autonoma de Bercelona
Head of the Biochemestry an molecular biology department

### Submitter
Diego Velázquez

### Lab Head
Dr Joaquin Ariño Carmona
Head of the Biochemestry an molecular biology department


