### Accession
PXD015153

### Title
A serial sample processing strategy with improved performance for in-depth quantitative analysis of type III secretion events in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Bacterial pathogens have the ability to secrete effector proteins to promote host cell invasion. The efficient analysis of the secretomes in close to wildtype cell systems is important to study the mechanisms of bacterial secretion efficiently at different levels. In particular the secretome analysis of bacteria that rely on rich media for optimal secretion may hamper analysis via modern sample preparation shotgun proteomics workflows due to higher degree of sample impurities. This is may be a reason for the low number of quantitative secretome investigations in such cells. We assessed the efficiency of different workflows and their amenability for secretome analysis including precipitation, SP3 and a combined, serial workflow. Using the model organism Pseudomonas aeruginosa, we found that, the combined TCA-SP3 strategy outperforms the other tested methods on all levels and proofed most efficient in the recovery of proteins related to the type III secretion system (T3SS), including all known effector proteins and secretion machinery components. Moreover, the serial workflows resulted in improved quantification accuracy using MS1 label-free quantification. Finally by monitoring the  compositional changes of secretome samples over time we observed strong increase of the fraction made up by T3SS related proteins with parallel decrease of proteins not linked to T3SS. Our study shows how combining sample preparation procedures can lead to orthogonality in depleting impurities that result in better chromatographic peptide separation, and more efficient MS detection with improved quantification parameters.

### Sample Protocol
For each quadruplicate 20 ml of secreting medium was inoculated with 1% of overnight culture of P. aeruginosa stain PAO1 or ΔpscV, and grown at 37 ⁰C for 6h. OD600  was measured and adjusted to the lowest OD600 so every sample contained the same amount of cells. Cultures were spun down for 10 min at 4000 x g and 4 ⁰C. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and filter sterilized twice (pore size 0.22 μm, Sarstedt, Germany). For each quadruplicate 5 ml supernatant was subtracted and further processed using three different sample preparation protocols. Time course - For each triplicate 100 ml of secreting medium was inoculated with 1% of overnight culture and grown at 37 ⁰C. After 0 min, 1h, 1.5h, 2h, 3h, 4h, 5h and 6h post inoculation 10 ml of cell culture was subtracted. Cultures were spun down for 10 min at 4000 x g and 4 ⁰C. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and filter sterilized twice (pore size 0.22 μm, Sarstedt, Germany). Supernatant was further processed using the combined TCA/SP3 method.  TCA- For protein precipitation 10 % v/v trichloracetic acid (TCA) was added to each supernatant sample and stored at 4 ⁰C over-night. The next day samples were spun down for 30 min at 4000 x g and 4 ⁰C. The supernatant was removed, while residual pellet was washed with 5 ml acetone followed by a centrifugation for 5 min at 4000 x g and 4 ⁰C. Washing step was repeated once, supernatant was discarded and residual acetone was evaporated at room temperature until the pellet was dry. Pellets could be either stored at -80 ⁰C or further processed. In order to solubilize the pellet 500 μl buffer (1 M Urea + 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) diluted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)) was added to the unfrozen pellet. To get the pellet into suspension it was vortexed and sonicated for 20 seconds (Hielscher UltrasoundTechnology). For the TCEP reaction suspension was transferred into 2 ml tubes and incubated for 30 min at 37 ⁰C. Sample was then cooled down on ice and Iodoacetamide (10 mM) was added to solution. Iodoacetamide reaction was then performed for 30 min at 25 ⁰C and 500 rpm in dark. For the digestion 1 μg trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) was added to the sample and incubated at 30 ⁰C overnight. To lower the pH of the solution 1.5 % TFA (v/v) was added. In order to get rid of precipitated proteins and to boost precipitation samples were frozen at -20 ⁰C, thawed and centrifuged at max speed for 15 min. Clear supernatant was transferred into a new cup. All protein digests were desalted using C18 microspin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. SP3 Acetonitrile was added to the 5 ml supernatant until it was 60% of the whole solution, afterwards 4 μl SP3 beads slurry (SpeedBead Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particals, GE Healthcare, UK) was added and solution was incubated for 15 min rotating at room temperature. After incubation beads were centrifuged for 1 minute at 2000 rpm (find out the g equivalent). All the supernatant except for approximately 1 ml was discarded, while residual supernatant was used to resuspend beads and transfer into 2 ml tubes. Beads were then separated on the magnetic rack DynaMagTM-2 (Invitrogen, UK) and residual supernatant was discarded. 500 μl 70% ethanol was added, rack was agitated and supernatant was removed (repeat washing twice). Afterwards 200 μl acetonitrile was added, rack was agitated, supernatant was removed and beads were dried. For the on bead digest 100 μl digestion buffer (10% acetonitrile + 100mM amoniumbicarbonate containing 1 μg trypsin per sample) was added to the beads and incubated at 30 ⁰C overnight. The next day beads were separated and supernatant was transferred into a collection eppi. Then 100 μl 2 % DMSO was added, samples were vortexed for 20 seconds, beads were separated and supernatant was transferred into the collection eppi (repeat once). Afterwards 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was added and incubated for 30 min at 37 ⁰C. Sample was then cooled down on ice and 10 mM Iodoacetamide was added to solution, while the reaction was performed for 30 min at 25 ⁰C and 500 rpm in dark. TCA and SP3 combined TCA precipitation was carried out as described above. Dried protein pellets were reconstituted in 60% acetonitrile, and proceeded with as described for SP3.

### Data Protocol
For all identification-based (ID) experiments, the MS raw data was searched using MASCOT (v.2.5, Matrix Science) against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa protein database (downloaded 03/09/2015). The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M) set as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions for high energy-collision dissociation (HCD). The data was further evaluated within Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for ID-based assessment of the data.  Discovery-LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0).  MS raw files were imported into Progenesis and the output data (MS/MS spectra) were exported in mgf format. MS/MS spectra were then searched using MASCOT against a decoy database of the predicted proteomes from E. coli strain K-12 downloaded from UniProt database. The search criteria were set as for ID-based evaluation of the data. Results from the database search were imported back to Progenesis in order to map peptide identifications to MS1 features. The peak heights of all MS1 features annotated with the same peptide sequence were summed and peptide abundance ratios across different digestion conditions and accompanying q-values (i.e., p-values adjusted for multiple testing) were calculated using SafeQuant R-package version 2.2.2, which is part of the BioConductor open development software project. MS raw files derived from each detergent digest condition were analyzed by LFQ separately to avoid potential quantification biases between each experimental condition. LFQ analysis of time course experiments were performed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.17) in default settings.

### Publication Abstract
The efficient analysis of secretomes is important to study the mechanisms of bacterial secretion. However, secretome analysis of bacteria that rely on rich media for optimal secretion via modern quantitative shotgun proteomics workflows is often hampered by the higher degree of sample impurities. This may be a reason for the low number of quantitative secretome investigations in such cases. We assessed the efficiency and amenability for rich media secretome analysis of different workflows including precipitation, SP3, and a combined, serial workflow. Using the model organism <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, we found that the combined TCA-SP3 strategy outperformed the other tested methods on all monitored qualitative and quantitative levels. This method proved to be most efficient in the recovery of proteins secreted by the type III secretion system (T3SS), including all known effector proteins and secretion machinery components. We monitored the compositional changes of secretome samples over time, and observed a strong increase in the secreted protein fraction by the T3SS 2 to 3 h after T3SS induction. Our study conceptually illustrates how the combination of TCA precipitation and SP3 results in orthogonality in depleting sample impurities accompanied by improved chromatographic peptide separation, and more efficient MS detection with improved quantification parameters.

### Keywords
Protein precipitation, Sp3, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Secretome

### Affiliations
Facility for Mass Spectrometry and bacterial Proteomics Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg, Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Facility for Mass Spectrometry and bacterial Proteomics Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg, Germany


