### Accession
PXD029861

### Title
Characterisation of a novel CRLS1 variant in multi-system mitochondrial disease pathogenesis identifies mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticular stress responses to cardiolipin dysfunction

### Description
Mitochondrial diseases (MD) are a group of inherited diseases with highly varied and complex clinical presentations and their molecular diagnosis has been improved through next generation sequencing. Here, we report four individuals, two of whom are siblings, affected by a progressive mitochondrial encephalopathy who carry biallelic variants in the cardiolipin biosynthesis gene CRLS1. Using patient fibroblasts, we characterised defects in mitochondrial function that were reflective of CRLS1 dysfunctions, providing functional evidence that the CRLS1 I109N variant causes the MD phenotype observed in this patient. Lipid profiling highlighted that the CRLS1 variants reduced cardiolipin levels, altered its acyl-chain composition and caused a significant increase in phosphatidylglycerol, the substrate of cardiolipin synthase. Proteomic profiling of patient cells and Crls1 knockout cell lines identified both endoplasmic reticular and mitochondrial stress responses, and key features that distinguish between varying degrees of cardiolipin insufficiency. Our findings support that deleterious variants in CRLS1 cause a novel autosomal recessive MD, presenting as a severe encephalopathy with multisystemic involvement. Furthermore, we have identified key changes in cardiolipin and proteome profiles across various degrees of cardiolipin dysfunction, facilitating future advances in diagnostic technologies based on curated signatures in high-throughput datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Patient and control fibroblasts were lysed in 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 200 µg of protein was dissolved in 50 µL cell lysis buffer and digested using the S-trap mini columns as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and samples were incubated at 70˚C for 1 hr. Proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were acidified with 2.5 µL of 12% phosphoric acid and diluted with 150 µL of binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final Tris). Samples were added to the S-Trap Mini Spin columns (Protifi) by centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 s then subsequently washed three times by successively loading 400 µL of binding buffer and centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 s. Digestion was achieved by adding 1 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 125 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and incubating for one hour at 47˚C. Peptides were eluted by successively adding 80 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 80 µL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and 80 µL of 50% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid with a 30 s centrifugation step at  4,000 g between the addition of each elution buffer. The elutions were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µL of buffer A (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid).  Samples were analysed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC and an Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected on a reverse-phase PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5 µm, 100 Å, 150 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at a flowrate of 10 µL/minute. After 2.7 minutes, the trap column was switched in-line with a Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 resolving column (1.7 µm, 130 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 100 mm) and the peptides were eluted at a flowrate of 0.9 µL/min buffer A (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid) as the mobile phases. The gradient consisted of: 5-24% B for 0 to 22 min, 24-40% B from 22 to 35 min, 40%-95% B from 35-39 min, followed by a wash, a return of 8 % buffer B and equilibration prior to the next injection. The mass spectra were obtained in DIA mode with an MS1 resolution of 60,000, automatic gain control target at 200 %, maximum injection time at 40 ms and scan range from 350-1200 m/z. DIA spectra were recorded at resolution 15,000 and an automatic gain control target of 800 %. The 70 isolation windows were 10 m/z each from mass 399.9319-1101.2502.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Spectronaut 15 using direct DIA analysis and default settings. Briefly, spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database from UniProt with carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-offs at the peptide spectral match, peptide and protein group levels. Quantitation was performed at the MS2 level with Q-value data filtering and cross run normalization with Q-complete row selection.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial diseases are a group of inherited diseases with highly varied and complex clinical presentations. Here, we report four individuals, including two siblings, affected by a progressive mitochondrial encephalopathy with biallelic variants in the cardiolipin biosynthesis gene CRLS1. Three affected individuals had a similar infantile presentation comprising progressive encephalopathy, bull's eye maculopathy, auditory neuropathy, diabetes insipidus, autonomic instability, cardiac defects and early death. The fourth affected individual presented with chronic encephalopathy with neurodevelopmental regression, congenital nystagmus with decreased vision, sensorineural hearing loss, failure to thrive and acquired microcephaly. Using patient-derived fibroblasts, we characterized cardiolipin synthase 1 (CRLS1) dysfunction that impaired mitochondrial morphology and biogenesis, providing functional evidence that the CRLS1 variants cause mitochondrial disease. Lipid profiling in fibroblasts from two patients further confirmed the functional defect demonstrating reduced cardiolipin levels, altered acyl-chain composition and significantly increased levels of phosphatidylglycerol, the substrate of CRLS1. Proteomic profiling of patient cells and mouse Crls1 knockout cell lines identified both endoplasmic reticular and mitochondrial stress responses, and key features that distinguish between varying degrees of cardiolipin insufficiency. These findings support that deleterious variants in CRLS1 cause an autosomal recessive mitochondrial disease, presenting as a severe encephalopathy with multi-systemic involvement. Furthermore, we identify key signatures in cardiolipin and proteome profiles across various degrees of cardiolipin loss, facilitating the use of omics technologies to guide future diagnosis of mitochondrial diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Dia, Mitochondrial disease, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia

### Submitter
Timothy McCubbin

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Filipovska
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia


