### Accession
PXD001195

### Title
Dynamics of AMPAR proteome across brain regions and in postnatal development

### Description
Native AMPA receptors (AMPAR) in the mammalian brain are macromolecular complexes whose functional characteristics vary across brain regions and postnatal development and change in response to neuronal activity. Both, structural and functional properties of the AMPARs are determined by their proteome, the ensemble of their protein building blocks. Here we use high-resolution quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the entire pool of AMPARs affinity-isolated from distinct brain regions, selected sets of synapses/neurons and from whole brains at distinct stages of postnatal development. These analyses show that the AMPAR proteome is largely dynamic in both space and time: AMPARs exhibited profound region-specificity in their architecture and the constituents building their core and periphery. Likewise, AMPARs (ex)change numerous of their building blocks during postnatal development. These results provide an as yet unique resource for analysis of the individual subunits of native AMPAR complexes and their role in excitatory neurotransmission.

### Sample Protocol
See detailed process description in reference PMID XXXXXXXX

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was extracted using "extract_msn.exe" (grouping tolerance 0.05; Thermo Scientific) for LTQ Orbitrap XL and "msconvert.exe" (part of ProteoWizard; http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/, version 2.2.3214) for Orbitrap Elite. Using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.0; Matrix Science), peak lists were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot releases 2013_11 and 2013_01, respectively, (only mouse, rat and human entries plus P00761|TRYP_PIG, P00766|CTRA_BOVIN and P02769|ALBU_BOVIN). For preliminary searches peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 15 or 25 ppm. After performing a linear shift mass recalibration using a custom script, tolerance was reduced to ± 5 ppm for final searches. Fragment mass tolerance was set to ± 0.8 Da. One missed trypsin cleavage and common variable modifications including S/T/Y phosphorylation were accepted for peptide identification. Significance threshold was set to p < 0.05. Proteins identified by only one specific MS/MS spectrum or representing exogenous contaminations such as keratins or immunoglobulins were eliminated.   For further details, see reference PMID XXXXXXX.

### Publication Abstract
Native AMPA receptors (AMPARs) in the mammalian brain are macromolecular complexes whose functional characteristics vary across the different brain regions and change during postnatal development or in response to neuronal activity. The structural and functional properties of the AMPARs are determined by their proteome, the ensemble of their protein building blocks. Here we use high-resolution quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the entire pool of AMPARs affinity-isolated from distinct brain regions, selected sets of neurons, and whole brains at distinct stages of postnatal development. These analyses show that the AMPAR proteome is dynamic in both space and time: AMPARs exhibit profound region specificity in their architecture and the constituents building their core and periphery. Likewise, AMPARs exchange many of their building blocks during postnatal development. These results provide a unique resource and detailed contextual data sets for the analysis of native AMPAR complexes and their role in excitatory neurotransmission.

### Keywords
Brain regions, Ap-ms, Lc-msms, Rat, Development, Ampa receptor, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II, University of Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Haupt

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Fakler
Institute of Physiology II, University of Freiburg, Germany


