### Accession
PXD038067

### Title
Proximity labelling and LCMSMS analysis of spliceosome complexes using SUGP1-miniTurbo

### Description
The purpose of the project is to identify proteins binding differentially to the human specific spliceosomal protein SUGP1 in the context of point mutations to its G-patch domain.  SUGP1 wt and mutant (G603N or L570E) C-terminally tagged with mini-Turbo-NLS was overexpressed for 48 h in HEK293T cells prior to a 2 min labelling pulse with 200 µM biotin. A non-transfection control was included and all samples were prepared in four independent biological replicates. Biotinylated proteins were captured by incubating total cell lysates for 30 min at 4 °C with streptavidin beads. The enrichment was then performed exactly as described in Cho et al. Nat Protoc 15, 3971–3999 (2020) pmid: 33139955

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed on-beads. Sample-incubated streptavidin magnetic beads were treated with 5 mM TCEP in 10 mM TEAB, and alkylation followed with 15 mM iodoacetamide, followed by overnight treatment with LysC and then trypsin, peptide recovery and TMT labelling for mass spectrometry analysis

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Protein Prospector against the human subset of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2019.07.31) plus the corresponding randomized sequences to calculate FRD on the searches), using Protein Prospector. 1% FDR was allowed on searches.

### Publication Abstract
The spliceosome is a staggeringly complex machine, comprising, in humans, 5 snRNAs and &gt;150 proteins. We scaled haploid CRISPR-Cas9 base editing to target the entire human spliceosome and investigated the mutants using the U2 snRNP/SF3b inhibitor, pladienolide B. Hypersensitive substitutions define functional sites in the U1/U2-containing A complex but also in components that act as late as the second chemical step after SF3b is dissociated. Viable resistance substitutions map not only to the pladienolide B-binding site but also to the G-patch domain of SUGP1, which lacks orthologs in yeast. We used these mutants and biochemical approaches to identify the spliceosomal disassemblase DHX15/hPrp43 as the ATPase ligand for SUGP1. These and other data support a model in which SUGP1 promotes splicing fidelity by triggering early spliceosome disassembly in response to kinetic blocks. Our approach provides a template for the analysis of essential cellular machines in humans.

### Keywords
Bioid, Spliceosome, Miniturbo, Sugp1, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
UCSF
Professor & Vice-Chair Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Hiten D.
Professor & Vice-Chair Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics UCSF


