### Accession
PXD009383

### Title
Human,squamous cell lung cancer,LC-MS/MS

### Description
We compared the proteome of primary SqCLC tumor tissue between patients with ER (< 10 months) vs. LR (> 30 months) following surgery. iTRAQ-based quantitative 2D LC-MS/MS proteomics were performed on 20 SqCLC tumor samples (10 ER, 10 LR) using a matched pair design in which each ER tumor sample was paired and analyzed together with a LR tumor sample matched based on similar patient clinicopathologic features, including gender, smoking history, age and TNM status.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT) using a Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen). Protein concentrations were determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm.A modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (compatible with iTRAQ labeling) was used for tissue digestion.Each two pairs of samples were labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems) in both orders (forward and reverse). Tumor tissue samples were analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The iTRAQ-labeled samples were mixed and fractionated on Agilent 1100 HPLC using SCX column. Six fractions were eluted using pH gradient elution buffer and desalted. The SCX-fractionated peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% FA solution and separated on a self-packed reversed phase tip column (75 μm × 150 mm; C18, 3 μm) using a 240 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. LTQ Orbitrap velos was conducted in data-dependent acquisition mode using a “high–high” strategy (high mass accuracy and resolution both on precursor and product ion mass). Full MS scans and HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation)-MS/MS scans for the ten most intense ions in each full MS scan were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and 7500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Mascot 2.2.2 (Matrix Science) software. Each MS/MS spectrum searched against a concatenated version of the forward and reversed human Uniprot fasta database. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels. Quantitative ratios for peptides and proteins were obtained using Buildsummary software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Squamous cell lung cancer, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Qingqing Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik J. Ditzel
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense, Denmark


