### Accession
PXD014050

### Title
The effects of fetal prenatal androgen and estrogenic exposure on the health of adult animals

### Description
Prenatal exposure to androgens and estrogens and their effect on liver development

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted using Qiagen's all-prep DNA-RNA-protein kit. Proteins were resuspended in minimul amount of buffer containing urea (0.414g/ml), thiourea (0.152g/ml), Rapigest detergent (0.1%), and DTT(0.003/ml). Ten micrograms of fetal plasma proteins were diluted to a final volume of 100 μL in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (BioUltra grade, Sigma Aldrich). Proteins were digested in solution according to the PRIME-XS protocol (http://www.primexs.eu/protocols/Public-Documents/04%2D%2D-Protocols/PRIME-XS-Protocol-NPC-In-Solution-Digestion.pdf/). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 2 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, > 99%) for 25 min at 60 °C and S-xalkylated in 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, > 99%) for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark, then digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK, cat.no. V5111) at a 1:10 ratio of trypsin:protein overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by freezing at − 80 °C. Samples were then thawed, dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac Plus SC110A, Savant), and dissolved in 10 μL 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The equivalent of 2 μg of peptides (assuming no losses) were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The LC-MS system included a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-LC configured for pre-concentration onto a nano-column, coupled to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-Spray nano-ESI source (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were injected onto a C18 PepMap 100 pre-column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm) in loading pump solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min for 5 min. The pre-column was then reverse-flushed to the analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18; 50 μm i.d. × 15 cm; Nano pump solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, Nano pump solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 0.3 μL/min using the nano-pump. Peptides were separated using a gradient of acetonitrile (LC gradient: 3–10% solvent B in 5 min, 10–40% solvent B in 30 min, 40–80% solvent B in 5 min, hold at 80% solvent B for 8 min, 80–3% solvent B in 1 min, hold at 3% solvent B for 15 min) while MS/MS data were acquired by the Q Exactive in data-dependent mode (Top10 method). Parameters for the full scan/data-dependent MS2 (Top10) method were as follows: full scan range 375–1750 m/z, resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms; MS2 scan resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum IT 100 ms, loop count 10, isolation window 1.6 m/z, NCE 26, underfill ratio 4%, charge states 2–5 included, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant runs against ovine, bovine, swine, horse and goat proteomes. Data were normalised usin MaxLFQ. Min peptides of 1 were used for protein identification, quantification and normalisation. A liberal FDR for protein identification of 0.2 was used, analyses were trimmed to a Q-value of 0.01 for downstream statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen signalling is a critical driver of male development. Fetal steroid signalling can be dysregulated by a range of environmental insults and clinical conditions. We hypothesised that poor adult male health was partially attributable to aberrant androgen exposure during development. Testosterone was directly administered to developing male ovine fetuses to model excess prenatal androgenic overexposure associated with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Such in utero androgen excess recreated the dyslipidaemia and hormonal profile observed in sons of PCOS patients. 1,084 of 15,134 and 408 of 2,766 quantifiable genes and proteins respectively, were altered in the liver during adolescence, attributable to fetal androgen excess. Furthermore, prenatal androgen excess predisposed to adolescent development of an intrahepatic cholestasis-like condition with attendant hypercholesterolaemia and an emergent pro-fibrotic, pro-oxidative stress gene and protein expression profile evident in both liver and circulation. We conclude that prenatal androgen excess is a previously unrecognised determinant of lifelong male metabolic health.

### Keywords
Plasma, Androgens, Liver, Estrogen, Sex differences, Sheep, Fetal programming

### Affiliations
The University of Aberdeen
Napier University, Edinburgh, Scotland

### Submitter
Panagiotis Filis

### Lab Head
Dr Mick Rae
Napier University, Edinburgh, Scotland


