### Accession
PXD019520

### Title
Control of the mitochondrial carrier import pathway by DYRK1A

### Description
Mitochondria require a complete and functional proteome to maintain a plethora of metabolic reactions in a cell. Changes in cellular demands depend on a rapid adaptation of the mitochondrial proteome. The translocase of the outer membrane TOM, constitutes the organellar entry gate that imports nearly all proteins as precursors from the cytosol. It is therefore an ideal target for cytosolic signalling pathways to regulate organellar protein influx.  Here we identify the human mitochondrial import receptor TOM70 as a target of the cytosolic kinase DYRK1A. Phosphorylation of TOM70Ser91 by DYRK1A does not affect precursor binding but stimulates the interaction of the peripheral import receptor with the core TOM complex to enable increased precursor translocation. Thus TOM70Ser91 phosphorylation by DYRK1A provides a regulatory switch for the carrier import pathway in human mitochondria. DYRK1A has not been linked to mitochondria before. Regulation of protein import by DYRK1A provides an efficient mean to adapt the mitochondrial proteome to changing cellular needs and may also build a basis for the understanding of disease mechanisms caused by dysfunctional DYRK1A.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in three consecutive cycles of snap-freezing (N2 liquid), thawing and 1 min incubation in an ultrasonic bath in presence of 4 % SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCL/150 mM NaCl pH 7,8 including PhosSTOP and Complete mini (Roche, Mannheim, Germany, 1 tablet per 10 mL). Debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 25 min at 4°C. Proteins were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation for 30 min at 56°C followed by alkylation via iodoacetaminde using a final concentration of 20 mM for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by adding 9 volumes of ice-cold ethanol and incubation at -40° C for 1 h. Precipitated proteins were spin down at 12,000 g for 40 minutes at 4° C and pellets were washed using 100 µL of ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were solubilized in 6 M guanidinium-HCl and the protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Prior proteolytic digestion, samples were diluted 20-fold using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1.5 mM CaCl2. Trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) was added in a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin : protein, w/w) and samples were incubated for 13 h at 37° C under slight agitation. The digestion was stopped by adding FA to a final concentration of 1 % and peptides were purified using SPEC-C18 AR cartridges (Agilent, Boeblingen, Germany). Digestion quality was controlled via a monolithic column HPLC. Electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (ERLIC) was performed similar to Loroch et al. using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a PolyWAX (weak anion exchange) column (4.6 mm × 100 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Poly LC, Columbia) eluted with a binary gradient of 20 mM sodium methylphosphonic acid, 70% acetonitrile, pH 2 (ERLIC buffer A) and 200 mM triethylammonium phosphate, 60% ACN, pH 2 (ERLIC buffer B). The system was equilibrated with buffer A for 20 minute before injection of the sample in 20 µl ERLIC buffer A. Separation was conducted at a flowrate of 1 mL/min starting with 100 % A for 10 min followed by a linear increase to 100 % B over 10 min followed by 100 % B for 5 min. 24 fractions of 1 minute were collected. To remove acetonitrile and residual ERLIC buffer salts, fractions were dried, reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA, subjected to RP-SPE using Hypersep SpinTips (Thermo Scientific) followed by LC-MS on an LTQOrbitrap Velos Pro online coupled to a U3000 RSLC nanoHPLC

### Data Protocol
Raw-files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4. Database search was conducted using Mascot v2.4 against Uniprot, taxonomy human (www.uniprot.org, 11-2016, 20,120 target sequences). DB search parameters were: trypsin with two missed cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modification. Error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. phosphoRS v3.1 was used to assign phosphosite localization probabilities and results were filtered to meet a 1 % false discovery rate (on PSM level) using the Percolator 2.04 node. Phosphosites were considered identified if the phosphoRS site probability was ≥ 90 %.

### Publication Abstract
The translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane TOM constitutes the organellar entry gate for nearly all precursor proteins synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes. Thus, TOM presents the ideal target to adjust the mitochondrial proteome upon changing cellular demands. Here, we identify that the import receptor TOM70 is targeted by the kinase DYRK1A and that this modification plays a critical role in the activation of the carrier import pathway. Phosphorylation of TOM70<sup>Ser91</sup> by DYRK1A stimulates interaction of TOM70 with the core TOM translocase. This enables transfer of receptor-bound precursors to the translocation pore and initiates their import. Consequently, loss of TOM70<sup>Ser91</sup> phosphorylation results in a strong decrease in import capacity of metabolite carriers. Inhibition of DYRK1A impairs mitochondrial structure and function and elicits a protective transcriptional response to maintain a functional import machinery. The DYRK1A-TOM70 axis will enable insights into disease mechanisms caused by dysfunctional DYRK1A, including autism spectrum disorder, microcephaly and Down syndrome.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Phosphoproteomics, Tom70

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


