### Accession
PXD031227

### Title
Reconstitution of 3’-processing of mammalian pre-mRNA reveals a central role of RBBP6

### Description
The 3’ ends of almost all eukaryotic mRNAs are generated in an essential two-step processing reaction, endonucleolytic cleavage of an extended precursor followed by the addition of a poly(A) tail. By reconstituting the reaction from overproduced and purified proteins, we provide a minimal list of fourteen polypeptides essential and two stimulatory for RNA processing. In a reaction depending on the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA, the reconstituted system cleaves pre-mRNA at a single preferred site corresponding to the one used in vivo. Among the proteins, Cleavage Factor I stimulates cleavage but is not essential, consistent with its prominent role in alternative polyadenylation. RBBP6 is required, structural data showing it to contact and presumably activate the endonuclease CPSF73 through its DWNN domain. The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is dispensable. ATP, but not its hydrolysis, supports RNA cleavage by binding to the hClp1 subunit of cleavage factor II with submicromolar affinity.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins of the pre-mRNA cleavage complex were recominantly expressed either in Sf21 Cells or in E.coli. Reactions with or without PVA were set up. Each reaction contained 250 µL 2x cleavage buffer6.25 pmol SV40 late RNA, 25 µg E.coli tRNA, 50 µl CDB200, 12.5 pmol each of CFI, CFII,CstF, bPAP, mCF3, mPSF and either 62.5 pmol RBBP61-340 or 31.25 pmol RBBP61-780. The reaction volume was increased to 500µl with 25 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 8.0, 200 mM KCl, 10 %sucrose, 1 mM DTT. After pre-incubation for 30 minutes at 30°C, 1.5 µl DSBU (Thermo Fisher;50 mM in DMSO) was added and the incubation continued for another 30 minutes at 25°C.The reaction was stopped by the addition of 25 µl 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of TCA to 10% and pelleted by centrifugation. Pellets were washed with 80 % ice-cold acetone, air-dried, and dissolved in 25 µl 8 M urea in 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate. Sulfide bonds were reduced for 20 min at 50°C with 7.5 mM DTT, and alkylation was performed at 25°C for 20 min with 14 mM chloroacetamide. The volume was made up to 200 µl with H2O, and 2.5 µg trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) was added. After incubation over night at 37°C, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 20 µl 10 % TFA. Peptides were first purified by StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Per reaction 10 StageTips with 5 Empore C18 extraction discs (Sigma-Aldrich)were prepared and washed with 20 µl methanol, then with buffer B (60% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and finally buffer A (0.1%TFA). Equal volumes of the crosslink reactions were loaded on the StageTips. The StageTipswere washed with 20 µl buffer A and eluted with 5 µl buffer B. The eluate was loaded on a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) running at 25 µL/min in 3% acetonitrile,0.1% TFA. Fractions of 50µl were collected and analyzed by nano-HPLC/nano-ESI-MS/MSusing an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with NanoFlex source (both Thermo Fisher). Samples were injected on a trap column (PepMap RP-C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher)with 0.1 % TFA at a flow rate of 30 μL/min. After 15 min, peptides were eluted via a 200 cm µPAC™ separation column (Pharmafluidics). For separation, 240 min gradients were applied(3-6.5 % B over 25 min at 600 nL/min followed by 6.5-33 % B over 205 min at 300 nL/min; A:0.1 % formic acid in water, B: 0.08 % formic acid in acetonitrile). Data were acquired in datadependent MS/MS mode (one MS survey scan, followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant signals). MS survey scans (m/z range 375-1799) were recorded with R = 140000 at m/z 200, the target of the automated gain control (AGC) was set to 3x106 and the maximum njection time was 100 ms. For MS/MS scans, triply to seven times protonated ions were selected for fragmentation by HCD with stepped normalized collision energies (NCEs: 27, 30,and 33 V). The following parameters were applied for MS/MS scans: R = 17.500, AGC: 2 ×105 and maximum injection time: 250 ms; dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into mzML files. For data analysis Merox (v. 2.0.1.4) were used. For identification cross-links from amine groups (lysines, n-termini) to amine and hydroxyl (serine, theronine, tyrosine) with 3 missed cleavages and blocked by C-terminal Pro residue were considered. A standard data cut-off at a FDR of 1% and a minimum score cut-off: 50 were applied.

### Publication Abstract
The 3' ends of almost all eukaryotic mRNAs are generated in an essential two-step processing reaction: endonucleolytic cleavage of an extended precursor followed by the addition of a poly(A) tail. By reconstituting the reaction from overproduced and purified proteins, we provide a minimal list of 14 polypeptides that are essential and two that are stimulatory for RNA processing. In a reaction depending on the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA, the reconstituted system cleaves pre-mRNA at a single preferred site corresponding to the one used in vivo. Among the proteins, cleavage factor I stimulates cleavage but is not essential, consistent with its prominent role in alternative polyadenylation. RBBP6 is required, with structural data showing it to contact and presumably activate the endonuclease CPSF73 through its DWNN domain. The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is dispensable. ATP, but not its hydrolysis, supports RNA cleavage by binding to the hClp1 subunit of cleavage factor II with submicromolar affinity.

### Keywords
Cpsf, 3’-processing, Xl-ms, Rbbp6

### Affiliations
University of Halle Department of Biochemistry Germany
Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology; AG Wahle

### Submitter
Florian Kluge

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wahle
University of Halle Department of Biochemistry Germany


