### Accession
PXD033635

### Title
Whole proteome analysis of leukocytes isolated from peripheral blood of patients with sex determination defects and germ cell tumors, occurred in Swyer and CAIS.

### Description
The ability to transmit genetic information through generations depends on preservation of genome integrity. Genetic abnormalities affect cell differentiation, causing tissue specification defects and cancer. We addressed genomic instability in individuals with Differences of Sex Development (DSD), characterized by gonadal dysgenesis, sex reversal, infertility, high susceptibility for different types of cancer, especially Germ Cell Tumors (GCT), and in men with testicular GCTs. We analyzed the whole proteome of leukocytes and confirmed it with immunoblotting and quantitative PCR analysis. Additional data from tissue biopsies strengthen our observations in peripheral blood. In particular, the analysis of leukocytes and dysgenic gonads uncovered DNA damage phenotypes, supported by changes in DNA damage response mechanisms: altered autophagy and innate immune response, suppressed TP53-dependent DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
Leukocytes isolation from the peripheral blood: blood was collected in EDTA and subjected to leukocytes isolation according to the stablished protocol. 10 ml of blood was mixed with 30 ml of lysis buffer (155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, 0,1 mM EDTA ph 7.4) and incubated 30’ on ice. Then mix was centrifuged 10’ at 1200 rpm at 4°C. The pellet was washed three times with 10 ml lysis buffer and then subjected for DNA, RNA and protein isolation with NucleoSpin® TriPrep kit (Marcherey-Nagel).  Reduction and alkylation of proteins was performed for 30 minutes at RT using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA. Lys-C was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and solution was mixed and incubated for 4h at 37C. Mixture was diluted 1:4 with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and trypsin was added in ratio 1:50, followed by overnight incubation at 37C. Samples were acidified using TFA to reach pH < 2. Digested proteins were desalted on self-made C18 Empore® extraction discs (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens protein database modified June 2020 and containing 20531 sequences (UP000005640) and a customized contaminant database using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da and a parent ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm. Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification of cysteine and oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and methionine loss (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Peptide quantification was done using precursor ion quantifier node with Top N Average method set for protein abundance calculation and N for Top N set to 3.

### Publication Abstract
The ability to transmit genetic information through generations depends on the preservation of genome integrity. Genetic abnormalities affect cell differentiation, causing tissue specification defects and cancer. We addressed genomic instability in individuals with Differences of Sex Development (DSD), characterized by gonadal dysgenesis, infertility, high susceptibility for different types of cancer, especially Germ Cell Tumors (GCT), and in men with testicular GCTs. Whole proteome analysis of leukocytes, supported by specific gene expression assessment, and dysgenic gonads characterization, uncovered DNA damage phenotypes with altered innate immune response and autophagy. Further examination of DNA damage response revealed a reliance on deltaTP53, which was compromised by mutations in the transactivation domain in DSD-individuals with GCT. Accordingly, drug-induced rescue of DNA damage was achieved by autophagy inhibition but not by stabilization of TP53 in DSD-individuals' blood in vitro. This study elucidates possibilities for prophylactic treatments of DSD-individuals, as well as new diagnostic approaches of GCT.

### Keywords
Germ cell tumor, Dsd, Swyer syndrome, Cais, Differences of sex development, Gct, Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg (UKHD)
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Krivega
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg (UKHD)


