### Accession
PXD020956

### Title
Porcine dermal extracellular matrix LC-MSMS

### Description
Hitherto, microenvironments provided by dermal analogues could not avoid frequent split-thickness skin grafts (STSGs) failure and scar fibrosis. We reported a novel method assembling 3D-printed dermal analogues (PDAs) with porcine dermal extracellular matrix(dECM)'s recapitulated the latter’s compositional and topological features. These optimized PADs reduced skin wounds contraction and improved cosmetic upshots proving superior to STSGs and commercially available dermal templates. Once grafted onto wounds beds, optimized PDAs evoked a type-2-like immune response, activated type-2 macrophages (M2-Mφ), upregulated anti-inflammatory genes like Wnt11, Fgf16 and ATF3, downregulated profibrotic genes like Il13r⍺2, Itg⍺11, and IL1β, and hindered fibrosis. Thus, PDAs' beneficial effects resulted from preserved dermis-specific ECM cues (by mass spectrometry analysis we identified more than 200 unique protein species inside our dECM powder) and well-balanced physicochemical properties, which collaboratively modulated crucial endogenous signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
A protein assay based on Bradford's method (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) using bovine serum albumin as the standard, determined the total protein content in acid-dissolved dECMp samples. To digest proteins, 0.05 M Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride solution (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; kept at 60°C for 60 min), 55 mM S-methyl-methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the dark at room temperature for 45 min), 100 μl of 8 M uric acid (pH = 8.5, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and 100 μl of 0.25 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were sequentially added to a solution 50 μg dECMp and spun down several times. After collection, the supernatant was proteolyzed to peptides first using 2% trypsin (Promega, USA) in 50 μl of 0.5M TEAB for 12 h at 37°C, then adding 1% trypsin for additional 4 h at 37°C. Adding 10 μl of 10% formic acid stopped the proteolytic activity. Peptide digests were analyzed via Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS), using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Mascot software (http://www.matrixscience.com). Database searches were carried out using the Uniprot Sus Scrofa database (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/9823). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Orthology-based Annotation System 2.0 (KOBAS 2.0) was used to perform Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG enrichment analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Scar contraction frequently happens in patients with deep burn injuries. Hitherto, porcine dermal extracellular matrix (dECM) has supplied microenvironments that assist in wound healing but fail to inhibit scar contraction. To overcome this drawback, we integrate dECM into three-dimensional (3D)-printed dermal analogues (PDA) to prevent scar contraction. We have developed thermally gelled, non-rheologically modified dECM powder (dECMp) inks and successfully transformed them into PDA that was endowed with a micron-scale spatial structure. The optimal crosslinked PDA exhibited desired structure, good mechanical properties as well as excellent biocompatibility. Moreover, <i>in vivo</i> experiments demonstrated that PDA could significantly reduced scar contraction and improved cosmetic upshots of split thickness skin grafts (STSG) than the commercially available dermal templates and STSG along. The PDA has also induced an early, intense neovascularization, and evoked a type-2-like immune response. PDA's superior beneficial effects may attribute to their desired porous structure, the well-balanced physicochemical properties, and the preserved dermis-specific ECM cues, which collectively modulated the expression of genes such as <i>Wnt11, ATF3,</i> and <i>IL1&#x3b2;,</i> and influenced the crucial endogenous signalling pathways. The findings of this study suggest that PDA is a clinical translatable material that possess high potential in reducing scar contraction.

### Keywords
Porcine dermal extracellular matrix, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
healthtimegene shenzhen
Laboratory of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, SunYat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China

### Submitter
shuhua zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Chen
Laboratory of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, SunYat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China


