### Accession
PXD032828

### Title
Lanthanide response of the obligate methylotroph Methylobacillus flagellatus and discovery of lanpepsy, a novel lanthanide-binding protein

### Description
Lanthanides were recently discovered as metals required in the active site of certain methanol dehydrogenases. Since then, the characterization of the lanthanome, i.e. all proteins involved in sensing, uptake, and utilization of lanthanides, has become an active field of research. Initial exploration of the response to lanthanides in methylotrophs has revealed that the lanthanome is not conserved and that multiple mechanisms for lanthanide utilization must exist. Here we investigated the lanthanome in the obligate model methylotroph Methylobacillus flagellatus. We used a proteomic approach to analyze differentially regulated proteins in the presence of lanthanum. While multiple known proteins showed induction upon growth in presence of lanthanum (Xox proteins, TonB-dependent receptor), we also identified several novel proteins not previously associated with lanthanide utilization. Among these was Mfla_0908, a periplasmic 19 kDa-protein without functional annotation. The protein comprises two characteristic PepSY domains and we thus termed the protein lanpepsy (LanP). Based on bioinformatic analysis, we speculated that LanP could be involved in lanthanide binding. Using dye competition assays as well as protein ultrafiltration followed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometric analysis, we demonstrated the presence of four lanthanide binding sites that showed selectivity over the chemically similar Ca2+ ion. A similar arrangement of two PepSY domains is also present in the recently described uranium-binding protein UipA from Microbacterium spp. LanP and UipA thus represent the first members of PepSY domain proteins involved in metal binding. Although the physiological role of LanP is still unclear, its discovery has important implications for applications towards the sustainable purification and separation of lanthanides.

### Sample Protocol
M. flagellatus strains were cultured in 20 mL minimal medium in 100 mL baffled flasks at 37 °C. The minimal medium (MMM) contained 125 mM methanol as carbon source, mineral salts (1.62 g/L NH4Cl, 0.2 g/L MgSO4·7H2O), phosphate buffer (2.4 g/L K2HPO4, 1.08 g/L NaH2PO4·2H2O), iron solution (15 mg/L Na2EDTA·2H2O, 3 mg/L FeSO4·7H2O), and trace elements (4.5 mg/L ZnSO4·7H2O, 3 mg/L CoCl2·6H2O, 0.64 mg/L MnCl2, 1mg/L H3BO3, 0.4 mg/L Na2MoO4·2H2O, 0.3 mg/L CuSO4·5H2O, 3 mg/L CaCl2·2H2O). For conditions containing lanthanum, 20 µM LaCl3 was added. For a detailed step-by-step protocol refer to ref. (48). Briefly, M. flagellatus KT was grown as independent pre- and main cultures with or without 20 µM LaCl3. From the main cultures, four OD600 units (corresponding to 4 mL of OD600 = 1) were harvested by centrifugation followed by washing with 10 mM MgCl2. The obtained cell pellets were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further processing. In total, five independent biological replicates were generated for each condition. Bacterial cell pellets were dissolved and lysed as described previously (10, 48, 49) in lysis buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysis was achieved by indirect sonication (3x 1 min, 100% amplitude, 0.8 cycle time) in a VialTweeter (Hielscher). Insoluble parts were removed by centrifugation (13,000g, 15 min, 4 °C) and supernatant protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BSA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufactures instructions. Disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of 5 mM tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubation for 30 min at 37 °C. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubation for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Afterwards, samples were diluted 1:5 with fresh 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 2 M. Proteins were digested over night at 37 °C and shaking at 300 rpm using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. After digestion, the trypsin was heat-inactivated (95 °C, 5 min) and formic acid was added to an approximate concentration of 1%. Peptide samples were centrifuged (20,000g, 10 min) and the supernatant was taken and desalted using Sep-Pak Vac C18 reversed phase columns (Waters) as described previously (48, 49) and dried under vacuum. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis the samples were re-solubilized in 3% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry analysis of peptide samples was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed using 0.1% formic acid for solvent A and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as solvent B. Two µL of peptide samples (at a concentration of 0.5 µg µL-1) were loaded on an EASY-spray C18 LC column (75 µm x 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 50 °C and separated with a gradient from 2% to 5% B in 2 min, 25% B in 93 min, 35% B in 10 min and 95% B in 10 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was configured for data-dependent acquisition and operating in top-speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1500 m/z and a resolution of 120k with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4 x 105. Peptides were fragmented using HCD (isolation window 1.6 m/z) using a normalized collision energy of 30 with an AGC target value of 2e3 and spectra were acquired in the ion trap operated with rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s. Internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10124 and 445.12003 was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were imported into Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v. 4.2.7207.2295) using the High-Mass Accuracy Instrument option. Runs were aligned automatically by Progenesis. From each peptide ion (with default sensitivity in peak picking), a maximum of the top five tandem mass spectra were exported using the charge deconvolution and deisotoping option and a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The Mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched using the Mascot Server (Matrix Science, v. 2.7.0.1) against a forward and reversed protein sequence database containing the 2609 annotated proteins of M. flagellatus KT (CP000284.1) concatenated with 6721 yeast proteins and 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants. Parameters for precursor ion tolerance and fragment ion tolerance were set to ±10 ppm and ±0.5 Da respectively. Trypsin was chosen as protein cleaving enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed  modification; oxidation of methionine and carbamylation of the N-terminus and lysine as variable modifications. The Mascot search results were important into Scaffold (Proteome Software, v. 5.0.1) using 5% peptide and 10% protein false discovery rate (FDR). The Scaffold Spectrum Report was exported and imported back into Progenesis QI. Normalization was performed on all precursor ions. For quantification, all proteins identified with at least two unique peptides were assessed. Proteins were grouped by Progenesis and the normalized abundance from the most abundant peptide ions (relative quantification using Hi-3) from the same protein group was averaged for each sample. For statistical analysis, one-way ANOVA was applied on the normalized protein abundance. The resulting P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction directly in Progenesis QI. Proteins were considered significantly changing with a q-value < 0.05 and log2 fold-change of >2 or <-2.

### Publication Abstract
Lanthanides were recently discovered as metals required in the active site of certain methanol dehydrogenases. Since then, the characterization of the lanthanome, that is, proteins involved in sensing, uptake, and utilization of lanthanides, has become an active field of research. Initial exploration of the response to lanthanides in methylotrophs has revealed that the lanthanome is not conserved and that multiple mechanisms for lanthanide utilization must exist. Here, we investigated the lanthanome in the obligate model methylotroph Methylobacillus flagellatus. We used a proteomic approach to analyze differentially regulated proteins in the presence of lanthanum. While multiple known proteins showed induction upon growth in the presence of lanthanum (Xox proteins, TonB-dependent receptor), we also identified several novel proteins not previously associated with lanthanide utilization. Among these was Mfla_0908, a periplasmic 19 kDa protein without functional annotation. The protein comprises two characteristic PepSY domains, which is why we termed the protein lanpepsy (LanP). Based on bioinformatic analysis, we speculated that LanP could be involved in lanthanide binding. Using dye competition assays, quantification of protein-bound lanthanides by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, as well as isothermal titration calorimetry, we demonstrated the presence of multiple lanthanide binding sites that showed selectivity over the chemically similar calcium ion. LanP thus represents the first member of the PepSY family that binds lanthanides. Although the physiological role of LanP is still unclear, its identification is of interest for applications toward the sustainable purification and separation of rare-earth elements.

### Keywords
Lanthanides, Methylotroph, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology
Hans Knöll Institute (Leibniz-HKI)

### Submitter
Jethro Hemmann

### Lab Head
Dr Julia A. Vorholt
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


