### Accession
PXD024340

### Title
Drosophila hemolymph infected with Spiroplasma poulsonii

### Description
We investigated the effect of Spiroplasma infection on Drosophila hemolymph protein content using Liquid Chromatography-tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). To this end, we extracted total hemolymph from uninfected and infected 10 days old females. At this age, Spiroplasma is already present at high titers in the hemolymph but does not cause major deleterious phenotypes to the fly.  Extraction was achieved by puncturing the thorax and drawing out with a microinjector. Four replicates were made

### Sample Protocol
Hemolymph was extracted from 10 days-old flies from the second generation after bleach treatment using a Nanoject II (Drummond) as previously described (Herren et al., 2014). 1 µL of hemolymph was collected for each sample, diluted in 10 µL of phosphate buffered saline and frozen at -80°C until further use.Hemolymph was then diluted 10 times with PBS containing Protease Inhibitor Cocktail 1X (Roche). 1µl was used for BCA quantification. The remaining 9 µl were mixed with SDS (0.2% final), DTT (2.5mM final) and PMSF (10µM final) and aliquot of 15µg were used for proteomics analysis.  Each sample was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.2 (3) against a concatenated database consisting of the Ensemble Drosophila melanogaster protein database (BDGP5.25) and a predicted Spiroplama poulsonii Proteome ( Expliquer d’ou ca vient ) . Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Label free quantification was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings.

### Publication Abstract
Insects are frequently infected with heritable bacterial endosymbionts. Endosymbionts have a dramatic impact on their host physiology and evolution. Their tissue distribution is variable with some species being housed intracellularly, some extracellularly and some having a mixed lifestyle. The impact of extracellular endosymbionts on the biofluids they colonize (e.g. insect hemolymph) is however difficult to appreciate because biofluid composition can depend on the contribution of numerous tissues. Here we investigate Drosophila hemolymph proteome changes in response to the infection with the endosymbiont Spiroplasma poulsonii. S. poulsonii inhabits the fly hemolymph and gets vertically transmitted over generations by hijacking the oogenesis in females. Using dual proteomics on infected hemolymph, we uncovered a weak, chronic activation of the Toll immune pathway by S. poulsonii that was previously undetected by transcriptomics-based approaches. Using Drosophila genetics, we also identified candidate proteins putatively involved in controlling S. poulsonii growth. Last, we also provide a deep proteome of S. poulsonii, which, in combination with previously published transcriptomics data, improves our understanding of the post-transcriptional regulations operating in this bacterium.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Endosymbiosis, Drosophila, Spiroplasma

### Affiliations
EPFL
GHI EPFL Switzerland

### Submitter
Samuel Rommelaere

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Lemaitre EPFL Switzerland
GHI EPFL Switzerland


