### Accession
PXD009200

### Title
Global hyperactivation of enhancers stabilizes human and mouse naïve pluripotency

### Description
The transition of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) from primed to naïve states constitutes a prototypical example of cellular plasticity.  The naïve state can be stabilized by defined chemical cocktails that block extracellular signals, notably including the MEK pathway. However, little is known regarding the underlying transcriptional mechanisms.  Here, we report that the transcriptional landscape of the naïve state can be mimicked in mouse and human PSCs by stimulating transcriptional enhancers.  This is attained by inhibiting the CDK8 and CDK19 kinases, which are negative regulators of Mediator, a critical component of enhancer function.  Mechanistically, CDK8/19i triggers a global increase in the recruitment of RNA Pol II at promoters and enhancers, hyperactivating enhancers and their target genes.  Lastly, the emergence of naïve pluripotency in the pre-implantation epiblast coincides with a marked reduction in CDK8/19 activity, and CDK8/19i blocks its subsequent developmental progression.  These findings suggest that naïve pluripotency during development includes hyperactivation of enhancers and can be captured in vitro, either by blunting extracellular signaling, or by stimulating enhancer-driven transcription.  These principles may apply to other cellular transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Long term proteome Cells were lysed using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 50mM Hepes, 1:1000 (v/v) of benzonase and 1:100 (v/v) of HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail 100x. Cell lysates were homogenized by sonication and cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was measured with Qubit® Protein Assay Kit. 110µg of each lysate (except for Control TNGA for which 220 µg were used) were digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). First digestion using Lys-C (1:50 w/w, Wako Pure Chemical Industries) was performed during 4 hours at room temperature, followed by a dilution 8-fold in 50mM TEAB to reduce urea concentration. Second digestion using trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) was carried out overnight at 37⁰C. To quantify the 15 samples using iTRAQ 8-plex, two multi-plex experiments were performed in parallel. TNGA control sample was added to both iTRAQ experiments. The following labelling scheme was used: 1st iTRAQ: 113 Ctrl TNGA, 114 2i TNGA, 115 Ctrl ZS, 116 2i ZS, 117 CDK8i ZS, 118 Ctrl V64, 119 2i V64, 121 CDK8i V64; 2nd iTRAQ 113 Ctrl TNGA, 114 CDK8i TNGA, 115 Ctrl TON, 116 2i TON, 117 CDK8i TON, 118 Ctrl BL6, 119 2i BL6, 121 CDK 8i BL6. Labelling was performed using the iTRAQ® Reagent 8plex kit (AB Sciex). Clean-up was performed with C18 Sep-Pack. Eluate was dried and dissolved in 10 mM of NH4OH for subsequent fractionation by high pH reversed phase chromatography. Each iTRAQ labelled sample was fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography. Peptides were dissolved in 100 µl of phase A (10 mM NH4OH). Peptides were eluted at 500 µl/min onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 (3.5 µm, 4.6 x 250 mm) column (Waters) using the following gradient of phase B (10 mM NH4OH, 90% CH3CN): 0-50 min 25% B, 50-54 min 60% B and 54-61 min 70% B. Samples were collected every minute from minute 10 to 55, and concatenated into 15 fractions. Fractions were dried and dissolved in 50 µl of 1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. The Impact (Bruker Daltonics) was coupled online to a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent). 7.5 µl of each fraction were loaded onto a reversed-phase C18, 5 µm, 0.1 x 20 mm trapping column (NanoSeparations) and washed for 15 min at 2.5 µl/min with 0.1% FA. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nl/min onto a home-made analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, 1.9 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm, heated to 45 °C. Solvent A was 4% ACN in 0.1% FA and Solvent B CH3CN in 0.1% FA. The MS acquisition time used for each sample was 180 min. The Q-q-TOF Impact was operated in a data dependent mode. The 20 most abundant isotope patterns exceeding a threshold of 5000 counts and with charge ≥2 and m/z > 350 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by collision induced dissociation (CID). Phospho-proteome after 15 min of treatment Cells pellets were lysed as described for full proteome experiment. 240µg of 2i TON, 8i TON, 2i ZS and 8i ZS; and 480µg of Ctrl TON and Ctrl ZS were digested using the FASP method as described previously. In the case of 480 µg of Ctrl TON and Ctrl ZS, samples were divided in two aliquots of 240µg and digested separately and in parallel. The following labelling scheme was used: 113 Ctrl TON, 114 Ctrl TON, 115 15 min 2iTON, 116 15 min Cdk8i TON; 117 Ctrl ZS, 118 Ctrl ZS, 119 15 min 2i ZS, 121 15 min CDK8i ZS. Two units of iTRAQ® Reagent 8plex kit (AB Sciex) per sample were used following the manufacturer instructions. The clean-up was performed with C18 Sep-Pack. To perform phosphopeptide enrichment, peptides were dissolved in 80% CH3CN and 6% TFA. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads were prepared at 60µg beads/µl of DHB solution (20 mg/ml DHB in 80% CH3CN 6% TFA). TiO2 beads were added to the sample in a ratio 1:2 (Sample:TiO2). Sample was incubated for 15 minutes. Supernatant was used for a second binding with half the amount of beads. Beads from the first and second TiO2 binding were transfer to separate C8-tips and washed. Peptides were eluted with 25µl of 5% NH4OH and 25µl of 10% NH4OH 25% CH3CN. Eluate from the second TiO2 binding was resuspended in 22 µl 5% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. Eluate from the first binding was fractionated with high pH reverse phase micro-columns. 5 discs of C18 stage tip were used. Sample was loaded into the tips thrice and the flow-through was collected to a vial. Next, 50 µl of phase A (20 mM NH4OH) was loaded and collected as the flow-through. Peptides were sequentially eluted increasing the percentage of Buffer B (20mM NH3 in CH3CN. Last three fractions were pooled together. Samples were dissolved in 22µl of 5% FA for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Each fraction were analyzed twice (technical replicates) by LC-MS/MS using a 90 minute linear gradient of phase B (CH3CN in 0.1% FA) using the same column settings and data acquisition method as described above.

### Data Protocol
LONG TERM PROTEOME Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) as the search engine against a Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 43,539 sequences).  Sample quantification type was set to iTRAQ8plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal were included as variable modifications.  Precursor mass tolerance was 35 ppm for the first search, and 7 ppm for the main search.  Fragment mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm.  Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed.  Peptides were filtered at 1% FDR.  For protein assessment (FDR <1%) in MaxQuant, at least one unique peptide was required for identification.  Other parameters were set as default.  Proteins that did not have reporter intensity in all eight channels were discarded for further analysis.   PHOSPHOPROTEOME Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) as the search engine against a Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 43,539 sequences).  Sample quantification type was set to iTRAQ8plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal were included as variable modifications.  Precursor mass tolerance was 35 ppm for the first search, and 7 ppm for the main search.  Fragment mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm.  Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed.  Peptides were filtered at 1% FDR.  For protein assessment (FDR <1%) in MaxQuant, at least one unique peptide was required for identification.  Other parameters were set as default.  Phosphorylation sites that were not quantified in all eight channels were discarded for further analysis. Afterwards, the “Phospho(STY) sites” file was processed with R (v 3.3.0) and Perseus (v1.5.5.2) (Tyanova et al., 2016) for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stem cells, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
Proteomics Unit, Spanish Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Ana Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Proteomics Unit, Spanish Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain


