### Accession
PXD027452

### Title
Annexin A1 is a polarity cue that directs planar mitotic spindle orientation during mammalian epithelial morphogenesis

### Description
Oriented cell divisions are critical for the formation and maintenance of structured epithelia. Proper mitotic spindle orientation relies on polarised anchoring of force generators to the cell cortex by the evolutionarily conserved Gαi-LGN-NuMA complex. However, the polarity cues that control cortical patterning of this ternary complex remain largely unknown in mammalian epithelia. Here we identify the membrane-associated protein Annexin A1 (ANXA1) as a novel interactor of LGN in mammary epithelial cells. ANXA1 acts independently of Gαi to instruct the accumulation of LGN and NuMA at the lateral cortex to ensure cortical anchoring of Dynein-Dynactin and astral microtubules and thereby planar alignment of the mitotic spindle. Loss of ANXA1 randomises mitotic spindle orientation, which in turn disrupts epithelial architecture and lumen formation in three-dimensional (3D) primary mammary organoids. Our findings establish ANXA1 as an upstream cortical cue that regulates LGN to direct planar cell divisions during mammalian epithelial morphogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, proteins on the beads were partially denatured with a buffer containing 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT. Beads were further treated with a buffer containing 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and proteins were eluted by digestion with 5 µg/ml trypsin (Promega). Eluted proteins were fully digested overnight. C18 reverse phase clean-up was performed on the tryptic peptides using a Waters Oasis C18 plate (Waters, UK). Peptide extracts were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) using a PepMap C18 EASY-Spray LC column, 2 μm particle size, 75 μm x 75 cm column (Thermo Scientific) over a 140 min (single run) linear gradient of 3–25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were introduced using an EASY‐Spray source at 2000 V to a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. Full MS spectra were recorded from 300 to 1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an automatic was performed using TopSpeed mode at a cycle time of 3 s. Peptide ions were isolated using an isolation width of 1.6 amu and trapped at a maximal injection time of 120 ms with an AGC target of 300,000. Higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was induced at an energy setting of 28 for peptides with a charge state of 2–4. Fragments were analysed in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw data was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific) and the data processed to generate reduced charge state and deisotoped precursor and associated product ion peak lists. These peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot KB database protein database (42,186 entries, 2018-05-18). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic digestion and the variable modification was set to contain oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with randomized decoy database searches and were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Annexin a1, Proteomics, Mammary

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences University of Southampton
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton

### Submitter
Paul Skipp

### Lab Head
Dr Salah Elias
Biological Sciences University of Southampton


