### Accession
PXD006904

### Title
Fc Gamma Receptor (FcγR) Expression and Signaling in the Developing Rat Brain

### Description
Maternal antibodies specific for antigens in the developing brain are implicated as risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders, but how these antibodies interfere with neurodevelopment remain speculative. It has been postulated that immunoglobulin G-immune complexes (IgG-IC) activate Fc gamma receptors (FcγR) on non-immune cells in the brain, thereby modulating intracellular signaling and/or internalizing function-blocking antibodies specific for intracellular antigens. However, testing this hypothesis has been hindered by the paucity of data regarding FcγR in the developing brain. Thus, we first investigated FcγR expression in the brain of neonatal male and female rats using quantitative PCR analyses. FcgrIa, FcgrIIa, FcgrIIb, FcgrIIIa and Fcgrt transcripts were detectable in the cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum at postnatal days 1 and 7. These transcripts were also present in primary hippocampal and cortical cell cultures, where their expression was upregulated by IFNγ. In order to confirm protein abundance of FcγRIa, FcγRIIb and FcγRIIIa in cultured hippocampal and cortical neurons and astrocytes on the single cell and tissue level we used immunocytochemistry, western blotting, proteotype analysis, and flow cytometry. The data shows that a subpopulation of these cells co-express the excitatory FcγRIa and the inhibitory FcγRIIb. Functional analysis shows that exposure of hippocampal and cortical cell cultures to IgG-IC increased intracellular calcium and Erk phosphorylation, and triggered FcγR-mediated internalization of IgG. Collectively, these data demonstrate that developing neurons and astrocytes express signaling competent FcγR. which could establish a molecular mode of action of maternal antibodies could influence vulnerability to neurodevelopmental disorders via direct interactions with FcγR on non-immune cells in the developing brain. These findings support the hypothesis that maternal antibodies influence vulnerability to neurodevelopmental disorders via direct interactions with FcγR on non-immune cells in the developing brain.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Surface Capture (CSC) technology was used as previously described (Wollscheid et al., 2009) to identify the cell surface proteotype (e.g. surfaceome) in DIV 7, DIV 14 and DIV 21 hippocampal cell cultures. Briefly, surface glycoproteins were gently oxidized with 2 mM NaIO4 and subsequently biotinylated with 5 mM biocytin hydrazide for 20 min. Cells were harvested by scraping, and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.25% Rapigest, 10 mM TCEP) by sonication using a VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics Gmbh, Germany). Proteins were alkylated for 30 min with 10mM iodoacetamide (room temperature in the dark) and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C, in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50. In order to inactivate trypsin, samples were boiled 20 min and subsequently incubated with 1 mM PMSF for 15 min at 37°C while shaking (300 rpm), and then acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 3. Samples were centrifuged (10 min, 16,000 x g) before capturing biotinylated glycopeptides using streptavidin affinity matrix (Pierce, Ultralink). Glycopeptides captured on the streptavidin affinity matrix were washed as previously described and incubated with PNGase F at 37°C for 18 h to release N-glycosylated peptides. Samples were acidified to pH 2-3 with formic acid, and peptides were desalted with C18 UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer's instruction and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA).       For mass spectrometric (MS) analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (75 μm inner diameter; New Objective) packed in-house with a 15 cm stationary phase (Magic C18AQ, 200 Å, 1.9; Michrom Bioresources) and connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 instrument combined with an autosampler (Proxeon). The HPLC was coupled to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with 100% buffer A (99% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min for 30 min with a linear gradient from 6-20% buffer B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by 15 min from 20 – 35% buffer B and a washing step with 90% buffer B. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner (Top15). In a standard method for medium-to-low abundant samples, high-resolution MS1 spectra were acquired at 70,000 resolution (automatic gain control target value 3*106) to monitor peptide ions in the mass range of 375 – 1,500 m/z, followed by High Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD)- MS/MS scans @ 35,000 resolution (automatic gain control target value 1*106). To avoid multiple scans of dominant ions, the precursor ion masses of scanned ions are dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 30 sec. Single charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states or charge states above 6 were excluded from MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, SEQUEST software v27.0 was used to search fragment ion spectra for a match to tryptic peptides with maximally two missed cleavage sites from a protein database, which was composed of the Rattus norvegicus reference proteome (Uniprot, organism ID 10116), various common contaminants and sequence-reversed decoy proteins. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all cysteines. The PeptideProphet and the ProteinProphet tools of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.6.2) were used for the probability scoring of peptide spectrum matches, and inferring protein identifications were filtered to reach an estimated false-discovery rate of ≤ 1 %. Finally, proteins were filtered for cell surface glycoproteins as previously described (Wollscheid et al., 2009). In brief, each identified protein was required to be identified with at least one peptide containing the consensus NXS/T glycosylation motif containing an asparagine to aspartic acid deamidation site with a MS measured mass difference of 0.986 Da, indicating the cell surface labeling and the enzymatic deamidation during the CSC workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Neuron culture, Fc gamma receptors

### Affiliations
Department of Health Sciences and Technology (D-HEST) Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB) ETH Zürich
Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research

### Submitter
Marc van Oostrum

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Department of Health Sciences and Technology (D-HEST) Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB) ETH Zürich


