### Accession
PXD013669

### Title
Rebuilding core abscisic acid signaling pathways of Arabidopsis in yeast

### Description
The signaling pathway of the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) regulates responses towards abiotic stress such as drought and high osmotic conditions. The multitude of functionally redundant components involved in ABA signaling, poses a major challenge for elucidating the largely unresolved response selectivity. We decided rebuilding single linear ABA signaling pathways in yeast for combinatoric permutation of ABA receptors and coreceptors, as well as the response-mediating SnRK2 protein kinases and their targeted transcription factors to drive luciferase expression in a heterologous host. We show that SnRK2s differ in the regulation by ABA receptor complexes, affect ABA responsiveness of the pathway, and differ in their transactivation activity but have similar preferences for ABA-responsive transcription factors. SnRK2s thought to act ABA-independently and known to be activated under osmotic stress in plants were regulated by ABA receptor complexes in yeast and competed with ABA receptor components in an ABA-dependent manner in plant tissue. The study reveals the suitability of the yeast system for analysis of ABA signaling factors and allowing the future dissection of ligand-receptor specificities in a functional response pathway. The analysis provides new insights into SnRK2 regulation indicating that four SnRK2 members of the osmotic stress response are tightly embedded into the ABA signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells expressing 3xFLAG:SnRK2 were grown in galactose-containing SD-minimal medium. Crude protein extracts were incubated with ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich) and bound proteins were eluted by boiling the samples in LDS-sample buffer. SnRK2 protein gel bands were excised from Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gels, reduced (DTT), alkylated (CAA) and in-gel digested with Trypsin. PROCAL peptide standard was added prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
To identify SnRK2 phosphorylation sites, (phospho)peptide identification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana (Araport11; https://www.araport.org) and yeast reference proteome (UP00002311) supplemented with common contaminants and a library of retention time spike-in peptides (PROCAL). Trypsin/P was set as protease, up to two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionines, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine was added as variable modification. Other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
The phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) regulates plant responses to abiotic stress, such as drought and high osmotic conditions. The multitude of functionally redundant components involved in ABA signaling poses a major challenge for elucidating individual contributions to the response selectivity and sensitivity of the pathway. Here, we reconstructed single ABA signaling pathways in yeast for combinatorial analysis of ABA receptors and coreceptors, downstream-acting SnRK2 protein kinases, and transcription factors. The analysis shows that some ABA receptors stimulate the pathway even in the absence of ABA and that SnRK2s are major determinants of ABA responsiveness by differing in the ligand-dependent control. Five SnRK2s, including SnRK2.4 known to be active under osmotic stress in plants, activated ABA-responsive transcription factors and were regulated by ABA receptor complexes in yeast. In the plant tissue, SnRK2.4 and ABA receptors competed for coreceptor interaction in an ABA-dependent manner consistent with a tight integration of SnRK2.4 into the ABA signaling pathway. The study establishes the suitability of the yeast system for the dissection of core signaling cascades and opens up future avenues of research on ligand-receptor regulation.

### Keywords
Aba, Yeast, Snrk2 phosphorylation, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Julia Mergner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
TUM


