### Accession
PXD020627

### Title
Barley root proteome and metabolome in response to cytokinin

### Description
Cytokinin is a phytohormone involved in the regulation of diverse developmental and physiological processes in plants. Its potential for biotechnology and development of high-yield and more resilient plants has been recognized, but the molecular mechanisms behind its action are far from understood. In this report, the roots of barley seedling were explored as a new tool to reveal as yet unknown cytokinin-responsive proteins. Significant differences were reproducibly observed for 176 proteins, and at least some of the revealed cytokinin-responsive pathways were confirmed in metabolome analysis, including alterations in phenylpropanoid pathway, amino acid biosynthesis or ROS metabolism. Bioinformatics analysis indicated a significant overlap between cytokinin response and response to abiotic stress. This was confirmed by comparing proteome and metabolome profiles in response to drought, salinity or a period of temperature stress. The results illustrate complex abiotic stress response in the early development of model crop plant and confirm an extensive crosstalk between plant hormone cytokinin and response to temperature stimuli, water availability or salinity.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Hloušková et al., 2019) employing a combination of phenol/acetone/TCA extraction. Portions of samples corresponding to 5 μg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo) and a qTOF maXis Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker) as previously described (Dufková et al., 2019). Peptides were eluted with up to a 120-min, 4% to 40% acetonitrile gradient. MS spectra were acquired at 2 Hz, while MS/MS spectra were acquired between 10-20 Hz using an intensity-dependent mode with a total cycle time of 7 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the reference barley (Mascher et al. 2017) by Proteome Discoverer 2.0, employing Sequest HT with the following parameters: Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Modifications - up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, N-terminal acetylation, Met-loss (protein N-terminus), Met-loss+Acetylation (protein N-terminus); MS1 tolerance - 35 ppm, MS2 tolerance - 0.1 Da (Sequest). The quantitative differences were determined by the spectral counting method, followed by normalization and t-test (compared to the mock-treated roots; p-value<0.05). For selected candidate proteins, the corresponding peptide peak areas were evaluated in Skyline (Pino et al., 2020). Note that the data deposit contains a single representative replicate of each biological sample

### Publication Abstract
Cytokinin is a phytohormone involved in the regulation of diverse developmental and physiological processes in plants. Its potential in biotechnology and for development of higher-yield and more resilient plants has been recognized, yet the molecular mechanisms behind its action are far from understood. In this report, the roots of barley seedlings were explored as a new source to reveal as yet unknown cytokinin-responsive proteins for crop improvement. Here we found significant differences reproducibly observed for 178 proteins, for which some of the revealed cytokinin-responsive pathways were confirmed in metabolome analysis, including alterations phenylpropanoid pathway, amino acid biosynthesis and ROS metabolism. Bioinformatics analysis indicated a significant overlap between cytokinin response and response to abiotic stress. This was confirmed by comparing proteome and metabolome profiles in response to drought, salinity or a period of temperature stress. The results illustrate complex abiotic stress response in the early development of model crop plant and confirm an extensive crosstalk between plant hormone cytokinin and response to temperature stimuli, water availability or salinity stress.

### Keywords
Zeatin, Hordeum vulgare, Abiotic stress, Ros, Proteome

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


