### Accession
PXD011909

### Title
Active kinome in human skeletal muscle insulin resistance

### Description
Obesity-related insulin resistance (OIR) is one of the main contributors to type 2 diabetes and other metabolic diseases. Protein kinases are implicated in key signaling steps including insulin signaling and glucose metabolism. Molecular mechanisms underlying OIR involving global active kinases remain less understood. Herein, we report findings from an in vivo active kinase profiling study in skeletal muscle from lean control (Lean) and OIR human participants, which identified the 1st active kinome comprised of 54 active protein kinases in human skeletal muscle. The activities of 23 kinases were different in OIR compared to Lean muscle (11 hyper- and 12 hypo-active), while their protein abundance was the same between the two groups.  The activities of multiple kinases involved in AMPK and p38 signaling were lower in OIR compared to Lean.  On the contrary, multiple kinases in JNK signaling pathway exhibited higher activity in OIR vs. Lean muscle. The kinase-substrate-prediction based on experimental data further confirmed a potential down-regulation of insulin signaling (e.g., inhibited phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 and AKT1/2). These findings provide a global view of the active kinome in OIR and Lean muscle, pinpoint novel specific impairment in kinase activities in multiple signaling pathways important for skeletal muscle insulin resistance, and provide potential drug targets (i.e., abnormal active kinase) to prevent and/or reverse skeletal muscle insulin resistance in humans.

### Sample Protocol
The approach we used included extensive clinical and proteomics data acquisition and bioinformatic analysis. The clinical studies started with participant recruitment and were followed by comprehensive screening tests, and hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp and muscle biopsies. The proteomics studies were conducted as follows: biopsy homogenization; spike-in standards, stable isotope labeled protein lysates from primary human skeletal muscle cells obtained by stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to minimize experimental variation; activity-based profiling probes (ABPP) with beads to enrich active kinases; in-solution trypsin digestion to generate tryptic peptides; and HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis to identify/quantify enriched active kinases. Multiple biological comparisons were used to minimize false positives.  Extensive bioinformatics and literature search were used to integrate clinical and proteomics data and to identify pathways/functional categories, in which identified active kinases were involved, that were impacted by OIR.

### Data Protocol
Database search of the MS raw files was conducted by MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.4.7) 32 against UniProt human reference proteome database (version April, 2016) , where SILAC quantification (Arg10 and Lys4) and desthiobiotin modified lysine residue (des-K)  were applied with a false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Active kinome, Quantitative proteomics, Protein kinase, Insulin resistance, Human skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute/NIH
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences - Room 3146, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy/Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 6135 Woodward Ave., Detroit, MI 48202

### Submitter
Yue Andy Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Zhengping Yi
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences - Room 3146, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy/Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 6135 Woodward Ave., Detroit, MI 48202


