### Accession
PXD035477

### Title
Characterization of the interactome profiling of Mycoplasma DnaK in cancer cell reveals interference with key cellular pathways

### Description
Chaperone proteins are redundant in nature and, to achieve their function, they bind a large repertoire of client proteins. DnaK is a bacterial chaperone protein that recognizes misfolded and aggregated proteins and drives their folding and intracellular trafficking. Some Mycoplasmas are associated with cancers, and we demonstrated that infection with a strain of Mycoplasma fermentans isolated in our lab promoted lymphoma in a mouse model. Its DnaK is expressed intracellularly in infected cells, it interacts with key proteins to hamper essential pathways related to DNA repair and p53 functions and uninfected cells can take-up extracellular DnaK.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample analysis. The gel pieces from the band (2 large slice fractions per sample) were transferred to a siliconized tube and washed in 200 μL 50% methanol. The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 30 μL of 10 mM dithiolthreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and reduced at room temperature for 0.5 h. The DTT solution was removed and the sample alkylated in 30 μL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. The reagent was removed, and the gel pieces were dehydrated in 100 μL acetonitrile. Next, the acetonitrile was removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 100 μL 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. The pieces were dehydrated in 100 μL acetonitrile, the acetonitrile was removed, and the pieces completely dried by vacuum centrifugation. The gel pieces were rehydrated in 20 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 30 min. Any excess enzyme solution was removed and 20 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added. The sample was digested overnight at 37oC and the peptides formed extracted from the polyacrylamide in a 100 μL aliquot of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid. This extract was evaporated to 15μL for MS analysis. The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer system with an Easy Spray ion source connected to a Thermo 75μmx 15 cmC18Easy Spray column (through pre-column). 7μL of the extract was injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M acetic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3μL/min over 2.0 hours. The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9kV. The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (Top10 HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 25000 MS/MS spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis. The data generated from the MS samples were analyzed by database search by using the Sequest search algorithm against Uniprot Human Proteome database (2017). The Sequest search results were uploaded into Scaffold 4 software program (Proteome Software, Inc.) for quantitative data analysis and the following filters were applied: 99% minimum protein ID probability, a minimum number of 2 unique peptides for one protein and a stringent minimum peptide ID probability of 95%. Quantification of label free proteins was based upon total spectra counts. Duplicate spectra count list for each identified protein were generated for each cell line. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) statistical analysis with Benjamini Ochberg correction (Ferreira and Zwinderman, 2006), was performed with Scaffold software on normalized duplicate spectra counts of proteins differentially expressed between the five cell types, by selecting a p-value of significance <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mycoplasma fermentans, Chaperone protein, Dnak protein, Cellular pathways

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
University of Virginia

### Submitter
Nicholas Sherman

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Zella
Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA


