### Accession
PXD008311

### Title
The impact of oncogenic EGFRvIII on the proteome of extracellular vesicles (exosomes) released from glioblastoma cells

### Description
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive and heterogeneous form of primary brain tumors, driven by a complex repertoire of oncogenic alterations, including the constitutively active epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFRvIII). EGFRvIII impacts both cell-intrinsic and non-cell autonomous aspects of GBM progression, including cell invasion, angiogenesis and modulation of the tumor microenvoiront, this is, at least in part, attributable to the release and intercellular trafficking of extracellular vesicles (EVs), heterogeneous membrane structures containing multiple bioactive macromolecules. Here we analyzed the impact of EGFRvIII on the profile of glioma EVs using a series of isogenic tumor cell lines, in which this oncogene exhibits a strong transforming activity. Thus, we observed that EGFRvIII expression alters several properties of glioma EVs, including their output and global protein composition. Using mass spectrometry, quantitative proteomic analysis and Gene Ontology terms filters, we observed that EVs released by EGFRVIII-transformed cells were enriched for extracellular exosome and focal adhesion related proteins. Among them, we validated the association of pro-invasive proteins (CD44, BSG, CD151) with EVs of EGFRvIII expressing cells, and down-regulation of exosomal markers (CD81 and CD82) in EVs of their indolent counterparts. Nano-flow cytometry revealed that the EV output from individual glioma cell lines was highly heterogeneous, such that only a fraction of EVs contained specific proteins such as EGFR, CD9, or others. Notably, cells expressing EGFRvIII released ample EVs double positive for CD44/BSG, and these proteins also co-localized in cellular filopodia. We also detected the expression of homophilic adhesion molecules and increased homologous EV uptake by EGFRvIII-positive glioma cells. These results suggest that oncogenic EGFRvIII reprograms the proteome of GBM-related EVs, a notion with considerable implications for their biological activity and properties relevant for development of EV-based cancer biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
The purified extracellular vesicle protein preparation was desalted with SDS-PAGE loaded onto the stacking gel followed by staining and destaining. The in-gel trypsin digestion was carried out under reducing conditions afforded by DTT, and alkylation was achieved using iodoacetic acid. The lyophilized peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid/2% acetonitrile, the peptides were loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (75 µm inner diameter x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo, San Jose, CA) pre-column and the onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (75 µm inner diameter x 15 cm, C18, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo) analytical column. Separation was achieved using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 220 nL/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic solvents (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 3 h. Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1, 15,000 for MS/MS) with higher-energy collisional dissociation sequencing of all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater.

### Data Protocol
All experiments were carried out in three biological replications. The raw data were converted into *.mgf format (Mascot generic format), searched using Mascot 2.3 against UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) human protein database (release 2016_03). The tolerance was 5 ppm monoisotopic for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. The permission of two potential missed cleavages was selected for trypsin digestion. The following modifications were used: Fixed modification for the carbamidomethylation of cysteine (58 Da) and variable modification for the oxidation of methionine (16 Da). The database search results were further analyzed by Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.4.8 (Proteome Sciences, Portland) (Protein threshold > 0.95%, Peptide threshold > 0.95%, and 2 of minimum number of unique peptides). Relative protein abundance in the proteomes was calculated using total ion chromatogram (TIC) in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive and heterogeneous form of primary brain tumors, driven by a complex repertoire of oncogenic alterations, including the constitutively active epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFRvIII). EGFRvIII impacts both cell-intrinsic and non-cell autonomous aspects of GBM progression, including cell invasion, angiogenesis and modulation of the tumor microenvironment. This is, at least in part, attributable to the release and intercellular trafficking of extracellular vesicles (EVs), heterogeneous membrane structures containing multiple bioactive macromolecules. Here we analyzed the impact of EGFRvIII on the profile of glioma EVs using isogenic tumor cell lines, in which this oncogene exhibits a strong transforming activity. We observed that EGFRvIII expression alters the expression of EV-regulating genes (vesiculome) and EV properties, including their protein composition. Using mass spectrometry, quantitative proteomic analysis and Gene Ontology terms filters, we observed that EVs released by EGFRvIII-transformed cells were enriched for extracellular exosome and focal adhesion related proteins. Among them, we validated the association of pro-invasive proteins (CD44, BSG, CD151) with EVs of EGFRvIII expressing glioma cells, and downregulation of exosomal markers (CD81 and CD82) relative to EVs of EGFRvIII-negative cells. Nano-flow cytometry revealed that the EV output from individual glioma cell lines was highly heterogeneous, such that only a fraction of vesicles contained specific proteins (including EGFRvIII). Notably, cells expressing EGFRvIII released EVs double positive for CD44/BSG, and these proteins also colocalized in cellular filopodia. We also detected the expression of homophilic adhesion molecules and increased homologous EV uptake by EGFRvIII-positive glioma cells. These results suggest that oncogenic EGFRvIII reprograms the proteome and uptake of GBM-related EVs, a notion with considerable implications for their biological activity and properties relevant for the development of EV-based cancer biomarkers.

### Keywords
Nano-flow cytometry, Heterogeneity, Glioma, Oncogene, Glioblastoma, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Invasion, Cancer, Egfrviii

### Affiliations
Janusz Rak MD, PhD Jack Cole Chair in Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Professor, Department of Pediatrics McGill University The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre Montreal Children's Hospital 1001 Decarie Blvd, Office # E M1 2244 Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1 Phone: (514) 412-4400 ext-office: 76240; -lab: 76220; Fax (514) 412-4331
Research Associate

### Submitter
Dongsic Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Janusz Rak
Janusz Rak MD, PhD Jack Cole Chair in Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Professor, Department of Pediatrics McGill University The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre Montreal Children's Hospital 1001 Decarie Blvd, Office # E M1 2244 Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1 Phone: (514) 412-4400 ext-office: 76240; -lab: 76220; Fax (514) 412-4331


