### Accession
PXD017291

### Title
Aggregation and disaggregation features of the human proteome

### Description
The aim of the project was to quantify protein aggregation and disaggregation in human cells after transient non-lethal heat shock and during recovery. In addition, the non-aggregating proteins were analyzed by two-dimensional proteome profiling to detect changes in thermal stability upon heat shock.  For aggregation/disaggregation study, K562 cells were grown in light SILAC medium which was changed to heavy medium 90 minutes before heat treatment (10 minutes at 44C). After heat shock, cells were let to recover at 37C. Samples were collected before and after the heat shock as well as on multiple time points during recovery (one, two, three and five hours). Protein intensities from soluble fraction (extracted with mild detergent - NP40) was compared to a control samples that on parallel were treated with mock shock (10 minutes at +37C). Samples were labelled with TMT labels and pooled. The medium switch prior to heat shock also allowed to monitor changes in protein synthesis caused by the heat shock. For control, an analysis of total protein amount (extracted with strong detergent - SDS) was conducted.  For two-dimensional proteome profiling, aliquots of heat shocked and mock shocked samples were exposed to a temperature gradient (from 37.0C to 66.3C). Samples from two adjacent temperatures were labelled with TMT and pooled. Proteins from soluble fractions were quantified and heat shock-induced changes in thermal stability were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with either 0.8% NP40 or 1% SDS. For lysis with NP40, insoluble fraction was removed by filtering. Proteins were extracted with a modified version of Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol. Proteins were digested with trypsin and Lys-C. Samples were fractionated off-line (reversed phase HPLC) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS with Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with isobarQuant. Protein identification was conducted with Mascot search engine. For SILAC data, two separate searched were conducted for light and heavy. Protein-level quantification based on TMT reporter ion intensities was conducted with isobarQuant. After quality control step, protein intensities were batch-cleaned and normalized with vsn-method.  Protein solubility was estimated by comparing protein intensity in the soluble fraction of heat shocked samples to mock shocked samples.  Accumulation of protein intensity in the newly synthesized protein fraction (heavy SILAC label) was estimated as a ratio between each sample to a sample collected before heat shock. Heat shock-induced changes in thermal stability of soluble proteins were estimated by calculating stability scores (based on aggregation behavior in the thermal proteome profiling assay).

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregates have negative implications in disease. While reductionist experiments have increased our understanding of aggregation processes, the systemic view in biological context is&#xa0;still limited. To extend this understanding, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to characterize aggregation and disaggregation in human cells after non-lethal heat shock. Aggregation-prone proteins were enriched in nuclear proteins, high proportion of intrinsically disordered regions, high molecular mass, high isoelectric point, and hydrophilic amino acids. During recovery, most aggregating proteins disaggregated with a rate proportional to the aggregation propensity: larger loss in solubility was counteracted by faster disaggregation. High amount of intrinsically disordered regions were associated with faster disaggregation. However, other characteristics enriched in aggregating proteins did not correlate with the disaggregation rates. In addition, we analyzed changes in protein thermal stability after heat shock. Soluble remnants of aggregated proteins were more thermally stable compared with control condition. Therefore, our results provide a rich resource of heat stress-related protein solubility data and can foster further studies related to protein aggregation diseases.

### Keywords
Human, K562, Q exactive plus orbitrap, Hyperplexing, Disaggregation, Protein quality control, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Thermal stability, Aggregation, Thermal proteome profiling, Lc-msms, Tmt, Silac, Isobarquant, Heat shock

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Tomi Määttä

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


