### Accession
PXD002963

### Title
Proteome profile of coffee embryogenic cell suspensions

### Description
Coffee is one of the most important commodities cultivated worldwide and has great economic impact in producing countries. Although 130 different species belonging to the coffea gender have been described, only two of them are commercially exploited: Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora. C. arabica is responsible for 61% of the world production (Van der Vossen et al., 2015). However, due to the narrow genetic back ground, classical genetic breeding is time consuming and takes around 30 years (Santana-Buzzy et al., 2007; Hendre et al., 2014). Several genetic engineering and biotechnological tools have been successfully applied in coffee breeding. Somatic embryogenesis (SE) is a process in which new viable embryos are produced from somatic tissues. It is one of the most promising production processes (Santana-Buzzy et al, 2007; Marsoni et al., 2008). A better understanding of the molecular basis related to somatic embryogenesis will give insight into the process of embryo formation and totipotency and will allow the development of new in vitro culture strategies for the propagation and genetic manipulation of elite cultivars (Marsoni et al., 2008). High throughput proteomics in coffee is limited so far to 2D gel based proteomics techniques. Although really useful and the most common technique for plants, 2DE is limited in throughput and a gel free technique allow to go a step further (Carpentier & America, 2014; Vanhove et al., 2015). To improve the knowledge about somatic embryogenesis, we present the first high throughput proteome profile (1051 confident protein identifications) of coffee embryogenic cell suspensions developed from leaves of Coffea arabica cultivar Catuaí.

### Sample Protocol
These leaves were collected from plants kept in a greenhouse at Federal University of Lavras and cultivated in vitro according the protocol described by Teixeira et al. (2004) to induce embryogenesis. Calli with 6 months old were used to initiate cell suspensions that were cultivated according Teixeira et al. (2004). After 3 months, two different cell suspensions initiated from different calli, were used to extract the proteins according Carpentier et al. (2005) resulting respectively 9 and 12 replicates per line. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The samples (1 µg protein/5 µL) were injected and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex,ThermoScientific) equipped with a Acclaim PepMap100 pre column (C18 3 μm – 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and an C18 PepMap RSLC (2 µm, 50 µm_15cm,ThermoScientific) using a linear gradient (300µl/min) of 0–4% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in 3 min, 4–10% B in 12 min, 10-35% in 20 min, 35%-65% in 5 min, 65-95% in 1 min 95% for 10 min, 95%-5% in 1min, 5% 10 min. The QExactive was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5kV and a source temperature of 250° C. Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos. Mode Cal Mix (MS CAL5-1EASUPELCO, Sigma- Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400–1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top 10 most intense peaks with +2, +3 +4 and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 at 17500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 10s.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (ThermoScientific). For identification, all raw data were converted into mgf.files by Proteome Discover version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and processed using MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against Uniprot coffea database (25,602 proteins). The parameters used to search at MASCOT were: Fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, parent tolerance of 10PPM, variable modification with oxidation (M), fixed modification with carbamidomethyl (C) and up to one missed cleavage for trypsine. Results from Mascot were imported to Scaffold version 3.6.3.The parameters used in Scaffold was at least one identified peptide with confidence > 95% resulting in a peptide FDR of 0.05% and the protein FDR was 0,3%.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis, is a process by which new viable embryos are produced from somatic tissues. Somatic embryogenesis is not only a useful biotechnological tool for the massive clonal propagation and genetic engineering but it also allows to obtain fundamental knowledge about the molecular changes that take place during embryogenesis. We present the proteome profile of two embryogenic cell suspensions. We identified 1052 non-redundant proteins. We present their known GO annotations and show two protein networks sharing the GO annotations related to stress and embryogenic capacity via the free program Cytoscape. To our knowledge these results give the first high-throughput proteome description of embryogenic cell suspensions and provide new information about somatic embryos for the whole plant community. The published proteome is a first step toward understanding somatic embryogenesis in coffee and toward a better annotation of proteins in an important non-model crop. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002963.

### Keywords
Totipotency, Gel free proteomics, Coffea arabica, Somatic embryogenesis

### Affiliations
KULeuven
Departament of Byossistems, KULeuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium

### Submitter
Nadia  Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Carpentier
Departament of Byossistems, KULeuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium


