### Accession
PXD013219

### Title
The Flemmingsome reveals an ESCRT-to-membrane coupling required for cytokinesis

### Description
Cytokinesis requires the constriction of ESCRT-III filaments on the midbody side, where abscission occurs. After ESCRT recruitment at the midbody, it is not known how the ESCRT-III machinery localizes to the abscission site. We obtained the proteome of intact, post-abscission midbodies (Flemmingsome) and revealed enriched proteins in this organelle. We propose that the ESCRT-III machinery must be physically coupled to a membrane protein at the cytokinetic abscission site for productive scission, revealing novel common requirements in cytokinesis, exosome formation and retroviral budding.

### Sample Protocol
Using an original FACS-based sorting of fluorescently labeled midbodies, highly purified intact and detergent-free post-cytokinetic midbody remnants were isolated. We used SDS to fully solubilize proteins from our different fractions and two methods (SDS-PAGE gel and eFASP) were performed for proteins digestion before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 against a Human Uniprot database (downloaded in 20150818, 20204 entries). Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode. For pairwise comparisons, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions . Missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p.

### Publication Abstract
Cytokinesis requires the constriction of ESCRT-III filaments on the side of the midbody, where abscission occurs. After ESCRT recruitment at the midbody, it is not known how the ESCRT-III machinery localizes to the abscission site. To reveal actors involved in abscission, we obtained the proteome of intact, post-abscission midbodies (Flemmingsome) and identified 489 proteins enriched in this organelle. Among these proteins, we further characterized a plasma membrane-to-ESCRT module composed of the transmembrane proteoglycan syndecan-4, ALIX and syntenin, a protein that bridges ESCRT-III/ALIX to syndecans. The three proteins are highly recruited first at the midbody then at the abscission site, and their depletion delays abscission. Mechanistically, direct interactions between ALIX, syntenin and syndecan-4 are essential for proper enrichment of the ESCRT-III machinery at the abscission site, but not at the midbody. We propose that the ESCRT-III machinery must be physically coupled to a membrane protein at the cytokinetic abscission site for efficient scission, uncovering common requirements in cytokinesis, exosome formation and HIV budding.

### Keywords
Human, Qexactive, Midbody, Lc-ms/ms, Escrt machinery, Cytokinesis

### Affiliations
Membrane Traffic and Cell Division Lab, Institut Pasteur, UMR3691, CNRS, 25–28 rue du Dr Roux, F-75015 Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Arnaud Echard
Membrane Traffic and Cell Division Lab, Institut Pasteur, UMR3691, CNRS, 25–28 rue du Dr Roux, F-75015 Paris, France


