### Accession
PXD029439

### Title
Antigen discovery in circulating extracellular vesicles from Plasmodium vivax patients

### Description
Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human malaria parasite with 7 million annual clinical cases and 2.5 billion people living under risk of infection. Presently, there is an urgent need to discover new antigens for vaccination as only two vaccine candidates, both based on the Duffy Binding protein, are currently in clinical trials. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small membrane-bound vesicles involved in intercellular communication and initially described in reticulocytes, the host cell of P. vivax, as a selective disposal mechanism of the transferrin receptor (CD71) in the maturation of reticulocytes to erythrocytes. We have recently reported the proteomics identification of P. vivax proteins associated to circulating EVs in P. vivax patients using size exclusion chromatography followed by mass spectrometry. Parasite proteins, however, were detected in two out of ten patients and only three of them with more than one unique peptide (UP). To increase the signal, we have implemented the Direct Immuno-affinity Capture (DIC) technique to enrich in EVs derived from CD71-expressing cells. Remarkably, we identified parasite proteins in all patients totaling 48 proteins (24 identified with ≥2 UP) and including several previously identified P. vivax vaccine candidate antigens (MSP1, MSP3, MSP7, MSP9, Serine-repeat antigen 1, and HSP70) as well as several membrane, cytosolic and exported proteins. Notably, a member of the Plasmodium helical interspersed sub-telomeric (PHIST-c) family, previously shown to be a main component of the caveola vesicle complexes, was robustly detected in five out six analyzed patients. Humoral immune response analysis by luminex confirmed its antigenicity. Collectively, we showed that enrichment of EVs by CD71-DIC from plasma, allows a robust identification of P. vivax proteins. This study represents a major advance in identifying new antigens for vaccination against this human malaria parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed for peptide digestion using the commercial kit (PreOmics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol adapted for samples containing <20 μg of protein with slight modifications. Briefly, CD71+Dynabeads complexes were resuspended in 20 μl of PreOmics lysis buffer and heated at 70ºC for 10 minutes. After this step, samples were place in a magnet and EVs lysates recovered and loaded into the cartridge and treated with 20 μl of Digest buffer at 37ºC, 500 r.p.m for 3h. Digested samples were washed and eluted according the standard protocol. After elution, samples were immediately speed-vac dried at 45ºC and kept at -80ºC. 1 ug of each sample was analyzed using liquid chromatography (nanoLCULTRA-EKSIGENT) followed by mass spectrometry on a 90min gradient in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the Proteomic Unit of the Genomic Research Center (Barcelona, Spain).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a customized database including P. vivax (all strains: 52920 entries) and Swiss-Prot human (20581 entries) (February 2020) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. Peptides have been filtered based on a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptides

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium vivax</i> is the most widely distributed human malaria parasite with 7 million annual clinical cases and 2.5 billion people living under risk of infection. There is an urgent need to discover new antigens for vaccination as only two vaccine candidates are currently in clinical trials. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small membrane-bound vesicles involved in intercellular communication and initially described in reticulocytes, the host cell of <i>P. vivax</i>, as a selective disposal mechanism of the transferrin receptor (CD71) in the maturation of reticulocytes to erythrocytes. We have recently reported the proteomics identification of <i>P. vivax</i> proteins associated to circulating EVs in <i>P. vivax</i> patients using size exclusion chromatography followed by mass spectrometry (MS). Parasite proteins were detected in only two out of ten patients. To increase the MS signal, we have implemented the direct immuno-affinity capture (DIC) technique to enrich in EVs derived from CD71-expressing cells. Remarkably, we identified parasite proteins in all patients totaling 48 proteins and including several previously identified <i>P. vivax</i> vaccine candidate antigens (MSP1, MSP3, MSP7, MSP9, Serine-repeat antigen 1, and HSP70) as well as membrane, cytosolic and exported proteins. Notably, a member of the <i>Plasmodium</i> helical interspersed sub-telomeric (PHIST-c) family and a member of the <i>Plasmodium</i> exported proteins, were detected in five out of six analyzed patients. Humoral immune response analysis using sera from vivax patients confirmed the antigenicity of the PHIST-c protein. Collectively, we showed that enrichment of EVs by CD71-DIC from plasma of patients, allows a robust identification of <i>P. vivax</i> immunogenic proteins. This study represents a significant advance in identifying new antigens for vaccination against this human malaria parasite.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry, Plasmodium vivax. extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
CRG / UPF
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG / UPF


