### Accession
PXD034119

### Title
Proteomics of Prevotella brevis GA33 and Prevotella ruminicola 23

### Description
We performed shotgun proteomics on the bacteria Prevotella brevis GA33 and Prevotella ruminicola 23.  We did this for two types of samples (cell extract and cell membrane) and using two methods (data-dependent and data-independent acquisition).

### Sample Protocol
Prevotella brevis GA33 was grown on PC+VFA medium and Prevotella ruminicola 23 was grown on medium BZ.  Cultures were grown to mid-exponential phase and lysed with a French press. Cell membranes were harvested by ultracentrifugation (208,000 × g for 60 min at 4°C).  Proteins in the sample (cell extract or membrane) were prepared for LC-MS/MS.    For cell extract, peptides were prepared according to Zhang et al. (2021. Appl Environ Microbiol. AEM.02959-20).  For the cell membrane, the pellet from ultracentriguation was resuspended in 10 mL ice-cold carbonate buffer (100 mM Na2CO3, 100 mM NaCl, pH = 11.0).  The resuspended pellet was mixed with a stir bar on ice for 60 min.  The membrane was harvested by ultracentrifugation, then the pellet was resuspended in 600 μL solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl [pH 7.5], 8 M urea, 1% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate).  The resuspended pellet was centrifuged (12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C) and the supernatant was transferred to a 2-mL screw tube.  TCEP solution (500 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine [TCEP] in 200 mM Tris-Cl [pH 8]) was added to the sample to give a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP. After incubation at 30°C for 60 min, the sample was alkylated by fresh iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The sample was mixed with equal volume of SDS-PAGE sample buffer (125 mM Tris-Cl [pH 6.8], 20% (v/v) glycerol, 20% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), a trace of Brilliant blue G-250) and loaded into gel wells. After electrophoresis at 140 V for 60 min, the gel (12% acrylamide, 29:1 acrylamide–bis-acrylamide) was fixed in a solution (40% [v/v] ethanol/10% [v/v] acetic acid), washed with distilled water, and visualized by Blue silver stain solution (100 g/L ammonium sulfate, 10% [v/v] phosphoric acid, 1.2 g/L Brilliant Blue G-250, 20% [v/v] methanol). The gel lanes loaded with samples were cut into gel pieces. The gel pieces were completely destained with gel washing solution (50% (v/v) acetonitrile LC/MS grade and 50 mM NH4HCO3 in water), dehydrated by pure acetonitrile, and mixed with diluted trypsin/Lys-C (V5073; Promega) (10 ng/µL) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for incubation at 37°C for 16 hours. One µg of trypsin/Lys-C was used for digestion per 8 µg of membrane protein. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by dehydration in acetonitrile, rehydration in 1% (v/v) acetic acid, drying in acetonitrile, 10 min ultrasonication in 5% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 min ultrasonication in acetonitrile, and drying in acetonitrile. The supernatants were pooled, reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 1% (v/v) TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). The peptides were further cleaned and desalted with the 100-µL Pierce C18 Tips (87784; Thermo Scientific) according to the instructions. Peptides were eluted with 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid/75% (v/v) acetonitrile, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA.  For data-dependent acquisition (DDA), peptides were analyzed by LC-MS as described in Zhang et al.  (2021. Appl Environ Microbiol. AEM.02959-20). For data-independent acquisition (DIA), peptides were analyzed by LC-MS.  The LC was a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher).  It was operated as in Zhang et al. (2021. Appl Environ Microbiol. AEM.02959-20), except a different gradient elution was used.  The concentration of mobile phase B was increased from 2% to 50% over 60 min, increased to 99% over 6 min, held at 99% for 3 min, and decreased to 2% over 2 min.  The MS was an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).  Mass spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 35%, resolution of 30 000, maximum inject time of 54 ms, and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5×104.  Staggered isolation windows of 12 Da in the range of 400 to 1000 m/z were used.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified from LC-MS/MS data.  For DDA, they were identified using X!TandemPipeline. The version of X! Tandem used was Alanine. The database was a fasta file containing all proteins in C. granulosum predicted by IMG/M. The parameter “Fragment ion mass tolerance (monoisotropic)” was set to 0.1 (based on preliminary analysis with recombinant SCACT and SCS). All other parameters were kept at default values.  The DIA, they were identified using Spectronaut 15 using the directDIA workflow with the default settings. Peak area intensities were exported from Spectronaut.  Quantitative and statistical analysis was performed processing protein peak areas determined by the Spectronaut software. Prior to library-based analysis of the DIA data, the DIA raw files were converted into htrms files using the htrms converter (Biognosys). MS1 and MS2 data were centroided during conversion, and the other parameters were set to default. The htrms files were analyzed with Spectronaut (version: 15, Biognosys) via directDIA. Precursor and protein identifications were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Propionate is a microbial metabolite formed in the gastrointestinal tract, and it affects host physiology as a source of energy and signaling molecule. Despite the importance of propionate, the biochemical pathways responsible for its formation are not clear in all microbes. For the succinate pathway used during fermentation, a key enzyme appears to be missing-one that oxidizes ferredoxin and reduces NAD. Here we show that Rnf [ferredoxin-NAD<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase (Na<sup>+</sup>-transporting)] is this key enzyme in two abundant bacteria of the rumen (Prevotella brevis and Prevotella ruminicola). We found these bacteria form propionate, succinate, and acetate with the classic succinate pathway. Without ferredoxin:NAD<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase, redox cofactors would be unbalanced; it would produce almost equal excess amounts of reduced ferredoxin and oxidized NAD. By combining growth experiments, genomics, proteomics, and enzyme assays, we point to the possibility that these bacteria solve this problem by oxidizing ferredoxin and reducing NAD with Rnf [ferredoxin-NAD<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase (Na<sup>+</sup>-transporting)]. Genomic and phenotypic data suggest many bacteria may use Rnf similarly. This work shows the ferredoxin:NAD<sup>+</sup> oxidoreductase activity of Rnf is important to propionate formation in Prevotella species and other bacteria from the environment, and it provides fundamental knowledge for manipulating fermentative propionate production.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Bacteria, Rumen

### Affiliations
Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Timothy Hackmann

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy John Hackmann
Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, USA


