### Accession
PXD002538

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Network Analysis Reveals Molecular Mechanisms of Myometrial Stretch Response

### Description
Mechanical stress is a potent regulator of cell growth, contractility and gene regulation. Abnormal uterine distension during pregnancy increases the risk of preterm birth and likely activates crosstalk between multiple signaling networks with protein phosphorylation playing a critical role. Telomerized human uterine smooth muscle cells were exposed to 18% biaxial stretch for 5 min and the phosphoproteome was probed by mass spectrometry. We observed specific phospho-activation of mitogen activated protein kinase at threonine 183 and tyrosine 185, myosin regulatory light chain 9 at threonine 19, and heat shock protein 27 at serine 82. Our analysis revealed protein phosphorylation changes in signaling pathways related to actin cytoskeleton remodeling, activation of the focal adhesion kinase pathway, smooth muscle contraction and mechanistic target of rapamycin activation. These data point to potential mechanistic links between stretch-induced phosphorylation and development of the contractile phenotype in myometrial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Growth arrested PHUSMC-HTRT cells on BIOflex plates were subjected to 18% biaxial stretch for 5 min on a Flexcell FX-5000 tension system. PHUSMC-HTRT cells grown on BIOflex plates not subjected to stretch served as controls. Cells were lysed in 300 μL/well MAPK buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl [pH 6.8], 2 % SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM EGTA)39 supplemented with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 4,000 × g for 15 min. Pellets were resuspended in MAPK buffer, precipitated in 4x volume of 100% acetone and washed 3x in 4x volume of 70% acetone. Precipitates were resuspended in 8M urea/50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), reduced in 5 mM  DTT at 37˚C for 20 min in the dark, and alkylated in 10mM iodoacetamide (BioRad, Hercules, California) for 20 min in the dark. Samples were re-precipitated with acetone as described above and resuspended, using sonication, in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Protein samples were digested with Trypsin/Lys C mix (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 75:1 protein:protease mix overnight at 37˚C , acidified in 0.1% formic acid, and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Phosphopeptides were enriched on IMAC columns containing nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) agarose beads charged with FeCl3 and labeled with 6Plex tandem mass tags (TMT) (Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) according to the manufacturer protocols. Labeled phosphopeptide samples were pooled and then separated by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography  fractionation as described previously40 for 60 min with a gradient change in solvent A (900ml ACN + 100ml ddH2O + 500l 10%TFA) from 0% solvent B (1L ddH2O +500L 10% TFA) to 90% at 45 min. 40 fractions were collected, dried down and resuspended in 100 l 5% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Digested peptide samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) at the Nevada Proteomics Center (University of Nevada, Reno). The peptides were separated and analyzed using a Michrom Paradigm Multi-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography instrument (Michrom Bioresources Inc., Auburn, CA) coupled with a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptide samples dissolved in 100 L of 0.1 % formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo acclaim Pepmap100 trap column (100µm x 2 cm, C18 5m, 100 Å,  Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), eluted from the trap, and then separated by reverse phase New Objective (New Objective Inc, Woburn, MA) Reprosil-pur C18AQ column (3 m, 120Å, 0.075 x 105 mm) with a gradient elution using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was set from 5 % to 40 % solvent B for 90 min, increased to 80% solvent B in 10 sec and held at 80% solvent B for 1 min. MS spectra were recorded over the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with resolution of 60,000. The three most intense ions were isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap using collision induced dissociation (CID) with minimal signal of 500% and collision energy of 35.0% or using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with minimal signal of 1000%, Collision energy of 55.0%, and an activation time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was implemented with 2 repeat counts, repeat duration of 15 sec, and exclusion duration of 90 sec.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Identification and quantification of peptides was achieved by combining CID and HCD fragmentation. CID fragmentation energy was fine tuned to avoid dissociation of phosphorylation groups. This reduced collision energy results in loss of approximately 30% of ions in the lower weight register. To maintain a high confidence of peptide identification and a valuable TMT labeled quantification signal, the top three peptides selected during the first mass spectrometry analysis were subjected to HCD in addition to CID. HCD spectra were used for quantification and integrated with the identifications attained from CID spectra using an in house Python script. Statistically significant peptides identified by the python script were cross checked for accuracy in Scaffold using a peptide identification confidence threshold of 90%. Statistical significance was confirmed using a student’s t-test on all peptides that contained the same post translational modification configuration. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.0). Sequest was set up to search the ipi.HUMAN_decoy.v3.87 database, (Version 3.87,  182928 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin/Lys-C. Phosphorylation signaling pathways of upregulated phospho-proteins were annotated with KEGG pathway mapping through the DAVID bioinformatics functional annotation tool (Version 6.7 accessed 2/12/2015) with an EASE threshold of < 0.05. Specific peptide phosphorylation events were annotated using the phosphosite.org database. EASE values are the p-values associated to a simple Fisher Exact test that compares the (number of total known genes in a particular pathway -1) vs. the size of the whole genome with the number of genes experimentally discovered within that pathway vs. the total number of genes examined in the study. In this experiment, pathways were only considered significantly enriched using EASE values less than or equal to 0.05, with a more stringent 0.01 cut off for a pathway to qualify for specific protein analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanical strain associated with the expanding uterus correlates with increased preterm birth rates. Mechanical signals result in a cascading network of protein phosphorylation events. These signals direct cellular activities and may lead to changes in contractile phenotype and calcium signaling. In this study, the complete phospho-proteome of uterine smooth muscle cells subjected to mechanical strain for 5&#x202f;min was compared to un-strained controls. Statistically significant, differential phosphorylation events were annotated by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to elucidate mechanically induced phosphorylation networks. Mechanical strain leads to the direct activation of ERK1/2, HSPB1, and MYL9, in addition to phosphorylation of PAK2, vimentin, DOCK1, PPP1R12A, and PTPN11 at previously unannotated sites. These results suggest a novel network reaction to mechanical strain and reveal proteins that participate in the activation of contractile mechanisms leading to preterm labor.

### Keywords
Human, Cell culture, Myometrium, Uterus, Stretch, Phosphoproteomic, Distension

### Affiliations
Pharmacology
Associate Professor, University of Nevada, Reno department of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Craig Ulrich

### Lab Head
Dr Heather Burkin
Associate Professor, University of Nevada, Reno department of Pharmacology


