### Accession
PXD010308

### Title
Grass carp serum IgM LC-ESI-MS/MS and MALDI-MS

### Description
Glycosylation represents a major post-translational modification of proteins that can influence their structure and function.Telesot immunoglobulin M (IgM) is an especially important product of the immune system because it is the main Abs in seum and plays a critical role against defense infection. However, little is known regarding site-specific N-glycan characteristics in teleost IgM , LC-ESI-MS/MS was used to analysis deglycopeptides and glycopeptides of grass carp serum IgM, and MALDI-MS was used to analysis released carbohydrates by PNGaseF diestion of grass carp serum IgM.

### Sample Protocol
The N-glycosylation sites Indentification was first checked via PNGase F digestion using LC-ESI-MS/MS, To determine site-specific glycan profiles at each of the four sites of the grass carp serum IgM was determined by analysis tryptic glycopeptides with LC-ESI-MS/MS by employing HCD fragmentation. MALDI-TOF analyses of released glycans was used to ndentifiy the carbohydrate moieties.

### Data Protocol
De-glycopeptide and glycopeptide MS data were searched against grass carp IgM sequence (GenBank accession No ABD76396.1) using Proteome Discoverer V2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Annotation of the corresponding glycopeptide spectra was performed in using Byonic software v1.09 (Protein Metrics).MALDI-TOF data of  glycan assignment was analysis by GlycoMod software (http://web.expasy.org/glycomod/).

### Publication Abstract
Immunoglobulin M (IgM) is the major antibody in teleost fish and plays an important role in humoral adaptive immunity. The N-linked carbohydrates presenting on IgM have been well documented in higher vertebrates, but little is known regarding site-specific N-glycan characteristics in teleost IgM. In order to characterize these site-specific N-glycans, we conducted the first study of the N-glycans of each glycosylation site of the grass carp serum IgM. Among the four glycosylation sites, the Asn-262, Asn-303, and Asn-426 residues were efficiently glycosylated, while Asn-565 at the C-terminal tailpiece was incompletely occupied. A striking decrease in the level of occupancy at the Asn-565 glycosite was observed in dimeric IgM compared to that in monomeric IgM, and no glycan occupancy of Asn-565 was observed in tetrameric IgM. Glycopeptide analysis with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry revealed mainly complex-type glycans with substantial heterogeneity, with neutral; monosialyl-, disialyl- and trisialylated; and fucosyl-and non-fucosyl-oligosaccharides conjugated to grass carp serum IgM. Glycan variation at a single site was greatest at the Asn-262 glycosite. Unlike IgMs in other species, only traces of complex-type and no high-mannose glycans were found at the Asn-565 glycosite. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization analysis of released glycans confirmed the overwhelming majority of carbohydrates were of the complex-type. These results indicate that grass carp serum IgM exhibits unique N-glycan features and highly processed oligosaccharides attached to individual glycosites.

### Keywords
Immunoglobulin m, Grass carp, Maldi-ms, Lc-ms/ms)

### Affiliations
Huigeng 
Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079, China

### Submitter
Yiling Su

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Geng
Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079, China


