### Accession
PXD038321

### Title
Proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 particles unveils a key role of G3BP proteins in viral assembly 

### Description
The aim of this project was to identify cellular factors exclusively present in SARS-CoV-2 virion preparations.

### Sample Protocol
A549-ACE2 cells were either mock-infected of infected with SARS-CoV-2 220_95 (EPI_ISL_469284) strain at a multiplicity of infection of 0.01.  Forty-eight h post-infection, supernatants were collected, filtered (filtropur S 0,45 µm) and ultracentrifuged through a TNE 20% sucrose (w/v) cushion at 25.000 rpm for 2 h at 4°C. Pellets were resuspended in TEAB (Triethylammonium Bicarbonate Buffer, Sigma-Aldrich) and concentrated through Amicon Ultra15 -100 kDa at 3.000g for 20 min. Viral particles were lyzed in 100 µL of HNE-sucrose-SDS 2% buffer at 95°C for 5 min. Bottom-up experiments’ tryptic peptides were obtained by S-trap Micro Spin Column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Protifi, NY, USA). Briefly: proteins were diluted 1:1 with 2x reducing-alkylating buffer (20 mM TCEP, 100 mM Chloroacetamide in 400 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and 4% SDS) and left 5 min at 95°C to allow reduction and alkylation in one step. S-trap binding buffer was applied to precipitate proteins on quartz and proteolysis took place during 14 h at 37°C with 1 µg Trypsin sequencing grade (Promega). After speed-vacuum drying of eluted peptides, these were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 10% Acetonitrile (ACN).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 HPLC nanoflow chromatographic system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Les Ulis, France) coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length mounted onto the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia) with a 60 minutes overall run-time gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DDA PASEF mode with a 1.9 second/cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in Parallel Accumulation and Serial Fragmentation (PASEF). This enabled a recurrent loop analysis of a maximum of up to 120 most intense nLC-eluting peptides which were CID-fragmented between each full scan every 1.1 s. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 166 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive polarity with PASEF in the 100-1700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MSMS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the otof control software, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 1000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and re-fragmented and summed until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u., while allowing a dynamic exclusion of 0.40 s elution gap.

### Publication Abstract
Considerable progress has been made in understanding the molecular host-virus battlefield during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nevertheless, the assembly and egress of newly formed virions are less understood. To identify host proteins involved in viral morphogenesis, we characterize the proteome of SARS-CoV-2 virions produced from A549-ACE2 and Calu-3 cells, isolated via ultracentrifugation on sucrose cushion or by ACE-2 affinity capture. Bioinformatic analysis unveils 92 SARS-CoV-2 virion-associated host factors, providing a valuable resource to better understand the molecular environment of virion production. We reveal that G3BP1 and G3BP2 (G3BP1/2), two major stress granule nucleators, are embedded within virions and unexpectedly favor virion production. Furthermore, we show that G3BP1/2 participate in the formation of cytoplasmic membrane vesicles, that are likely virion assembly sites, consistent with a proviral role of G3BP1/2 in SARS-CoV-2 dissemination. Altogether, these findings provide new insights into host factors required for SARS-CoV-2 assembly with potential implications for future therapeutic targeting.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Cellular factors, Virions, G3bp

### Affiliations
Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Gallois-Montbrun
Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris


