### Accession
PXD006131

### Title
Optimizing the parameters governing the fragmentation of cross-linked peptides in a tribrid mass spectrometer

### Description
We compared the five different ways of fragmentation available on a tribrid mass spectrometer and optimized their collision energies with regard to optimal sequence coverage of cross-linked peptides. We created a library of bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3/DSS) cross-linked precursors, derived from the tryptic digests of three model proteins (Human Serum Albumin, creatine kinase and myoglobin). This enabled in-depth targeted analysis of the fragmentation behavior of 1065 cross-linked precursors using the five fragmentation techniques: collision-induced dissociation (CID), beam-type CID (HCD), electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), and the combinations ETciD and EThcD. EThcD gave the best sequence coverage for cross-linked m/z species with high charge-density, while HCD was optimal for all others. We tested the resulting data-dependent decision tree against collision energy-optimized single methods on two samples of differing complexity (a mix of eight proteins and a highly complex ribosomal cellular fraction). For the high complexity sample the decision tree gave the highest number of identified cross-linked peptide pairs passing a 5% false discovery rate (on average ~21% more than the second best, HCD). For the medium complexity sample the higher speed of HCD proved decisive. Currently, acquisition speed plays an important role in allowing the detection of cross-linked peptides against the background of linear peptides. Enrichment of cross-linked peptides will reduce this role and favor methods that provide spectra of higher quality.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were cross-linked separately using a 1:1 weight-to-weight (w/w) cross-linker to protein ratio. C3b buffer was exchanged using 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filters (Millipore, Cork, Ireland), into cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8). HSA, creatine kinase, myoglobin, ovotransferrin, catalase and cytochrome C were dissolved in cross-linking buffer. Protein and cross-linker were mixed to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml each. The mixture was incubated on ice for 2 h before the reaction was stopped by ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, 50 mM final concentration).  Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea. Disulfide bonds were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT, 2.5 mM, 50 °C for 15 min) and alkylated by iodoacetamid (IAA, 5 mM, RT for 30 min in the dark). The samples were diluted to 2 M urea using 50 mM ABC and digested with trypsin (50:1 protein to enzyme w/w ratio, 37 °C, over-night). Digestions were stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) until the pH was <2. Digests were desalted using self-made C18 StageTips16 and peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile and 20%, 0.1% TFA in water. Eluates were dried and resuspended in 0.1 % TFA. The sample referred to as the pseudo-complex was obtained by mixing resuspended peptides from all proteins in 1:1 molar ratio. The injected amount was 1 µg of peptides. Data acquisition. All samples were analyzed using a UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% water. Peptides were loaded onto a 500 mm C-18 EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with 2% B at 300 nl/min flow rate for 11 min and eluted at 300 nl/min flow rate with a linear gradient from 2% - 40% B over 139 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were preprocessed with MaxQuant (v1.5.4.1) by using the partial processing feature until step 5. Resulting peak files (APL format) were subjected to Xi, using the following settings: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; max. missed cleavages, 4; max. number of modifications, 3; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on Cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation on Methionine; cross-linker: BS3 (mass modification: 109.0396 Da).  Additionally variable modifications of the cross-linker (‘BS3NH2’, mass modification: 155.0946 Da; ‘BS3-OH’, 156.0786 Da) and loop-links (‘BS3-loop’, 138.0681 Da) were allowed. BS3 was assumed to react with Lysine, Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine or the protein N-terminus. For CID/HCD, b- and y-type ions were included in the search, for ETD c- and z-type ions and for ETciD/EThcD b-, c-, y- and z-type ions. The respective search databases consisted of a single entry with the sequence of the corresponding protein, that was extracted from the crystal structure PDB file (PDB IDs: 1AO6, 2CRK, 2FRJ). FDR was estimated using XiFDR18 on 5% linklevel with enabled boosting and including only unique peptide-spectra matches (PSMs). To further minimize false positives in the target list, links which had a distance greater than 30 Å corresponding to the crystal structure were excluded. All corresponding m/z species of the remaining links were used to compile inclusion lists for the targeted experiments. Retention time windows were calculated using iRT peptides (Biognosys, Zürich, Switzerland) with a windows size of 10 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
We compared the five different ways of fragmentation available on a tribrid mass spectrometer and optimized their collision energies with regard to optimal sequence coverage of cross-linked peptides. We created a library of bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3/DSS) cross-linked precursors, derived from the tryptic digests of three model proteins (Human Serum Albumin, creatine kinase, and myoglobin). This enabled in-depth targeted analysis of the fragmentation behavior of 1065 cross-linked precursors using the five fragmentation techniques: collision-induced dissociation (CID), beam-type CID (HCD), electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), and the combinations ETciD and EThcD. EThcD gave the best sequence coverage for cross-linked m/z species with high charge density, while HCD was optimal for all others. We tested the resulting data-dependent decision tree against collision energy-optimized single methods on two samples of differing complexity (a mix of eight proteins and a highly complex ribosomal cellular fraction). For the high complexity sample the decision tree gave the highest number of identified cross-linked peptide pairs passing a 5% false discovery rate (on average &#x223c;21% more than the second best, HCD). For the medium complexity sample, the higher speed of HCD proved decisive. Currently, acquisition speed plays an important role in allowing the detection of cross-linked peptides against the background of linear peptides. Enrichment of cross-linked peptides will reduce this role and favor methods that provide spectra of higher quality. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006131.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Fusion lumos, Cross-linking, Fragmentation

### Affiliations
Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany  2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sven Giese

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany  2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom


