### Accession
PXD010188

### Title
Wheat spikelet LC-MSMS -  iTRAQ-based quantitative proteome analysis reveals metabolic changes between a cleistogamous wheat mutant and its wild-type wheat counterpart

### Description
A novel wheat mutant, ZK001, characterized as cleistogamic and presumed to provide structural barriers for Fusarium head blight during the flowering stage, was created through static magnetic fields mutagenesis from YM18. The atrophied, thin and ineffective lodicules of ZK001 lost the ability to push the lemma and palea apart during the flowering stage. Compared to YM18, ZK001 exhibited lower Fusarium infection. comparative studies at the proteome level were employed between YM18 and ZK001. isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were employed to characterize protein expression differences between YM18 and ZK001.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The spikelets of YM18 and ZK001 were harvested during the white anther stage, green anther stage, yellow anther stage and anthesis stage. Protein extraction and quantification Total soluble proteins were extracted following a published procedure (Yang, et al. 2013) with slight modifications. Briefly, moderate amounts of the samples were separately frozen using liquid N2 and ground in -20 °C pre-cooled pestles and mortars with urea extraction buffer containing 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 8 M urea, 0.5% SDS, 1.2% Triton X-100, 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM EGTA, 50 mM NaF, 1% glycerol 2-phosphate, 5 mM DTT, and 0.5% phosphatase inhibitor mixture 2 (Sigma). The mixtures were centrifuged at 10,000 ⅹg for 1 hr. at 4 °C, then the supernatants were mixed with pre-cooled acetone/methanol and incubated for 1 hr. at -20 °C. The mixtures were centrifuged at 15,000 ⅹg for 15 min at 4 °C. The pellets were washed twice with cold acetone. Pellets were dried and solubilized in Lysis Buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 8 M urea, 5 mM DTT, 1% SDS, and 10 mM EDTA. Protein samples were estimated using the Bradford method (Bradford 1976) and stored at -80 °C for further use. All protein samples were checked via sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) according to the Schägger protocol (Schägger 2006) to ensure that proteolysis was minimal during sample preparation. SDS-PAGE gels (Figure S1) were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) staining solution containing 0.02% CBB-G250 in 2% (w/v) phosphoric acid, 5% aluminium sulphate and 10% ethanol (Kang, et al. 2002). Sample preparation and iTRAQ labelling After determining the protein concentration, samples were prepared and labelled with iTRAQ based on the Unwin et al. protocol (Unwin, et al. 2010) with some modifications. Up to 200 µg of protein was mixed with 5 µL of 1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT, Genview, CD116) incubated in 37 °C for 1hr. Samples were kept in the dark at room temperature for 1hr. and mixed with 20 µL of 1 M Iodoacetamide (IAA, Vetec, V900335). The samples were transferred into tubes with ultrafiltration membranes and centrifuged at 14, 000 ⅹg for 15 min. Afterward, 100 µL UA buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was added, the samples were transferred to new tubes with ultrafiltration membranes and centrifuged for 15 min. After washing the ultrafiltration membrane twice with 100 µL UA buffer, 100 µL of 0.5 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, 17902) was added to the tubes followed by centrifugation for 10 min. This step was repeated three times and the collection tubes were renewed the third time. Trypsin (Promega, V5113) was added to the collection tubes, mixed with the samples and incubated for 12-16 hrs. at 37 °C. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation. About 100 µg peptides of different samples were labelled with iTRAQ reagents (isobaric tags 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121 for group YM18-1, ZK001-1, YM18-2, ZK001-2, YM18-3, ZK001-3, YM18-4 and ZK001-4, respectively) following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Strong fractionation by cation exchange chromatography and LC-electrospray ionization-MS/MS analysis The lyophilized peptide mixture was reconstituted with 100 µL of solution A (2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10). Then, the samples were loaded onto a reverse-phase column (C18 column, 1.9 µm 150 µmⅹ120 mm, Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a step linear elution program. The samples were collected every 1.5 min and centrifuged for 5-90 min. The 60 fractions collected were dried and re-dissolved with 5 µL 0.5% formic acid (FA). The collected fractions were finally combined into 10 pools and centrifuged at 14, 000 ⅹg for 10 min.  The reconstituted peptides were analysed with the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nano high-performance liquid chromatography (1260 Infinity II, Agilent) system. The peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (C18 column, 3 µm 100 µm ⅹ 200 mm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (xBridge peptide BEH 130 C18 column, Waters) using mobile phases A (0.1% FA/H2O) and B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN). The HPLC effluent was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer and analysed based on pre-set parameters.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass data were processed for peptide data analysis using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ver. 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with specific parameters (Enzyme, Trypsin; Max Missed Cleavages, 2; Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M) - Acetyl (Protein N-term) - iTRAQ8plex (N-term) - iTRAQ8plex (K) - iTRAQ8plex (Y); Peptide Mass Tolerance, ±15 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance, 20 mmu; Peptide confidence, High; Quantification Experimental Bias, Normalize on Total peptide Amount) for searching the Uniprot Triticum database. The false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 was estimated for protein identification using a target-decoy search strategy (Elias and Gygi 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Wheat, Spikelet

### Affiliations
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science Chinese Academy of Sciences P. O. Box 1138, Hefei ,Anhui, 230031, P.R. China Tel: 86-551-65591413
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lifang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Lifang Wu
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science Chinese Academy of Sciences P. O. Box 1138, Hefei ,Anhui, 230031, P.R. China Tel: 86-551-65591413


