### Accession
PXD004929

### Title
NIH 3T3 AHA p-c, SILAC p-c, inhibitor, and enrichment control experiments

### Description
We developed a pulse-chase method in where fully SILAC (heavy, medium-heavy and Light) labelled cells were pulsed with Azidohomoalanine (AHA) and then chased for different length of times. These experiments were performed with 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 13 h of chase. Data from 3 biological replicates are provided. Each replicate contains data from 3 experiments (0, 1, 2 and 0, 4, 8 and 0, 16, 32 hours chase) in where the 0 h time point is always heavy labelled followed by the medium and light labelled time points.  In addition, AHA p-c experiments were performed using only 0, 4 and 8 h chase times in combination with different inhibitor combinations (MG132, Actinomycin D and Wortmanninin + Bafilomycin A1) or control (DMSO). Also, a control enrichment data set was created. Here heavy SILAC labelled cells were pulsed with AHA before being mixed with light cells that were not pulsed with AHA. This was followed by the click reaction and enrichment of AHA containing proteins. Label-swap experiments were also performed. Finally, a SILAC p-c data set is provided. Here light cells were pulsed with heavy (Arg10, Lys8) amino acids and then split in two. One half of the cells was chased in medium (Arg6, Lys4) amino acids and the other part was directly frozen. Label-swap experiments and experiments using different pulse and chase times were also performed. All provided datasets are from mouse fibroblast cells (NIH 3T3).

### Sample Protocol
AHA labelled cells where lyzed and newly synthesized proteins were enriched by click chemistry covalently linking the AHA-bearing proteins to alkyne-agarose beads. After stringent washing proteins where digested "on bead" by Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides where fractionated using isoelectric focusing, SCX or SAX before being separated on a 15 cm column packed with C18 material using a HPLC system and analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Denatured and alkylated proteins from the SILAC p-c experiments were precipitated by Wessel-Flügge precipitation. Protein pellets were re-suspended in Urea buffer and digested by Lys-C and trypsin. Resulting peptides were separated on a 4 m long monolithic column using a 12 h gradient with increasing concentration of organic solvent before being analyzed on a Q-Exactive. Peptides from the enrichment experiment (processed as for the other AHA-labelled samples) and the input (processed as the SILAC p-c samples) from the enrichment experiment were separated on a 2 m monolithic column before being analyzed on a Q-exactive.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2. Default settings were kept except that `match between runs` was turned on. Lys8, Arg10, Lys4, Arg6 were set as labels for the AHA and SILAC p-c data and only Lys8 and Arg10 for the AHA enrichment control measurements. Oxidation of methionines, n-terminal acetylation and deamidation of aspargine and glutamine residues were defined as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl of c-termini was set as fixed modification. The in silico digests of the mouse Uniprot database (2014-10) was done with Trypsin/P. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % and both peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Do young and old protein molecules have the same probability to be degraded? We addressed this question using metabolic pulse-chase labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry to obtain degradation profiles for thousands of proteins. We find that&#xa0;&gt;10% of proteins are degraded non-exponentially. Specifically, proteins are less stable in the first few hours of their life and stabilize with age. Degradation profiles are conserved and similar in two cell types. Many non-exponentially degraded (NED) proteins are subunits of complexes that are produced in&#xa0;super-stoichiometric amounts relative to their exponentially degraded (ED) counterparts. Within complexes, NED proteins have larger interaction interfaces and assemble earlier than ED subunits. Amplifying genes encoding NED proteins increases their initial degradation. Consistently, decay profiles can predict protein level attenuation in aneuploid cells. Together, our data show that non-exponential degradation is common, conserved, and has important consequences for complex formation and regulation of protein abundance.

### Keywords
Degradation, Mouse, Aneuploidy, Silac, Azidohomoalanine

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Centrum, Berlin Charité, Berlin
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC)

### Submitter
Erik McShane

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrueck Centrum, Berlin Charité, Berlin


