### Accession
PXD020101

### Title
Loss of AA13 LPMOs impairs degradation of resistant starch and reduces the growth of Aspergillus nidulans

### Description
Background Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are often studied in simple models involving activity measurements of a single LPMO or a blend thereof with hydrolytic enzymes towards an insoluble substrate. However, the contribution of LPMOs to polysaccharide breakdown in complex cocktails of hydrolytic and oxidative enzymes, similar to fungal secretomes, remains elusive. Typically, two starch-specific AA13 LPMOs are encoded by mainly Ascomycota genomes. Here, we investigate the impact of LPMO loss on the growth and degradation of starches of varying resistance to amylolytic hydrolases by Aspergillus nidulans. Results Deletion of the genes encoding AnAA13A that possesses a CBM20 starch-binding module, AnAA13B (lacking a CBM20) or both AA13s genes resulted in reduction in growth on solid media with resistant, but not soluble processed potato starch. Larger size and amount of residual starch granules were observed for the AA13 KO strains as compared to the reference and the impairment of granular starch degradation was more severe for the AnAA13A KO based on a microscopic analysis. After five days of growth on raw potato starch in liquid media, the mount of residual starch was about 5-fold higher for the AA13 KO strains compared to the reference, which underscores the importance of LPMOs for degradation of especially resistant starches. Proteomic analyses revealed substantial changes in the secretomes of the AA13 double KO, followed by the AnAA13A deficient strains, whereas no significant changes in the proteome were observed for the AnAA13B deficient strain.  Conclusions This study shows that the loss of AA13, especially the starch-binding AnAA13A, impairs degradation of resistant potato starch, but has limited impact less-resistant wheat starch and has no impact at all on processed solubilised starch. The effects of LPMO loss are more pronounced at the later stages of fungal growth, when the less-accessible regions of the substrate accumulate. The striking impact of the loss of a single LPMO against a whole secretome offers insight into the crucial role played by AA13 in the degradation of resistant starch and presents a methodological framework to analyse the contribution of distinct LPMOs towards complex substrates under in vivo conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (2 mL) from four biological replicate cultures were collected from day 3 to 5 under sterile conditions. The samples were centrifuged (20,000×g, 10 min, 4°C) and filtered (0.2 μm regenerated cellulose syringe filters, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to remove mycelia and residual insoluble starch. The filtrate was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until further use. Proteins of the culture filtrates were precipitated by addition of acetone to a final concentration of 80% (v/v), incubation over night at -20°C, and centrifugation (4000xg, 10 min) to pellet the precipitated protein. The protein pellets were dissolved in 50 µL buffer (6 M Guanidinium hydrochloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5), boiled (5 min 95°C) and sonicated (5x60 sec at 4°C) (Bioruptor, Diagenode). For digestion, 45 µL sample were diluted 1:3 in digestion buffer (50 mM HEPES, 10% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), pH 8.5) and incubated with 200 ng LysC (MS grade, Wako) for 3 h at 37°C. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 1:10 in digestion buffer and further digested with 200 ng trypsin (MS grade, Promega) for 18 h at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by addition of 450 µL 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were desalted using SOLAµ HRP plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by activation with 200 µL methanol and 200 µL MS buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), equilibration 2x200 µL 3% ACN, sample application, 2x wash with MS buffer and elution with 2x 300 µL 40% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. Between each solvent application, the plate was centrifuged (1500 rpm, 1 min). Eluted peptides were dried in an Eppendorf Speedvac (3 h at 60°C) and reconstituted in 2% (v/v) ACN, 1% (w/v) TFA acid prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The peptides were loaded on the mass spectrometer by reverse phase chromatography through an inline 15 cm C18 column (Thermo EasySpray ES8034A) connected to a 2 cm long C18 trap column (164705, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Thermo Easy nLc 1200 HPLC system. Peptides were eluted with a mobile phase of constant 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL min−1 over 100 min with a five step gradient of Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1%FA): 0-68 min gradient of 6-23%, 68-85 min 23-38%, 85-90 min 38-60%, 90-93 min 60-95%, and 93-100 min 95%. Analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) run in a data-dependent manner using a “Top 15” method. Full MS spectra were collected at 60,000 resolution, with an AGC target set to 3x106 ions or maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides were fragmented via higher-energy collision dissociation (normalized collision energy=25). The intensity threshold was set to 1x104, dynamic exclusion to 60 s and ions with a charge state <2, >6 or unknown species were excluded. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, with an AGC target value of 1x105 ions or a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The scan range was limited from 350-1850 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the A. Nidulans database obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q) and Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspergillus, Lpmo, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Maher Abou Hachem
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark


