### Accession
PXD026436

### Title
Human adipose-derived stem cells secretome

### Description
This project is a report of protemoic data of secretome from human adipose tissue-derived stem cells. The ADSCs were cultured in serum-free condition, and LC-MS/MS identification was conducted to analyze the ingredients in the secretome.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 240 μg protein of SF was subjected to Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) digestion. Proteins were trypsin digested at 37℃ for 16 hrs, 3 % Trifluoroacetic acid was added into elute to stop the reaction, and the C18 tip column was used to remove salts. A total of 2 μg per 5 μl of the digested peptide was used to analyze using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Spectra raw data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) with EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). An autosampler was used to load 5 μl aliquots of the peptide solutions into an EASY column, Acclaim PepMap™ 100 of i.d. 75 μm, length 2 cm, and particle size of 3 μm (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). Then, the trapped peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray Column, C18 analytic-column of i.d. 75 μm and length 500 mm and 2 μm particle size (100 Å from Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases were composed of 100% water (A), and 100% acetonitrile (B), and each contained 0.1% formic acid. The liquid chromatography with 2 hrs gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. During the chromatographic separation, the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey full scans were acquired on the mass range 400-1,600 m/z, maximum injection time of 100 ms, automatic gain control target 2 x 105 ions with the resolution of 120,000, and analyzed using the Orbitrap. MS/MS precursors were selected from top n intense ions in 3 sec between survey scans, which were fragmented by 37.5% Higher-energy collisional dissociation. MS/MS was acquired on maximum injection time of 54 ms, automatic gain control 5 x 104 ions with the resolution of 30,000, and analyzed using the Orbitrap. Previously fragmented precursors were excluded for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) at default settings with Unique peptide ≥2 and Min # of Amino acid ≥6. Identified peaks were searched against a database of homo sapience from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/). Output files generated from Maxquant were subjected to Perseus (version 1.6.2.2) to perform bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, the stem cell-derived secretome, which is the set of proteins expressed by stem cells and secreted into the extracellular space, has been demonstrated as a critical contributor for tissue repair. In this study, we have produced two sets of high concentration secretomes from adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ADSCs) that contain bovine serum or free of exogenous molecules. Through proteomic analysis, we elucidated that proteins related to extracellular matrix organization and growth factor-related proteins are highly secreted by ADSCs. Additionally, the application of ADSC secretome to full skin defect showed accelerated wound closure, enhanced angiogenic response, and complete regeneration of epithelial gaps. Furthermore, the ADSC secretome was capable of reducing scar formation. Finally, we show high-dose injection of ADSC secretome <i>via</i> intraperitoneal or transdermal delivery demonstrated no detectable pathological conditions in various tissues/organs, which supports the notion that ADSC secretome can be safely utilized for tissue repair and regeneration.

### Keywords
Adscs, Lc-ms/ms, Serum-free, Secretome

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
BioMax/N-Bio Institute, Seoul National University

### Submitter
Young-Hyeon An

### Lab Head
Dr Nathaniel Suk-Yeon Hwang
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea


