### Accession
PXD018404

### Title
Malassezia sympodialis host response studied with an ex-vivo human skin model

### Description
An ex-vivo human skin model was used to investigate the host skin response to M. sympodialis on oily (supplemented with oleic acid) and non-oily skin. Host-pathogen interactions were analysed by different molecular techniques including proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Skin samples were incubated for six days at 37 °C and 5% CO2 before being recovered. Tissue samples for RNA and protein extraction were cut into smaller pieces and placed in a microcentrifuge tube with RNAlater® and stored frozen at -70 oC until further subsequent RNA-Protein extraction. RNA and proteins were extracted from the same recovered samples in a single 2-day sequential process based on previous published methods based on trizol (Chomczynski & Sacchi, 1987; Berglund et al, 2007; Corzo-León et al, 2019). Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µl ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) in 1.5 ml low-binding tubes. Reduction was performed by the addition of 2 µl DTT (200 mM) with incubation for 30 min at 60 °C, then alkylation by the addition of 4 µl iodoacetamide (200 mM) with incubation in the dark for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were digested by the addition of 10 µl sequencing grade trypsin (20 µg/ml, Promega) with incubation overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were frozen at -70 °C and dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac SC110A, Savant). Peptides were dissolved in 40 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted on µ-C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Watford, UK) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC-MSMS: Desalted peptide samples were dissolved in 10 µl loading solvent (0.1% formic acid (v/v), 2% acetonitrile (v/v) in ultrapure water). Liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry was performed using a Q Exactive Plus/Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Sample (5 µl) was loaded onto a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100; 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) for 5 min at 10 µl/min and reverse-flushed to the nano column (PepMap RSLC C18; 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm) at 300 µl/min using a gradient of varying proportions of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in ultrapure water). The proportion of solvent B was increased from 3-10% during 5-10 min, from 10-40% during 10-40 min, from 40-80% during 40-45 min, held at 80% during 45-53 min, then returned to 3%. Mass spectra were acquired during 5-65 min in Full MS/data-dependent MS2 mode using a ‘Top 10’ method. MS1 scans were performed from 375 – 1750 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (max IT) of 50 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions with charge states of +2 to +5 were selected from each MS1 scan for sequential trapping and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy 26%). MS2 scans were performed with a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 5e4, and max IT of 100 ms. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s, and peptide ions were preferred.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the Q Exactive Plus were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) with Mascot v2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK) as the search engine. The human database comprised 71,772 protein sequences of reference proteome UP000005640 (Homo sapiens) and the malassezia database comprised 3,318 protein sequences of reference proteome UP000016925 (Malassezia sympodialis) downloaded from the UniProt Knowledgebase. Search parameters were: Enzyme = Trypsin; Maximum missed cleavage sites = 2; Instrument = ESI-FTICR; Precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance = 20 mmu; Dynamic modifications = Oxidation (M); Static modifications = Carbamidomethyl (C). Results were filtered for peptides with a Mascot significance value of 0.05, and protein area values were based on the extracted ion chromatograms of the three most abundant peptides. Peptide-spectrum matches were validated using a decoy database search with target false discovery rates of 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Malassezia</i> species are a major part of the normal mycobiota and colonize mainly sebum-rich skin regions of the body. This group of fungi cause a variety of infections such as pityriasis versicolor, folliculitis, and fungaemia. In particular, <i>Malassezia sympodialis</i> and its allergens have been associated with non-infective inflammatory diseases such as seborrheic dermatitis and atopic eczema. The aim of this study was to investigate the host response to <i>M. sympodialis</i> on oily skin (supplemented with oleic acid) and non-oily skin using an <i>ex vivo</i> human skin model. Host-pathogen interactions were analyzed by SEM, histology, gene expression, immunoassays and dual species proteomics. The skin response to <i>M. sympodialis</i> was characterized by increased expression of the genes encoding &#x3b2;-defensin 3 and RNase7, and by high levels of S100 proteins in tissue. Supplementation of oleic acid onto skin was associated with direct contact of yeasts with keratinocytes and epidermal damage. In oily conditions, there was increased expression of <i>IL18</i> but no expression of antimicrobial peptide genes in the skin's response to <i>M. sympodialis</i>. In supernatants from inoculated skin plus oleic acid, TNF&#x3b1;, IL-6, and IL1-&#x3b2; levels were decreased and IL-18 levels were significantly increased.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Malassezia sympodialis, Human skin, Infection model

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Stead

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Carol A Munro
University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom


