### Accession
PXD025140

### Title
Labeling preferences of diazirines with protein biomolecules

### Description
Diazirines are widely used in photoaffinity labeling (PAL) to trap non-covalent interactions with biomolecules.  However, design and interpretation of PAL experiments is challenging without a molecular understanding of the reactivity of diazirines with protein biomolecules.  Here, we report a systematic evaluation of the labeling preferences of alkyl and aryl diazirines with individual amino acids, single proteins, and in the whole cell proteome. We find that alkyl diazirines exhibit preferential labeling of acidic amino acids in a pH-dependent manner that is characteristic of a reactive alkyl diazo intermediate, while aryl-fluorodiazirines labeling patterns reflect reaction primarily through a carbene intermediate. From a survey of 32 alkyl diazirine probes, we use this reactivity profile to rationalize why alkyl diazirine probes preferentially enrich highly acidic proteins or those embedded in membranes and why probes with a net positive-charge tend to produce higher labeling yields in cells and in vitro. These results indicate that alkyl diazirines are an especially effective chemistry for surveying the membrane proteome, and will facilitate design and interpretation of biomolecular labeling experiments with diazirines.

### Sample Protocol
For full protocol, see the SI section of the accompanying paper. SKNSH cells were grown to 90% confluency and treated with varying photoaffinity probes. The cells were irradiated, harvested, lysed and crosslinked proteins labeled with a biotin probe. Biotinylated proteins were enriched with Streptavidin beads and digested with trypsin. Trypsinized pepties were recovered and labeled with TMT for quantification. For binding site ID, small molecule labeled peptides were cleaved off of the avidin beads and recovered.  Mass spectrometry procedures: The desalted samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/water (20 μL). The sample (10.0 μL) was loaded onto a C18 trap column (3 cm, 3 µm particle size C10 Dr. Maisch 150 µm I.D) and then separated on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 µm particle size, 250 mm length, 75 µm internal diameter) at 150 nL/min with a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 system connected in line to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 50 ˚C. The tryptic peptides were separated via a step-wise gradient from 5% to 98% of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile over 120 min (0–1 min, 0–5%; 1–91 min, 5–27%; 91–115 min, 27–98%; 115–120 min, 98%–0%).  The cleavage peptides were separated via the same gradient described above. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 120K FWHM resolution (m/z = 200).  Tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 at a resolving power settings of 50K. HCD fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments accumulated for up to 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of photolabeled SK-N-SH proteome. Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.3. HCD spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5 were searched against a database containing the Uniprot 2016 annotated human proteome (Swissprot) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions with specific trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da), static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), and static TMT labeling at lysine residues and N-termini. Assignments were validated using Percolator. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to include medium and high confidence matches, and TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier. PSMs were filtered based on if a PSM is in only one protein group with an Isolation Interference under 70%. Empty abundances were filled in with minimum noise level computed by taking the minimum for each channel in Control and minimum for each channel in Treatment. 2000 centroids were generated at random from the absolute max in Control and Treatment and the absolute min in Control and Treatment, and a minimum noise level was generated using a K-means clustering method. If one abundance was missing, then the instance was filled with the geometric mean of the PSM for Control or Treatment. If all abundances were missing for Control and Treatment or the variance between existing abundances was above 30%, the PSM was removed. Any empty abundance missing completely at random, missing not at random, or missing at random any valid instances were filled with the appropriate method described above. P-values for enrichment ratios were calculated using the t-test (background) method.     Binding site analysis. Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 using SEQUEST HT, allowing for variable modifications (methionine oxidation: +15.995 Da; cysteine carbamidomethylation: +57.021 Da; asparagine/glutamine deamidation: +0.984; and JN compound masses from Table S6), up to two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for fragment ions from HCD. Searching was performed against the Swiss-Prot human database and a contaminant protein database. For binding sites of JN probes, MS/MS data from the cleavage fraction were searched by SEQUEST HT against the Uniprot 2016 annotated human proteome (Swissprot) and contaminant proteins.  The high and medium confidence peptide assignments (false discovery rate < 5%) were analyzed using IsoStamp for the precursor isotope pattern and filtered based on manual validation.

### Publication Abstract
Diazirines are widely used in photoaffinity labeling (PAL) to trap noncovalent interactions with biomolecules. However, design and interpretation of PAL experiments is challenging without a molecular understanding of the reactivity of diazirines with protein biomolecules. Herein, we report a systematic evaluation of the labeling preferences of alkyl and aryl diazirines with individual amino acids, single proteins, and in the whole cell proteome. We find that alkyl diazirines exhibit preferential labeling of acidic amino acids in a pH-dependent manner that is characteristic of a reactive alkyl diazo intermediate, while the aryl-fluorodiazirine labeling pattern reflects reaction primarily through a carbene intermediate. From a survey of 32 alkyl diazirine probes, we use this reactivity profile to rationalize why alkyl diazirine probes preferentially enrich highly acidic proteins or those embedded in membranes and why probes with a net positive charge tend to produce higher labeling yields in cells and in vitro. These results indicate that alkyl diazirines are an especially effective chemistry for surveying the membrane proteome and will facilitate design and interpretation of biomolecular labeling experiments with diazirines.

### Keywords
Sknsh cells, Photoaffinity labeling, Proteomics, Diazirine, Binding sites

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina M. Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138


