### Accession
PXD004910

### Title
Towards an optimized workflow for middle-down proteomics

### Description
Detailed description of an optimally tuned workflow for high throughput middle-down proteomics with the currently available state-of-the-art instrumentation. In this work we describe and critically evaluate the limits of an optimized workflow for the detection of middle-range peptides. First, the work compares the yield of desired longer peptides both by enzymatic and acidic digestion protocols. Second, it uses optimized conditions for sample clean-up and multidimensional LC. Third, we fine-tuned critical MS parameters for improving the detection of middle-range peptides where we comprehensively evaluated ETD, HCD and EThcD fragmentation schemes on all the digests obtained in order to choose the best sequencing method for distinct populations of peptides and with special attention paid to longer peptides.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa digests were prepared as described previously: prior to digestion proteins were reduced (with dithiothreitol) and carbamidomethylated (with iodoacetamide). The protein concentration was estimated by a Bradford assay and subsequently the cell lysate was split into three samples of 200 µg for the digestion by the alternative protocols. For Asp-N and Glu-C digests, procedures reported from Giansanti et al. were used. For the chemical digestion, the lysate was diluted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg / µl with a solution of FA (final 2% FA) and kept at 100 °C constant temperature. Sample clean-up was performed in C18 300 Å pore size solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns. Prior to the MS analysis, samples were fractionated to reduce the complexity using a strong cation exchange (SCX) system. Nano-UHPLC-MS/MS was performed on an Agilent 1290 Infinity System connected to an Orbitrap Fusion and 95 minutes was set as analysis time for the all SCX fractions.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.1, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, DE) and the spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (version 2015_04). Searching was done with Sequest HT and the following parameters were used: unspecific searches with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications. In the case of the FA digest two dynamic modifications were included: formylation of the N-terminus and the conversion from Glutamate to pyro-Glutamate. Peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The results were filtered using Percolator37,38 to a peptide and protein FDR below 1%. We further only accepted peptides with an Xcorr of at least 2. We calculated peptide-spectrum matching fragmentation coverage using an in-house developed script. Theoretical ion series were calculated for each fragmentation method (b and y for CID and HCD, c and z for ETD and b, y, c and z for EThcD). Matching was performed with a tolerance of 0.05 Da, for peaks with an intensity higher than 5% of the base peak intensity. The global fragmentation coverage was calculated based on the possible fragments, disregarding the exact breakage positions.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflows can crudely be classified into two distinct regimes, targeting either relatively small peptides (i.e., 0.7 kDa &lt; M<sub>w</sub> &lt; 3.0 kDa) or small to medium sized intact proteins (i.e., 10 kDa &lt; M<sub>w</sub> &lt; 30 kDa), respectively, termed bottom-up and top-down proteomics. Recently, a niche has started to be explored covering the analysis of middle-range peptides (i.e., 3.0 kDa &lt; M<sub>w</sub> &lt; 10 kDa), aptly termed middle-down proteomics. Although middle-down proteomics can follow, in principle, a modular workflow similar to that of bottom-up proteomics, we hypothesized that each of these modules would benefit from targeted optimization to improve its overall performance in the analysis of middle-range sized peptides. Hence, to generate middle-range sized peptides from cellular lysates, we explored the use of the proteases Asp-N and Glu-C and a nonenzymatic acid induced cleavage. To increase the depth of the proteome, a strong cation exchange (SCX) separation, carefully tuned to improve the separation of longer peptides, combined with reversed phase-liquid chromatography (RP-LC) using columns packed with material possessing a larger pore size, was used. Finally, after evaluating the combination of potentially beneficial MS settings, we also assessed the peptide fragmentation techniques, including higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), and electron-transfer combined with higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD), for characterization of middle-range sized peptides. These combined improvements clearly improve the detection and sequence coverage of middle-range peptides and should guide researchers to explore further how middle-down proteomics may lead to an improved proteome coverage, beneficial for, among other things, the enhanced analysis of (co-occurring) post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Human, Middle-down proteomics, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Alba Cristobal

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


