### Accession
PXD033004

### Title
Ethynyl-1,2,3-triazolyl-phosphinate based electrophiles for cysteine labelling

### Description
Herein we report the density functional theory (DFT) guided discovery of ethynyl-triazolyl-phosphinates (PT) as a new class of electrophilic warhead for cysteine selective bioconjugation. Using DFT-calculations, we found that both the electron withdrawing character as well as the π-acidity of the P-bound triazole significantly contribute to its enhanced reactivity towards thiols. We developed a straightforward synthetic route starting from readily available organic azides and diethynyl phosphinates using CuI-catalysed azide alkyne cycloaddition in aqueous buffer to access a variety of functional electrophiles. These reagents were used to obtain fluorescent peptide-conjugates for receptor labelling on live cells and in the generation of stable and biologically active antibody-drug-conjugates. Moreover, we were able to incorporate PT-electrophiles into azide-containing proteins under native conditions and demonstrate their potential in protein-protein conjugation. Finally, we showcase the excellent cysteine selectivity of this new class of electrophile in mass spectrometry based, proteome-wide cysteine profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitin dimers (1 mg/ml, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) were supplemented with 1.5% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and heated to 60°C for 30 minutes. The solution was diluted to 1% (wt/vol) SDC and trypsin was added 1:20 (wt/wt). The protein was digested for 4h at 37°C and the reaction was stopped by adding 1% TFA. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was stored at -20°C until analysis.  For proteome-wide cysteine profiling using DTB-phosphinate 6 we adapted the workflow described by Zanon et al.(2021)   HEK293 cells were grown in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks to ca. 80% of the total area. The cells have been washed by PBS and lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and 0.5% Triton x-100 by centrifugation. The total amount of the protein was detected by BCA assay and was adjusted to 1 mg/ml with PBS. Cell lysate was reacted with 200 µM 6 for 45 minutes at room-temperature. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated in 2 ml ice-cold acetone overnight at -20°C. Precipitates were centrifuged at 3,500 rpm at 25 °C for 10 min and resuspended in 0.5 ml cold MeOH. The suspension was centrifuged at 10’000 xg for 5 minutes and the supernatant was removed. This procedure was repeated two more times. Proteins were resuspended in 150 μL 8 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma Aldrich) and subsequently diluted to 2 M urea using 100 mM TEAB buffer. This solution was added to pre washed high capacity Streptavidin-beads (25µl initial slurry) and incubated for 1h at room-temperature with gentle agitation.  To remove unbound proteins, beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was discarded. Additionally, the beads were washed 3x with 300 µl PBS supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, 3x with 300 µl PBS and with 300 µl milliQ-water. Beads were resuspended (8M Urea, 100mM TEAB) and treated with 15 μl of dithiothreitol (DTT; 31 mg/mL in water) at 37°C for 45 minutes. Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 15 μl of iodoacetamide (74 mg/mL in water) for 45 minutes in the dark. After centrifugation and removal of the supernatant, the beads were resuspended in 0.5 ml TEAB-buffer (100 mM, 2 M Urea) and 1 µg trypsin was added (Promega, V5113). Proteins were digested at 37°C overnight.  The supernatant, containing non-labeled peptides was discarded and the beads were washed 3x with 300 µl PBS supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, 3x with 300 µl PBS and with 300 µl milliQ-water. Desthio-biotinylated peptides were eluted two times with 100 μl 50:50:0.1 water/MeCN/FA. Solvent was removed by lyophilization, the samples were redissolved in 30 µl 5:95:0.1 water/MeCN/FA and stored at -20°C until measurement.

### Data Protocol
Ubiquitin dimers The FASTA-file was modified to contain a wtUb and a UbK63A or UbK48A mutant. Analysis was done in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.5.0.400) using MS Amanda 2.02 as a search engine using the following settings: MS1 accuracy: 6 ppm; MS2 accuracy: 20 ppm; used enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavages: 3; max. dynamic modifications: 4; peptide mass: 350 - 5000 Da; dynamic modifications: PT + Ub-Cterm (A, +375.077 Da).  Proteome-wide reactivity of Desthiobiotin-PT 6 To determine the modification mass and amino acid selectivity, data was analyzed as described by Zanon et al. (2021) The closed search was performed in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.5.0.400) using MS Amanda 2.02 as a search engine using the following settings: MS1 accuracy: 8 ppm; MS2 accuracy: 20 ppm; used enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavages: 3; max. dynamic modifications: 4; peptide mass: 350 - 5000 Da; dynamic modifications: carbamidomethylation (cysteine, +57.021 Da), oxidation (methionine, +15.995 Da), formylation (N-term, +27.995 Da), DTB-PT (cysteine, +438.214 Da). For FDR calculation Percolator was used with a target FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
We report the density functional theory (DFT) guided discovery of ethynyl-triazolyl-phosphinates (ETPs) as a new class of electrophilic warheads for cysteine selective bioconjugation. By using Cu<sup>I</sup> -catalysed azide alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) in aqueous buffer, we were able to access a variety of functional electrophilic building blocks, including proteins, from diethynyl-phosphinate. ETP-reagents were used to obtain fluorescent peptide-conjugates for receptor labelling on live cells and a stable and a biologically active antibody-drug-conjugate. Moreover, we were able to incorporate ETP-electrophiles into an azide-containing ubiquitin under native conditions and demonstrate their potential in protein-protein conjugation. Finally, we showcase the excellent cysteine-selectivity of this new class of electrophile in mass spectrometry based, proteome-wide cysteine profiling, underscoring the applicability in homogeneous bioconjugation strategies to connect two complex biomolecules.

### Keywords
Chemical proteomics, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
FMP Belrin
Chemical Biology Department, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany.  Department of Chemistry, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Brook-Taylor-Straße 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Stieger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Hackenberger
Chemical Biology Department, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany.  Department of Chemistry, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Brook-Taylor-Straße 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany


