### Accession
PXD006661

### Title
Iron response of HepG2 cells -  The exon-intron gene structure upstream of the initiation codon predicts translation efficiency

### Description
Quantitative proteomics of HepG2 cells in response to iron. SILAC 3plex was conducted

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (500 μL per 1×106 cells). Clarified lysate was electrohporesed in 10% SDS PAGE gel. Gel lane was divided into 10 molecular fractions. Each fraction was digested in-gel with trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were labelled by 3plex SILAC [Heavy label: Arg10, 13C(6)15N(4) / +10.008 Da (R); Lys8, (13C(6)15N(2) / +8.014 Da (K). Medium label: Arg6, 13C(6) / +6.020 Da (R); Lys4, 2H(4) / +4.025 Da (K)]. Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (500 μL per 1×106 cells). Clarified lysate was electrohporesed in 10% SDS PAGE gel. Gel lane was divided into 10 molecular fractions. Each fraction was digested in-gel with trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry).  Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 using default settings. Peak list search was done using Human RefSeq or Ensembl 88 protein database. SILAC labeling was not considered for searching the peak lists. Only dynamic modifications of carbamidomethyl (Cys), deamination (Asn), and oxidation (Met) were selected.   Post-processing FDR estimation was done using the Percolator algorithm. The charge-based Sequest XCorr was adjusted to ensure a FDR of less than 1% on the peptide level. Only peptides assigned at high confidence to master proteins which were identified with two or more peptides were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Introns in mRNA leaders are common in complex eukaryotes, but often overlooked. These introns are spliced out before translation, leaving exon-exon junctions in the mRNA leaders (leader EEJs). Our multi-omic approach shows that the number of leader EEJs inversely correlates with the main protein translation, as does the number of upstream open reading frames (uORFs). Across the five species studied, the lowest levels of translation were observed for mRNAs with both leader EEJs and uORFs (29%). This class of mRNAs also have ribosome footprints on uORFs, with strong triplet periodicity indicating uORF translation. Furthermore, the positions of both leader EEJ and uORF are conserved between human and mouse. Thus, the uORF, in combination with leader EEJ predicts lower expression for nearly one-third of eukaryotic proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Hepatocellular cacinoma, Lc-ms/ms, Iron

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago.
University of Otago

### Submitter
Chun Shen Lim

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Brown
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago.


