### Accession
PXD038233

### Title
Target identification of methyl bestatin

### Description
Target identification of methyl bestatin (MeBs) using the photoreactive diazirine-alkyne probe, CQ83.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were harvested and pelleted at 400 x g, washed 3 x with cold PBS, resuspended in 1 mL of PBS and lysed by sonication. Lysates were then clarified at 20,000 x g for 15 min. The soluble fraction was retained, and protein concentrations were determined using the DC Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad) and adjusted to 1 mg/mL. Aliquots of 1.0 mL were treated with CQ83 probe (10 µM) for 30 min. For competition experiments the lysates pretreated with 100 µM inhibitor MeBs (30 min) and then probe (30 min). Samples were then irradiated for 30 min in the Photochemical Reactor equipped with 350 nm lamps at 4 °C. 10 µL 4% SDS was added to each sample and heated at 60 °C for 30 min. Added the mix of click reagent gents (1 mM CuSO4, 100 µM BTTAA ligand and 100 µM biotin-PEG3 azide, 1 mM TCEP) and incubate for 60 min at RT. Protein samples were then precipitated with acetone and frozen at −20 °C overnight. Samples were then centrifuged 3,500 x g for 5 min at 4 °C, aqueous/acetone solution was removed and protein precipitates and washed 3x with (cold acetone 1 mL, sonication and re-precipitated at −20 °C for 15 min, then spun at 3500 x g for 5 min at 4 °C). After the final wash, the pellets were air dried at RT for 10 min and re-solubilized in 100 µL 4% SDS PBS by sonication and gentle heat, then added PBS (2 mL) and diluted to 0.2% SDS. They were then enriched with streptavidin beads (100 µL per sample), incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Beads were then pelleted by centrifugation (1400 x g, 2 min), washed with 1% SDS PBS x 3, 2 M Urea PBS x 3, PBS X 3 each 2 mL). To the solution of the probe-bound streptavidin beads, ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (25 mM) and 10 mM DTT 20 µL (100 mM stock) was added, then placed in 42 °C heat block for 30 min. 200 µL of 20 mM iodoacetamide was added and allowed to react at 37 °C for 30 min (protected from light). It was then spun down and washed with 10 mM DTT in 200 µL ABC, followed by washed 3 x with 25 mM ABC. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1,300 x g, 2 min) and resuspended in 200 µL of 25 mM ABC, 1mM CaCl2 2 µL, and trypsin 2 µg. The digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C with shaking. Digested peptides were collected and dried using Genevac EZ-2 evaporator. TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Label Reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific), 0.8 mg per label, were equilibrated to room temperature, dissolved in 60 µL of dry acetonitrile and mixed by vortexing briefly before use. 7.5 µL of each TMT label reagent was carefully added to each sample (126 and 127 for the blank control, 128 and 129 for the probe, 130 and 131 for the competition) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. 3 µL of 5% hydroxylamine was then added to each sample and incubated for 15 mins to quench the labeling reaction. Samples were then combined in equal quantities (about 100 µg), purified using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce), and divided into two fractions (CQ83TMT1 and CQ83TMT2), and dried with a Genevac EZ-2 evaporator.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 by searching against the Uniprot human database supplemented with common contaminant protein sequences and quantifying according to SPS MS3 reporter ions. MaxQuant was run using the following parameters: reporter Ion MS3 – 6plex TMT; variable modifications - methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da), asparagine or glutamine deamidation (+0.984 Da); fixed modification - carbamido- methylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine; digestion – trypsin/P.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aminopeptidase, Bestatin, Methyl bestatin

### Affiliations
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA
Tri-Institutional PhD Program in Chemical Biology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA

### Submitter
Hsin-Che Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel A Bachovchin
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA


