### Accession
PXD043513

### Title
Disrupted propionate metabolism evokes transcriptional changes in the heart by increasing histone acetylation and propionylation

### Description
Propionate is a common three-carbon intermediate produced from the breakdown of propiogenic substrates, such as branched-chain amino acids and odd-numbered fatty acids, and by gut bacteria. Propionate can chemically modify proteins, and if this involves histones, it may underpin a disease-relevant link between short-chain acyls and gene expression in the heart. Here, we sought to characterize how propionate-dependent modifications to histones affect cardiac gene expression and contractile function in a mouse model producing elevated levels of propionate/propionyl-CoA. An adult mouse model of propionic acidaemia (PA) was used to investigate how propionate affects histones and gene expression in the heart, an organ strongly affected in PA patients. Mass spectrometry confirmed elevated plasma propionate in 8-week PA mice, reaching levels detected in PA patient serum.  Metabolomic analyses confirmed a metabolic signature of PA, but male mice had enhanced propionate processing towards -alanine. Female PA hearts had expanded end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes, and weaker systolic contractions, without major electrocardiographic changes.  Ca2+ signals were deranged in female PA mice (raised diastolic Ca2+), consistent with contractile dysfunction.  Differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) included Pde9a and Mme, previously linked to cardiac dysfunction. These DEGs also responded to 48-h culture of wild-type myocytes with propionate as well as butyrate, an HDAC inhibitor, suggesting a role for increased histone acetylation alongside propionylation in inducing these genes. Indeed, histone acetylation (H3K27ac) and propionylation were elevated genome-wide in the PA heart and at the promoters of Pde9a and Mme. These propionate-associated epigenetic responses were more pronounced in female PA mice.  The greater prominence of epigenetic, transcriptional, and functional responses in female PA mice, despite a mostly sex-indiscriminate overall metabolic milieu, argues that histone acylation plays a defining role in the cardiac phenotype. We conclude that perturbed propionate metabolism in vivo alters histone acylation and gene expression, which impacts cardiac contractile function.

### Sample Protocol
Neonatal rat ventricular myocytes were incubated with either 13C6-isoleucine/13C5-valine or 13C1-propionate. Histones were extracted by hypotonic lysis and acid extraction. Histones underwent D10-propionic anhydride derivatisation and underwent trypsin digestion. Sample clean-up was with C18 tips. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used to analyse the purified tryptic peptides. Six per cent of tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMapC18; 300µm x 5mm, 5µm particle size, Thermo Fischer) and separated on a 50cm-long EasySpray column (ES803, Thermo Fischer) using a-60 minute linear gradient from 2 % to 35% buffer B (A: 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; B: 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 250 nl/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were then analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (instrument control software v3.3). Data were acquired in data-dependent mode, with the advance peak detection (APD) enabled. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 k resolution over a m/z range 400 -1500, AGC target of 4e5 ions and S-lens RF of 30. MS/MS spectra were obtained in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution with a Quad isolation window of 1.6, AGC target of 5e4 ions, maximum injection time of 54 ms, with HCD activation and a fixed collision energy set at 30%.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using FragPipe v19.1. Initially the data were analysed using the FragPipe open search workflow to determine the amino-acid mass shift induced by growing cells in presence of heavy Isoleucine and heavy valine; or 1C13 propionic acid, as well as the mass shift induced by the in vitro derivatisation at protein level of non-modified lysines with D10-propionic acid in the histone enriched fractions (pre-trypsin digestion). The data were searched against the reviewed SwissProt-uniprot Rattus norvegicus proteome (downloaded 20230203_10102sequences) and analysed using the default open search parameters. The open searched identified mass shifts of +5.01677 in Val, 6.02129 in Leu as a result of the incorporation of heavy Val and Ile into proteins, respectively; +57.02956 in K corresponding to a K propionylation with 1C13; +61.0574 in K and n-term corresponding to D10-propionylation and +59.03627 in K corresponding to propionylation with three C13 (3-Pro; probably coming from heavy Val or Ile). These mass shifts were used for a second FragPipe analysis. In this second FragPipe analysis we used the Label Free Quantitation with Match Between Runs workflow (LFQ-MBR) with the minor changes on the default settings. Briefly, data were search against the Rat proteome, selecting trypsin as proteolytic enzyme (maximum 2 missed cleavages) and oxidation (M; +15.9949), acetylation (K, N-terminal; +42.0106), heavy Val (+5.01677), heavy Ile (+6.02129), propionyl anhydride (K; 56.0262; Pro), propionyl:13C1(K, +57.02956; 1-Pro), D10-propionic anhydride (k, n-terminus; +61.0574), propionyl mono-methyl (K, +70.0422; Pro-me) and heavy propionylation (k; +59.03627; 3-Pro) as variable modifications. MBR (match between runs) ion FDR of 1% was applied. Intensities and MaxLFQ intensities were reported in the data outputs. FragPipe modified-combined_peptides output was used to look at changes on Histone propionylation induced by the experimental treatment.  The mass spectrometry raw related to Histone post-trasnslational modifications had been deposited to the Proteome eXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXDXXXXX (Perez-Riverol Y et al.2019)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Epigenetics, Histone, Contraction, Propionic acidemia

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Swietach
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.


