### Accession
PXD023296

### Title
Renal cell carcinoma: a proteomic approach

### Description
The proteome of clinical tissue samples diagnosed with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) were evaluated analyzed along with the dataset identifier PXD022018 to establish a potential discriminative biomarker panel of proteins for these tumors subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
The present work utilized high resolution mass spectrometry to analyze the proteomes of 27 flash-frozen, OCT-embedded, human renal tissue biopsies from clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC, n=7), papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC, n=5), chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC, n=5) and renal oncocytoma (RO, n=5) including normal adjacent renal tissue (NAT, n=5). Protein digested was carried out using trypsin enzyme over four minutes using an ultrasonic microplate horn assemble device. The extracts containing the digested proteomes were subsequently analyzed by label-free nanoLC-HR-MS/MS approach. For each biopsy, two instrumental replicates were generated.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V1.6.0.16. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda search engine with the UniProt-SwissProt H. sapiens as a reference and a contaminants database of common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantification., Proteins, Renal oncocytoma, Renal tumors, Papillary renal cell carcinoma, Biomarkers, Clear cell renal cell carcinoma, Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
NOVA School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon,  Caparica, Portugal
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo M. Santos
NOVA School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon,  Caparica, Portugal


