### Accession
PXD040724

### Title
Mitochondria preconditioning delays aging and associated diseases in C. elegans impacting on key ferroptosis players

### Description
Excessive iron accumulation or deficiency have detrimental consequences across species, leading to a variety of pathologies in humans. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans severe iron as well as oxygen deprivation induce developmental arrest. Instead, hypoxia preconditioning protects against severe hypoxia-induced neuromuscular damage and sub-lethal levels of iron depletion extend lifespan in C. elegans. The positive health outcomes of applying hypoxia preconditioning are obvious but have low feasible application. Here, we thus assessed the potential beneficial effects of genetic and chemical interventions acting via mild iron instead of oxygen depletion. We show that limiting iron availability through frataxin silencing or the iron chelator bipyridine, similar to hypoxia preconditioning, protect against hypoxia-, age- and proteotoxicityinduced neuromuscular deficits. Mechanistically, our data suggest that the beneficial effects elicited by frataxin silencing are at least in part mediated by counteracting ferroptosis, a form of non-apoptotic cell death specifically mediated by iron-induced lipid peroxidation. These is achieved by impacting on different key players of the ferroptosis machinery and likely via novel, gpx-independent redox systems. We thus point to ferroptosis inhibition as a novel strategy to promote healthy aging.

### Sample Protocol
4000 worms were collected, worms lysates were prepared using TissueLyser II, followed by in-solution tryptic digestion, micro-SPE and LC-MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Mascot 2.4.0 and processed by Scaffold 4.4.8.

### Publication Abstract
Excessive iron accumulation or deficiency leads to a variety of pathologies in humans and developmental arrest in the nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>. Instead, sub-lethal iron depletion extends <i>C.&#xa0;elegans</i> lifespan. Hypoxia preconditioning protects against severe hypoxia-induced neuromuscular damage across species but it has low feasible application. In this study, we assessed the potential beneficial effects of genetic and chemical interventions acting via mild iron instead of oxygen depletion. We show that limiting iron availability in <i>C. elegans</i> through frataxin silencing or the iron chelator bipyridine, similar to hypoxia preconditioning, protects against hypoxia-, age-, and proteotoxicity-induced neuromuscular deficits. Mechanistically, our data suggest that the beneficial effects elicited by frataxin silencing are in part mediated by counteracting ferroptosis, a form of non-apoptotic cell death mediated by iron-induced lipid peroxidation. This is achieved by impacting on different key ferroptosis players and likely via <i>gpx</i>-independent redox systems. We thus point to ferroptosis inhibition as a novel potential strategy to promote healthy aging.

### Keywords
Aging; c. elegans; fatty acids; ferroptosis; frataxin; hypoxia; iron; mitochondria; neurodegeneration; oxidoreductase

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Institute of Clinical Medicine,  Department of Clinical Molecular Biology,  University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Hilde Loge Nilsen
Institute of Clinical Medicine,  Department of Clinical Molecular Biology,  University of Oslo, Norway


