### Accession
PXD025535

### Title
A multifactorial proteomics approach to sex-specific effects of diet composition and social environment in an omnivorous insect

### Description
Rearing conditions may elicit noticeable plastic responses in life-history traits of living organisms. For instance, diet composition has proven to influence prominent traits such as body size, fecundity, and lifespan. In contrast, the social environment may influence the survival rate at immature stages, food consumption, and fat storage. Nevertheless, the physiological mechanisms underlying such responses are largely unknown. In this study, we investigated changes in the proteome of the house cricket Acheta domesticus subjected to diets of different nutritional composition (i.e., protein to carbohydrates ratio) and two distinct social environments (i.e., solitary or in groups). We measured the relative abundances of 685 proteins identified in whole-body cricket samples using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Differential expression of proteins induced by diet composition and social environment in female and male A. domesticus was assessed in a data-independent proteomics approach. Additionally, we performed a functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins using comprehensive databases (KEGG and GO). We found that sex alone explained a significant portion (40.87%) of the relative protein abundance variation. Males had a higher representation of proteins involved in metabolic pathways and locomotion. In contrast, females exhibited a higher abundance of proteins related to genetic processes regulation and nutrient catabolism. Moreover, diet composition and social environment induced sex-specific changes in a smaller set of proteins with particular roles. Females had their protein profile affected by diet composition and social environment. The involved proteins were mainly related to several protein synthesis stages, carbohydrate metabolism, and muscle development. In contrast, males were only affected by diet composition, overexpressing proteins related to hormone production, carbohydrate metabolism, and apparently depositing excess protein in the cuticle when fed with a protein-rich diet. It was evident that diet had a more substantial influence on the proteome of the cricket A. domesticus than the social environment, showing that diet composition may exert profound physiological changes in insects in a sex-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Five biological replicates (i.e., whole crickets) from every one of the eight experimental treatments (N=40) were subjected to proteome analysis using a bottom-up approach (Kettman, Frey, & Lefkovits, 2001). Additionally, three samples of each diet (i.e., 3:1 and 1:1) were also processed to accurately identify the dietary protein profile and to exclude such diet-derived proteins from the final cricket proteome dataset. All reagents were obtained from Merck KGaA (Germany) unless otherwise stated. Samples were individually homogenized in extraction buffer in a 1:20 w:v ratio (6M urea, 1M thiourea, 0.05M Tris HCl, pH=8.0) using an Ultra-Turrax (T18, IKA®-Werke GmbH & Co., Germany) at 9600 rpm during two minutes. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 10410 g during 1h at 4°C (Z326K, Hermle, Germany). The supernatant containing the extracted proteins was stored at 4°C and used for posterior procedures. The concentration of protein for each sample was determined by using the Bradford protein quantification assay (Bradford, 1976). In brief, the protein concentration of every sample is calculated through a linear regression model of a known reference sample (bovine serum albumin) using absorption spectroscopy (Spectrostar nano, BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany). Two technical replicates were prepared by precipitating 500 µg of protein per sample with acetone and left overnight at -20°C. Posteriorly, samples were transferred to digestion buffer (6M urea, 0.1M Tris HCl), and treated with solutions of dithiothreitol (for reduction) and then iodoacetamide (for alkylation) to prevent reformation of disulphide bonds. Later, all samples were digested to peptides with 10 µg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were submitted to solid-phase extraction (Strata™-X 33 µm, Phenomenex, Germany) to remove impurities and the eluent was evaporated in a vacuum concentrator at 30°C and 1500 rpm (RVC 2-18 CDplus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Germany). The peptides were dissolved in 50 µL of a solution of 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An additional 1:50 (v/v) dilution with the same solution was performed to allow for injection in the micro-scale liquid chromatography system. Samples were finally stored at -20°C until measurement took place.

### Data Protocol
In-silico construction of the reference house cricket proteome: In order to construct the reference proteome, several RNA-Seq datasets of A. domesticus were downloaded from the Sequence Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra, the datasets can be accessed with the codes SRR1552491, SRR2230498, SRR6001368, SRR6250553, SRR6250554). Sequencing adapters were removed using BBDuk from BBTools v37.93 (Bushnell & Rood, 2018) by matching a 23-mer with a single mismatch to an adapter reference. Low-quality regions at the 3´-end were removed applying a PHRED 20 quality threshold, and sequence reads with an average quality below PHRED 20 were entirely discarded. Pre-processing success was manually inspected by FastQC v0.11.5 (Andrews, 2010). Clean data was assembled into a reference transcriptome using Trinity v2.8.4 (Grabherr et al., 2011) with a k-mer size of 23. Subsequently, resulting contigs were scanned for putative coding regions of minimum 100 aa length by TransDecoder v5.5.0 (Haas & Papanicolaou, 2017). To address the completeness and quality of the inferred in-silico proteome, a search for conserved protein domains was performed using DOGMA v3.4 (Dohmen, Kremer, Bornberg-Bauer, & Kemena, 2016), followed by a search for single-copy orthologs via BUSCO v3.1.0 (Simão, Waterhouse, Ioannidis, Kriventseva, & Zdobnov, 2015; Waterhouse et al., 2018) using an insect dataset. We used BLAST+ v2.9.0 (Altschul, Gish, Miller, Myers, & Lipman, 1990; Camacho et al., 2009) with Swiss-Prot/UniProtKB database (Release 2019_07) and an e-value cut-off of 1e-5 to identify orthologs.   Generation of the spectral ion library: The eight IDA files of cricket samples were simultaneously analysed in ProteinPilot (Version 5.0.1, AB Sciex) with the paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) against the constructed reference proteome complemented by egg and milk protein sequences downloaded from UniProtKB in January 2019 (207051 entries). The same was done for the two IDA files of diet samples but only against egg and milk proteins (16 entries). Search parameters were as follows: Cysteine alkylation, Iodoacetamide; Digestion, trypsin; Instrument, TripleTOF 6600; Species, none; Biological modifications, checked; Amino acid substitutions, checked; Thorough ID, checked; false discovered rate (FDR) analysis, checked.  SWATH data processing: SWATH data were processed using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (Version 2.0.1, AB Sciex) in PeakView (Version 2.2, AB Sciex). The generated ProteinPilot “.group” file was imported by setting the maximum number of proteins to be imported at 880 (recorded from the FDR report: 1% Global FDR) for crickets and at 16 for diets without importing peptides shared by more than one protein. Eleven endogenous peptides from A. domesticus were manually selected and used for retention time calibration in cricket samples, whereas fifteen milk and egg peptides were used in diet samples. Processing settings for peak extraction were as follows: six peptides per protein; six transitions per peptide; peptide confidence threshold of 99%; FDR of 1%; modified peptides excluded; XIC extraction window of 6 min; XIC width of 75 ppm. Results (areas, score, FDR, retention time) were exported in .xlsx format for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
House cricket, Tandem mass spectrometry, Multifactorial experiment, Acheta domesticus, Ida, Swath, Liquid chromatography, Differential expression, Nutritional ecology

### Affiliations
Department of Food Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart
University of Stuttgart, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, Department of Food Chemistry

### Submitter
Marion Fresch

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jens Brockmeyer
Department of Food Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart


