### Accession
PXD012857

### Title
On-target antifungal activity and induction of an unusual metabolic defense mechanism by inhibitors of wheat pathogen Zymoseptoria tritici N-myristoyltransferase

### Description
Novel myristoylated proteins in a fungal pathogen of wheat Zymoseptoria tritici were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Zymoseptoria tritici spores were inoculated in rich media, cultured for 44 h in total, cultures were treated with NMT inhibitors, alkyne-myristate and/or myristic acid. Yeast-like Z. tritici cells were pelleted, washed with PBS and lysed. FASP protocol was used to prepare whole-proteome samples. Alkyne-myristate moiety incorporated into the proteome was used to attach azido-biotin (AzRB) using "click" reaction to prepare "enrichment" samples. Biotinylated proteins were then enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Samples were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with IAA and digested with trypsin. Peptides were used in the next steps as they are for label-free experiments or labelled with TMT reagents. STAGE tip based clean-up protocol was used, TMT samples were fractionated in the STAGE-tips. Peptides were separated on nano-LC column and detected using Thermo QExactive.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant. Protein database for Zymoseptoria isolate IPO323 was downloaded from UniProt. Resulting proteinGroups.txt files were processed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Zymoseptoria tritici, Nmt inhibitor, Myristoylation

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Imperial College London


