### Accession
PXD011104

### Title
Tissue protease activity with MALDI MSI

### Description
Aberrant protease activity has been implicated in the etiology of various prevalent diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer, in particular metastasis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has recently been established as a key technology for bioanalysis of multiple biomolecular classes such as proteins, lipids, and glycans. However, it has not yet been systematically explored for investigation of a tissue’s endogenous protease activity. In this study, we demonstrate that different tissues, spray-coated with substance P as a tracer, digest this peptide with different time-course profiles. Furthermore, we reveal that distinct cleavage products originating from substance P are generated transiently and that proteolysis can be attenuated by protease inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. To show the translational potential of the method, we analyzed protease activity of gastric carcinoma in mice. Our MSI and quantitative proteomics results reveal differential distribution of protease activity – with strongest activity being observed in mouse tumor tissue, suggesting the general applicability of the workflow in animal pharmacology and clinical studies.Aberrant protease activity has been implicated in the etiology of various prevalent diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer, in particular metastasis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has recently been established as a key technology for bioanalysis of multiple biomolecular classes such as proteins, lipids, and glycans. However, it has not yet been systematically explored for investigation of a tissue’s endogenous protease activity. In this study, we demonstrate that different tissues, spray-coated with substance P as a tracer, digest this peptide with different time-course profiles. Furthermore, we reveal that distinct cleavage products originating from substance P are generated transiently and that proteolysis can be attenuated by protease inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. To show the translational potential of the method, we analyzed protease activity of gastric carcinoma in mice. Our MSI and quantitative proteomics results reveal differential distribution of protease activity – with strongest activity being observed in mouse tumor tissue, suggesting the general applicability of the workflow in animal pharmacology and clinical studies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for protease activity assessment by MALDI MSI  For MALDI MSI analysis, frozen tissue was cut into 10 μm slices on a CM1950 cryostat (Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany) at a temperature of -17 °C and thaw-mounted onto ITO-slides. In washing experiments, slices were rinsed with 2 x 1 mL 50 mM ammonium formiate (pH 7 and pH 3). The tissue was vacuum-dried for 15 min at 4 °C. To assess proteolytic in-situ activity, one “digest” slide and one “no digest” control slide were prepared per tissue type. For assessment of time-dependent endogenous protease activity on porcine tissue (5 time-points x 5 organs x 2 conditions, i.e. “digest” and “no digest” for a total of 50 MSI datasets), 4x1 μL protease inhibitor mix (PIM; 1x) consisting of 2 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF), 0.3 μM aprotinin, 116 μM bestatin hydrochloride, 14 μM E-64, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 1 μM leupeptin was applied to each tissue. Additionally, 1x1 μL ddH2O was pipetted on each tissue as solvent control. For studies of inhibitor concentration-dependent protease activity on porcine tissue, a dilution series (0x, 0.1x, 0.25x, 0.5x, 1x, 2.5x, 10x) of PIM was prepared in H2O, and one μl of each dilution was spotted onto tissue at arbitrarily chosen positions (n=2). Slides were kept on ice at all times. In experiments using mouse tumor samples, an additional tissue slice was covered with PIM, using the SunCollect (pump system, SunChrom, Friedrichsdorf) and the following conditions: 3x15 μL/min, Y-distance 25.5 mm, Speed in X= Low 4, Speed in Y=Medium 1. The final amount of PIM on tissue was 0.2 μL/mm2. After drying under vacuum for 3 min at room temperature (RT), porcine or mouse tissues on the “digest” slide (Fig. 1) were covered with the tracer protease substrate substance P (20 pmol/μL in ddH2O) using the SunCollect spray system as described for PIM above for a coating with 3.5 pmol/mm2 substance P. During the spray process, the slide was kept on a cool pad. After spraying, the slide was dried in desiccator for 3 min at RT. Both slides (“digest” and “no digest”) were incubated simultaneously at 37 °C and 95 % humidity in the SunDigest device (SunChrom) for 15 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min, 120 min or 360 min in time-course experiments and for 60 min in inhibitor-concentration-dependence experiments (porcine tissues). Mouse tissue was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C instead, as protease activity was apparently higher in snap-frozen mouse tissue than in slaughterhouse tissue, but otherwise treated as porcine tissue. Homogeneity of the substance P coating on “no digest” slides was evaluated, and experiment with inhomogeneous coatings were  rejected.   MALDI-TOF and MALDI-FT-ICR mass spectrometry imaging   MALDI-TOF MSI with DHB matrix was performed as outlined(14). Porcine tissues were analyzed using an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonik) in reflector positive mode and a mass range of m/z 500-2500. Tissues were measured at a lateral resolution of 200 μm, summing up 300 shots per pixel. External quadratic calibration using peptide standard II was performed for all MS instruments. Data was acquired and processed using flexControl V3.4 and flexImaging V4.1 software (Bruker  Daltonik). For mouse samples, a rapifleX MALDI-TOF instrument (and flexImaging V5.1 (Bruker Daltonik) was used at a lateral resolution of 50 μm (20 μm for the replicate experiment), summing up 400 shots per pixel. After MALDI-TOF data acquisition, the same slides were analyzed using a 7T solariX XR MALDI FT-ICR (Bruker Daltonik). For imaging, the instrument was used in positive ion mode in an m/z range of m/z 100-3000 with a raster width of 20 μm and 15 laser shots/pixel. The following parameters were used: Ion transfer (Funnel 1 150 V, Skimmer 1 15 V, Funnel RF Amplitude 70 Vpp); Octopole (Frequency 5 MHz, RF Amplitude 350 Vpp); Collision Cell (RF Frequency 2 MHz, RF Amplitude 1200 Vpp); Transfer Optics (Time of Flight 1.5 ms, Frequency 4 MHz, FR Amplitude 350 Vpp); Quadrupole (Q1 Mass 350 m/z); Excitation Mode (Sweep Excitation, Sweep Step time 15 μs). Spectra of mouse tumor stomach were recorded using 512k (FID 0.2447 s) data point transient, corresponding to an estimated resolving power of 33,000 at m/z 400 resulting in a manageable data size of 22 GB. The average detected mass resolution at m/z 1347.73 was 23,000. Internal calibration was done using a lock mass of m/z 780.551 [PC(34:2)+Na]+. Data acquisition was performed using ftmsControl (Bruker Daltonik); ion images were obtained from flexImaging 4.1. For verification of substance P and its peptide products, CID fragmentation was used. Data analysis was performed using Biotools 3.2 and Sequence Editor 3.2 software (Bruker Daltonik).

### Data Protocol
Processing of mass spectra and statistical analysis  To export mean intensities, we manually drew regions-of-interest (ROI) on tissue around spots with inhibitor (+inhibitor) or without inhibitor (-inhibitor) on “digest”- and “no digest” control slides, respectively. Mean spectra of those ROIs were exported into mMass (V5.5.0(20)) for baseline-subtraction and peak picking (S/N > 5). Intensities of the m/zvalues of interest were exported into Excel (Microsoft). Non-linear regression analysis was performed in Prism 5.0 software (Graphpad Software).  For statistical analysis of the mouse tumor tissue, TOF data sets were converted into imzML file format(21) using the flexImaging converter (resampled to 80,000 data points), while the centroided FT-ICR datasets were read directly by an in-house conversion tool. Subsequently, the datasets were imported into R 3.3.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria)(22, 23) using MALDIquant and MALDIquantForeign packages(24). The segmentation was performed using spatially aware shrunken centroid clustering(25) (r=2,k=2,s=3) as implemented in Cardinal(26). The variable r=2 to distinguish between tumor and non-tumor. The segmentation was performed based on the m/z segment of 798.54 ± 5 and 798.54 ± 0.05 for the TOF and FT-ICR datasets, respectively. In that mass range, the lipid PC(34:1)+K+ with m/z 798.54, known to be enriched in gastric tumor in this mouse model, is present(14). No pre-processing was performed on the imported raw data. Intensities for Substance P and its peptide cleavage products were exported and grouped into tumorous- and non-tumorous segment.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant protease activity has been implicated in the etiology of various prevalent diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer, in particular metastasis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has recently been established as a key technology for bioanalysis of multiple biomolecular classes such as proteins, lipids, and glycans. However, it has not yet been systematically explored for investigation of a tissue's endogenous protease activity. In this study, we demonstrate that different tissues, spray-coated with substance P as a tracer, digest this peptide with different time-course profiles. Furthermore, we reveal that distinct cleavage products originating from substance P are generated transiently and that proteolysis can be attenuated by protease inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. To show the translational potential of the method, we analyzed protease activity of gastric carcinoma in mice. Our MSI and quantitative proteomics results reveal differential distribution of protease activity - with strongest activity being observed in mouse tumor tissue, suggesting the general applicability of the workflow in animal pharmacology and clinical studies.

### Keywords
Protease activity, Maldi-msi

### Affiliations
CeMOS HS Mannheim
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS), Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, Paul-Wittsack Str. 10, 68163 Mannheim, Germany

### Submitter
Katrin Erich

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Carsten Hopf
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS), Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, Paul-Wittsack Str. 10, 68163 Mannheim, Germany


