### Accession
PXD019600

### Title
Proteome landscape of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of retinal pigment epithelium shares commonalities with malignancy-associated EMT

### Description
Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) stress and injury often leads to epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), in which RPE cells lose its cobblestone morphology and acquire more motile and spindle-shaped fibroblast phenotype.   RPE dysfunction due to acquired EMT phenotype have been implicated in a number of retinal diseases such as proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), diabetic retinopathy (DR), neovascular (“wet”) and atrophic (“dry”) age-related macular degeneration (AMD). We investigated distinct temporal protein expression changes and signaling events that occur during enzymatically dissociated hRPE EMT model, as well as those that occur up to forty-eight hours after EMT onset. Further, we compared analysis on altered proteome profiling with malignancy associated EMT and AMD models. Together, proteome profiles provide a comprehensive RPE EMT resources for understanding molecular signaling events, associated biological pathways, that underlie RPE-EMT onset and further identifying chemical modulators that could potentially inhibit RPE EMT.

### Sample Protocol
hiPS RPE monolayers and dissociated cells were lysed in 4% SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.05M TEABC, pH 8.0) and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. 500 µg of protein lysate was reduced by adding 10mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by adding 40mM iodoacetamide and incubated in dark for 30 minutes. Then lysate was subjected to methanol: chloroform precipitated. The protein pellet was resolubilized in 6M Urea and incubated on ice for 30 minutes and further the Urea concentration was reduced to 2M Urea by adding 50mM TEABC buffer and subjected to double digestion by adding lysine (1:200, enzyme: protein) and incubated at 32°C for 4 hrs and then trypsin digested for overnight.  Following, the tryptic digest reaction was quenched by adding 1% TFA (final) and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the superenatant was transferred to new collection tubes and subjected to C18 clean up using Sep-PaK cartridges and the eluted peptides were vacuum dried.  For DIA analysis hiPS RPE monolayer, 12Hr and 48Hr samples were lysed in 4% SDS lysis buffer and prepared samples using S-Trap assisted tryptic digestion. Digested peptides were vacuum dried and 500 ng of peptide amount of each sample was injected into mass spectrometer. The TMT labelling was carried out as per manufacturer instructions by reconstituting with 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. Approximately, 400 µg of each reporter tag was added to the sample as follows, 126, 127N and 127C to RPE monolayer; 128N, 128C and 129N to RPE 12 Hr; 129C, 130N and 130C to RPE 48 hr time point samples. Following, 10 µL of the reaction from each sample was pooled together and vacuum dried and desalted to check the labeling efficiency. Further, 5 µL of 5% hydroxyl amine was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. Following, all off the samples were pooled and lyophilized and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges. The eluted peptides were vacuum dried and subjected to basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) fractionation. A total of 96 fractions were collected, concatenated to 12 fractions in zig-zag fashion which were then vacuum dried and performed LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The concatenated 12 bRPLC fractions were analyzed on a Thermo Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Each fraction was injected as a technical replicate. Each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in 3% Acetonitrile (v/v) in 10ul volume and was loaded onto the autosampler tray of Waters nanoACQUITY liquid chromatography system which is in-line with the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The peptides were loaded onto a 25 cm in-house packed (Magic C18 material) analytical column and was separated by applying a linear gradient of 110 minutes with a total run of 120 minutes at 300 nl/min flow rate. The mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data dependent mode (DDA) by targeting top 15 precursor ions for fragmentation. The peptide precursor ions were surveyed in the scan range between 350 to 1800 m/z and was acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200. The MS2 data was selected by using 1.0 m/z with an isolation off-set of 0.5 m/z using Quadrupole and fragmented using stepped normalized higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) between 30 to 35 and acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer at 30,000 resolution at m/z 200. The AGC and Ion injection times for both MS1 and MS2 were set as 3E6 and 50ms and 1E5 and 200 ms respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec and both MS1 and MS2 were acquired in a profile mode. DIA data was acquired on Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer inline with Easy nLC 1000. Data was acquired using 45 variable DIA windows in the scan range between 375 to 1500 m/z by including two MS1 scans for the same scan range by measuring at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200. Precursor ions were fragmented using 35% stepped collision energy and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer at 30,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometry raw data was processed using MaxQuant pipeline. The MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 was used and was searched against Human Uniport database version of March 2017 using in-built Andromeda search engine. In-built potential contaminants database was selected.  Group specific parameters: The peak picking was carried out by selecting MS2 reporter ion and the Precursor intensity fraction (PIF)% was set at 0.75 for filtering out the co-eluting peptide ion ratio compression for an accurate TMT reporter ion quantification. Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-term); Deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation of (STY) were set as dynamic modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications. PSM FDR of 0.01, Protein FDR of 0.01 and Site FDR of 0.01 were used. Phosphorylation of (STY) modified peptides were excluded for protein level quantifications. The MaxQuant output tables were processed using Perseus software suite, R statistical computation platform and GraphPad Prism software. DIA data was analyzed using Spectronaut 14.0 version using direct DIA strategy by employing default direct DÍA search parameters. The result files were processed using Perseus software for downstream Bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rpe, Proteomics, Emt, Mass spectrometry and vision research

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
1Department of Ophthalmology, Stem Cell Ocular Regenerative Medicine Center, Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

### Submitter
Srinivasa Rao Sripathi

### Lab Head
Dr Donald Jeffery Zack
1Department of Ophthalmology, Stem Cell Ocular Regenerative Medicine Center, Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.


