### Accession
PXD008987

### Title
Chemoproteomic identification of molecular targets of antifungal prototypes, thiosemicarbazide and a camphene derivative of thiosemicarbazide, in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

### Description
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a neglected human systemic disease caused by species of the genus Paracoccidioides. The disease attacks the host’s lungs and may disseminate to many other organs. Treatment involves amphotericin B, sulfadiazine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, or fluconazole. The treatment duration is usually long, from 6 months to 2 years, and many adverse effects may occur in relation to the treatment; co-morbidities and poor treatment adherence have been noted. Therefore, the discovery of more effective and less toxic drugs is needed. Thiosemicarbazide (TSC) and a camphene derivative of thiosemicarbazide (TSC-C) were able to inhibit P. lutzii growth at a low dosage and were not toxic to fibroblast cells. In order to investigate the mode of action of those compounds, we used a chemoproteomic approach to determine which fungal proteins were bound to each of these compounds. The compounds were able to inhibit the activities of the enzymes formamidase and β-1,3-glucosidase and interfered in P. brasiliensis dimorphism. In comparison with the transcriptomic and proteomic data previously obtained by our group, we determined that TSC and TSC-C were multitarget compounds that exerted effects on the electron-transport chain and cell cycle regulation, increased ROS formation, inhibited proteasomes and peptidases, modulated glycolysis, lipid, protein and carbohydrate metabolisms, and caused suppressed the mycelium to yeast transition.

### Sample Protocol
or the affinity chromatography assay, the AminoLink immobilization kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Walthan, USA) was used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 2 mg of each compound was dissolved in 2 mL of coupling buffer (0.1 M sodium phosphate, 0.05% NaN3, pH 7.0), the resin was equilibrated to 25-28 °C and 6 mL of coupling buffer was added and drained through the resin. Then, 2 mL of compound solution was added and the resin was shaken for 1 h and 50 mM sodium cyanoborohydrite (NaCNBH3) was added and shaken overnight at 4 °C. The content was drained and the flow through was saved to calculate the coupling efficiency. The resin was washed with 4 mL of coupling buffer. In order to block the remaining active sites, 4 mL of quenching buffer (1 M Tris-HCl, 0.05% NaN3, pH 7.4) was drained through the resin, 50 mM NaCNBH3 was added and incubated for 30 min with agitation, and the resin content was drained. For equilibration, 6 mL binding buffer was drained though the resins. Protein extract with a total protein content of 20 μg was added and incubated for 1 h. The flow-through was collected and the resin was washed with 12 mL washing buffer. Then, 8 mL of elution buffer (0.1 M glycine-HCl, pH 2.5) was added, 1 mL of fractions was collected, and 50 μL neutralization buffer (1 M Tris, pH 9.0) was added to each fraction. The columns were regenerated by washing with 18 mL washing buffer and stored at 4 °C with 8 mL washing buffer containing 0.05% sodium azide. Ten microliters of each eluted fraction was subjected to SDS-PAGE and the gel was silver stained. The control solution was obtained starting from the blockage step of the above protocol.

### Data Protocol
The eluted fractions were concentrated by using a 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off in an ultracel regenerated membrane (Millipore, Bedford, USA). The protein extract concentrations were determined by using the Bradford assay [29] and the extracts were prepared for analysis, as previously described [30], by using nano-scale ultraperformance liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry with data-independent acquisitions (nanoUPLC-MSE). In this system, the trypsin-digested peptides were separated by using a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA). The MS data obtained via nanoUPLC-MSE were processed and examined by using the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) version 2.5 (Waters). Protein identification analyses were performed as previously described [31]. The observed intensity measurements were normalized to the identified peptides of the digested internal standard, rabbit phosphorylase. Proteins that were present in the negative control and the samples were removed from the analysis. For protein identification, the Paracoccidioides genome database (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/paracoccidioides_brasiliensis/MultiHome.html) was used. Protein tables generated by PLGS were merged by using FBAT software [32], and the dynamic range of the experiment was computed by using MassPivot software. The identified proteins were classified according to the MIPS functional categorization (http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/proj/funcatDB/) by using the online tool PEDANT (http://pedant.gsf.de/pedant3htmlview/pedant3view?Method=analysis&Db=p3_p28733_Par_brasi_Pb18).

### Publication Abstract
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a neglected human systemic disease caused by species of the genus Paracoccidioides. The disease attacks the host's lungs and may disseminate to many other organs. Treatment involves amphotericin B, sulfadiazine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, or fluconazole. The treatment duration is usually long, from 6 months to 2 years, and many adverse effects may occur in relation to the treatment; co-morbidities and poor treatment adherence have been noted. Therefore, the discovery of more effective and less toxic drugs is needed. Thiosemicarbazide (TSC) and a camphene derivative of thiosemicarbazide (TSC-C) were able to inhibit P. brasiliensis growth at a low dosage and were not toxic to fibroblast cells. In order to investigate the mode of action of those compounds, we used a chemoproteomic approach to determine which fungal proteins were bound to each of these compounds. The compounds were able to inhibit the activities of the enzyme formamidase and interfered in P. brasiliensis dimorphism. In comparison with the transcriptomic and proteomic data previously obtained by our group, we determined that TSC and TSC-C were multitarget compounds that exerted effects on the electron-transport chain and cell cycle regulation, increased ROS formation, inhibited proteasomes and peptidases, modulated glycolysis, lipid, protein and carbohydrate metabolisms, and caused suppressed the mycelium to yeast transition.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomic, Camphene, Thiosemicarbazide, Paracoccidioidomycosis

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Goiás
Universidade Federal de Goias

### Submitter
Joyce Borba

### Lab Head
Dr Joyce Borba
Universidade Federal de Goias


