### Accession
PXD006211

### Title
Haloferax mediterranei -  Systematic Analysis of Lysine Acetylation in the Halophilic Archaeon Haloferax mediterranei

### Description
We report the lysine acetylproteome of a model haloarchaeon, Haloferax mediterranei. Using Immunoaffinity enrichment, two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC) and Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified 1017 acetylation sites in 643 proteins, accounting for 17.3% of the total proteins in this haloarchaeon. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that lysine acetylation has a widespread subcellular distribution and participates in many biological processes, and protein interaction network analysis showed that lysine acetylation might also regulate a wide range of interactions. The proteins that are involved in translation and carbon metabolism consist of the preferred substrates of lysine acetylation. This dataset indicates that lysine acetylation is an abundant and diverse modification in H.mediterranei, providing opportunities to explore the physiological role of acetylation in this haloarchaeon.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and digested by trypsin.The tryptic peptides were enriched by Affinity purification.A two-dimensional liquid chromatography method comprising of high pH reversed-phase separation and low pH reversed-phase separation was used toseperate the sample into 6 fractions. At last, the peptide samples were further analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot H. Mediterranei database concatenated with reverse decoy database.Then the acetylated proetins were subjected to GO, KEGG and othe bioinformatices analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a reversible and highly regulated post-translational modification that plays a critical role in regulating many aspects of cellular processes, both in bacteria and in eukaryotes. However, this modification has not been systematically studied in archaea. Herein, we report the lysine acetylome of a model haloarchaeon, Haloferax mediterranei. Using immunoaffinity enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified 1017 acetylation sites in 643 proteins, accounting for 17.3% of the total proteins in this haloarchaeon. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that lysine acetylation mainly distributes in cytoplasm (94%) and participates in protein biosynthesis and carbon metabolism. Specifically, the acetylation of key enzymes in PHBV biosynthesis further suggested that acetylation plays a key role in the energy and carbon storage. In addition, a survey of the acetylome revealed a universal rule in acetylated motifs: a positively charged residue (K, R, or H) located downstream of acetylated lysine at the positions +1, +2, or +3. Interestingly, we identified acetylation in several replication initiation proteins Cdc6; mutation on the acetylated site of Cdc6A destroyed the Autonomous Replication Sequence (ARS) activity of its adjacent origin oriC1. Our study indicates that lysine acetylation is an abundant modification in H.&#xa0;mediterranei, and plays key roles in the processes of replication, protein biosynthesis, central metabolism, and carbon storage. This acetylome of H.&#xa0;mediterranei provides opportunities to explore the physiological role of acetylation in halophilic archaea.

### Keywords
Haloferax mediterranei, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
institute of microbiology

### Submitter
Jingfang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Xiang
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


