### Accession
PXD014063

### Title
HDA714 is a versatile protein lysine deacetylase regulating metabolic and translational activities

### Description
The rice genome encodes 18 HDACs from the three different families. The RPD3 family comprises 14 genes, the HDT and the Sir families contain each 2 genes. Previous studies showed that rice RPD3 members are involved in various developmental processes. In this work, we used quantitative proteomics to investigate the acetylomes regulated by rice rpd3 family HDAC proteins in seedlings. Our results establish an unprecedentedly comprehensive protein acetylome in plants and reveal that HDA714 is a major deacetylase targeting a large number of Kac sites on hundreds of proteins of diverse function. We show that HDA714-dependent deacetylation is required for glycolytic activity, ribosome translational function, and plant growth and development. Our data uncovers novel regulators of protein Kac homeostasis in plants and extends the role of protein Kac in gene expression to translational regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Western Blot Proteins were extracted as previously described (Nallamilli et al 2014; Wang et al 2017). Briefly, 14-day seedlings were ground in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle, and then homogenized in buffer containing 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) TritonX-100, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM DTT. After centrifugation at 15000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was incubated in ice-cold acetone for more than 2 h at -20 °C, and then centrifuged at 15000 g for 15 min at 4 °C again. The obtained pellet was washed with cold acetone for three times, and then lyophilized and stored at -80 °C for further use.  Protein pellet was dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and then the protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad protein assay, USA). For western blot, the procedure was as previously described (He et al 2016; Xue et al 2018). Briefly, protein was diluted with SDS loading buffer, and 20 ug protein of each sample was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and electro-blotted onto PVDF. The blot was probed with pan anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM-102, PTM Biolab) or anti-RPS3 (A2533, ABclonal).  Protein Digestion, Acetylated Peptides Enrichment, LC-MS/MS Analysis and data analysis  Protein (about 5 mg) was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios for a second 4-hour-digestion. To enrich the acetyllysine (Kac), tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-conjugated pan-anti-acetyllysine agarose beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle rotation. The supernatant was discarded and the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions were combined and desalted with self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Thermo, US) according to the manufacturer ‘s instructions.  The enriched peptides were vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for online nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive plusTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were loaded onto the reversed-phase analytical C18-nanocapillary LC column (5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore diameter) and eluted with a linear gradient of 7%–24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 24 min and 24%-36% solvent B for 8 min at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min. The Q-ExactiveTM plus was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The resulting peptides were subjected to a nanospray ion source (NIS) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM plus coupled to the online UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Full MS spectra for intact peptides from m/z 350 to 1800 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000, and the isolation window was 2.0 m/z. For MS survey scan, the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2×104 with 5.0 s dynamic exclusion were picked for MS/MS fragmentation by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%, the repeat duration is 10s. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, 5×104 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching  The obtained MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Oryza sativa database (63195 protein sequences, July 2014 release), concatenated with reverse database and common contaminants. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and up to four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide and five charges were allowed for database search. Acetylation on lysine (+ 42.011 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.011 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was searched as fixed modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Protein, peptide and modification sites passed a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds. Minimum peptide length was specified at 7 and the site localization probability over 0.75 was allowed. Default values were used for all the other parameters in MaxQuant. Briefly, minimum score and minimum delta score for modified peptides were set to 40 and 17, respectively; FTMS de-isotoping, FTMS higher charges, FTMS water loss, FTMS ammonia loss and FTMS dependent losses were checked; search for common contaminants was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rice； acetylation； histone deacetylase ；ribo_seq

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
qiutao xu

### Lab Head
Dr zhou dao xiu
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China


