### Accession
PXD003173

### Title
Molecular profiling of a monkey ischemia stroke model

### Description
In this study, we examined a Macaca fascicularis transient middle cerebral artery occlusion surgery-induced stroke model, consisting of two sample groups, determined by MRI-quantified infarct volumes as a measure of the stroke severity 28 days after the ischemic episode.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation To extract the protein, the frozen brain tissues were first rinsed with ice cold RIPA buffer containing 1x phosphatase and protease inhibitors. The brain slice sections were then minced into small pieces and homogenized in RIPA buffer using a Tissue Tearor (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK) at full speed on ice until the lysate was homogeneous (ca. 10–30 s). The samples were vortexed briefly, ultrasonicated at 4 °C for 10 cycles (10 s ON/10 s OFF), and then centrifuged at 4 °C and 15 000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred into new pre-cooled tubes and protein precipitation was performed with the addition of ice-cold acetone and overnight incubation at –20 °C. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at RT and 4000 rpm for 15 min, re-dissolved in 8 M urea and quantified using a Bradford assay kit.  Sample preparation for proteome profiling and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) For the samples prepared for qualitative proteomics analysis, the extracted protein lysates were dissolved in 8 M urea and reduced with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by incubation with 20 mM IAA in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature in the dark for 1 h (for cysteine-blocking). The samples were diluted with 100 mM NH4HCO3 so that the final concentration of urea was 2 M. Trypsin was added, at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:25 (w/w), and then the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The samples were lyophilized and stored at –80 °C until required for use. For the samples prepared for quantitative proteomics analysis, on-filter digestion was performed with minor modifications. Briefly, proteins (100 µg) designated for a specific isobaric tag in iTRAQ were denatured with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 60 °C, then alkylated with 10 mM IAA in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at room temperature. The denatured proteins were loaded on Microcon® centrifugal filters and purified through centrifugation at 4000 rpm. The sample on the filter was digested with sequencing-grade trypsin [trypsin to sample ratio, 1:33 (w/w)] in 0.5 mM TEAB buffer at 37 °C overnight. The trypsinized samples were collected and labeled with the corresponding isobaric tags according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were lyophilized and stored at –80 °C until required for use.  Phosphorylated monkey brain protein digestion and enrichment The sample protein digestion was performed in the same manner as in the qualitative proteomic analysis. After tryptic digestion, samples were desalted offline using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation), portioned as 250-µg aliquots and dried in vacuo. Preparation of the enriched phosphopeptide samples was performed following a previously published protocol with slight modifications. The TiO2 gel loading tips were prepared in-house using titanium beads (bead diameter: 5 µm) following the protocol described by Rappsilber et al. To obtain the best enrichment efficiency of the TiO2 material (40), desalted peptides (250 µg) were loaded onto the TiO2 beads in buffer A [300 mg mL–1 lactic acid in buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA); 80 µL], and washed with buffer B (200 µL) to remove most of the non-phosphorylated content of the peptide mixture. Two aliquots (each 50 µL) of buffer C (0.5% NH4OH) were used to elute the phosphorylated peptides from the TiO2 gel loading tips. Eight enriched aliquots were pooled together as an individual injection to ensure that an adequate amount of sample was used in the subsequent proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS parameters and database search All MS data were acquired using a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). The MS and independent data acquisition parameters are listed in Supplementary Table 1. The data collected were searched against the theoretical spectra generated from the sequences in the NCBI M. fascicularis reference proteome database (released in January, 2014 with 56 572 entries; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using the Paragon algorithm in the ProteinPilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). The parameters used in the database searches are listed in Supplementary Table 2. The plug-in Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline (PSPEP) featured on ProteinPilot 4.5 was employed for analysis of the false discovery rate (FDR). Protein groups and peptides with local FDR of less than 5% were considered as identified entries. The lists of the identified proteins and protein groups are provided in Supplementary Table 4.  iTRAQ ratio calculations The ProteinPilot generated protein list was employed; protein ratios were recalculated using the weighted average of the natural logarithm of the peptide ratios, as described in the ProteinPilot manual. The recalculated protein ratios were based on spectra with at least 95% confidence; only proteins having at least four spectra were considered as quantified. A t-test was applied to the iTRAQ reporter ion ratios observed from the spectra for each protein; expression ratios of ≥1.23 or ≤0.81 with a p-value of ≤0.05 were considered dysregulated. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed in the LIV and EIV groups of monkeys if the iTRAQ ratios were deemed dysregulated in >66% of the samples in each group.

### Publication Abstract
Stroke is one of the main causes of mortality and long-term disability worldwide. The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying this disease are not well understood, particularly in the chronic phase after the initial ischemic episode. In this study, a Macaca fascicularis stroke model consisting of two sample groups, as determined by MRI-quantified infarct volumes as a measure of the stroke severity 28 days after the ischemic episode, was evaluated using qualitative and quantitative proteomics analyses. By using multiple online multidimensional liquid chromatography platforms, 8790 nonredundant proteins were identified that condensed to 5223 protein groups at 1% global false discovery rate (FDR). After the application of a conservative criterion (5% local FDR), 4906 protein groups were identified from the analysis of cerebral cortex. Of the 2068 quantified proteins, differential proteomic analyses revealed that 31 and 23 were dysregulated in the elevated- and low-infarct-volume groups, respectively. Neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, and inflammation featured prominently as the cellular processes associated with these dysregulated proteins. Protein interaction network analysis revealed that the dysregulated proteins for inflammation and neurogenesis were highly connected, suggesting potential cross-talk between these processes in modulating the cytoskeletal structure and dynamics in the chronic phase poststroke. Elucidating the long-term consequences of brain tissue injuries from a cellular prospective, as well as the molecular mechanisms that are involved, would provide a basis for the development of new potentially neurorestorative therapies.

### Keywords
Brain, Multidimensional liquid chromatography, Cynomolgus monkey, Ischemic stroke, Itraq

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Chemistry, the University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Henry Law

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan K. Chu
Department of Chemistry, the University of Hong Kong


