### Accession
PXD024284

### Title
Reduced thrombogenicity of surface-treated Nitinol implants steered by altered protein adsorption

### Description
Blood-contacting medical implants made of Nitinol and other titanium alloys, such as neurovascular flow diverters and peripheral stents, have the disadvantage of being highly thrombogenic. This makes the use of systemic (dual) anti platelet / anticoagulant therapies inevitable with related risks of device thrombosis, bleeding and other complications. Meeting the urgent clinical demand for a less thrombogenic Nitinol surface, we describe here a treatment of standard, commercially available Nitinol that renders its surface ultra-hydrophilic and functionalized with phosphate ions. The efficacy of this treatment was assessed by comparing standard and surface-treated Nitinol disks and braids, equivalent to flow diverters. Static and dynamic (Chandler loop) blood incubation tests showed a drastic reduction of thrombus formation on treated devices. Surface chemistry and proteomic analysis indicated a key role of phosphate and calcium ions in steering blood protein adsorption and avoiding coagulation cascade activation and platelet adhesion. A good endothelialization of the surface confirmed the biocompatibility of the treated surface.

### Sample Protocol
Nitinol disks were inserted into a 24-well plate (#92024, TPP, Switzerland). 0.5 ml of PPP were added to each well and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Standard and treated disks were incubated each with PPP of three different donors. After incubation, the Nitinol surfaces were washed 3 times with PBS prior peptide preparation. For protein digestion and peptide elution from Nitinol disks, the surfaces were incubated with 400 µl 1 M Urea in 0.1 M tris buffer (pH 8.5). Tris-(2 carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP) was added to reach a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at RT. After that, chloroacetamide (CAA) was added to reach a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were further incubated for 20 min at RT. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), in a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:10. Trypsin activity was stopped with addition of 20 µl of 10% formic acid (FA). Eluted peptides were then desalted using self-made stage tips packed with reverse phase C18 material as follows: After a first wetting step with 150 µl 100% methanol and centrifugation for 1 min at 2000 g, the tips were cleaned with 150 µl 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 1 min at 2000 g. Prior sample loading, the tips were equilibrated twice with 150 µl 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA for 1 min at 2000 g. After sample loading of 150 µl, tips were centrifuged for 1.5 min at 2000 g and this step was repeated until full loading of the sample. After that, the tips were washed twice with 150 µl 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA for 1 min at 2000 g. Desalted peptides were eluted in total 160 µl, by adding twice 80 µl 60% ACN / 0.1% TFA and centrifuging 2 min at 2000 g. Samples were dried to completeness by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were resolved in 20 µl MS buffer (3% ACN / 0.1% FA) prior sonication for 5 min. Prior injection, peptides were further diluted with MS buffer in a ratio of 1:10 to a final volume of 15 µl including 1.5 µl iRT peptides for internal retention time normalization and quality control (Ki-3002-1, Biognosys, Switzerland). Additionally, a pool of these samples was prepared by mixing 1 µl of each sample in a new vial. The samples were analyzed with the high field orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to a nano Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC, Aquity UPLC M-Class, Waters Corporation, USA) at the Functional Genomic Center in Zurich (FGCZ). Injection of the samples was done in randomized order with a controlled standard QC sample after every 7th sample for quality control. The samples were loaded onto a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters Corporation, USA) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min on a HSS T3 C18 reverse-phase column (1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters Corporation, USA). Solvent composition of mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in ddH2O and of mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were separated with the following LC gradient: 0-49 min 8-22% B, 49-60 min 22-32% B, 60-65 min 95% B, 65-75 min: 8% B. Full mass spectra were acquired in the m/z range of 300-1700, at a resolution of 120000 at 200 m/z, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan range of 200-2000 m/z, at a resolution of 30000 at 200 m/z, AGC target at 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. The 12 most abundant ions were selected for higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 28, and an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded from further selection for 30 s. Furthermore, unassigned, single charged and precursors with charges higher than +8 were excluded and intensity threshold was set to 8.2e4.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry (MS) files were imported into the ProgenesisQI for proteomics software (Waters Corporation, USA). Automatic alignment after manual seeding increased the alignment score to > 90% for all files. Peptide ions were filtered for positive charges of +2, +3 and +4. For peptide identification, the 5 highest ranked MS/MS spectra with a limit ion fragment count of 200 were exported using charge deconvolution and deisotoping. The generated mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched with Mascot Server 2.6 (Matrix Science Ltd, UK) allowing two missed cleavages by trypsin and using the following parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications, 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 15 ppm MS/MS tolerance, and the value for number of 13C set to 1. We searched the canonical human reference proteome (only reviewed proteins) as forward and concatenated to its reversed entries and known mass spectrometry contaminants (downloaded in December 2016). The mascot results were then imported into Scaffold (v4.8. Proteome Software, Inc., USA). The spectrum report was exported using the filters of 10% protein false discovery rate (FDR), minimum 1 unique peptide and 5% peptide FDR. The exported file was reimported into the ProgenesisQI for proteomics software for further processing. The protein hits were normalized using the set of iRT peptides as normalization factors. For quantification prior export of protein and peptide lists in excel format, relative quantitation using Hi-N with 3 peptides was selected. Protein hits were further filtered for minimally 2 peptide count and 2 unique peptides resulting in a protein list of 232 proteins with a FDR of <1%. After elimination of decoy proteins, non-human contaminants and iRTs, a list of 224 protein hits remained. P-values were calculated using a two tailed paired t-test function in Excel on the hyperbolic arcsine of the normalized values. Fold changes (FCs) of the identified proteins of treated versus standard were calculated using the logarithmic transformation (base 2) of the mean normalized values. Only protein hits with p-values equal or smaller 0.05 and a cutoff at FC > 2 (= log2(T vs S) > 1) were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Blood-contacting medical implants made of Nitinol and other titanium alloys, such as neurovascular flow diverters and peripheral stents, have the disadvantage of being highly thrombogenic. This makes the use of systemic (dual) anti-platelet/anticoagulant therapies inevitable with related risks of device thrombosis, bleeding and other complications. Meeting the urgent clinical demand for a less thrombogenic Nitinol surface, we describe here a simple treatment of standard, commercially available Nitinol that renders its surface ultra-hydrophilic and functionalized with phosphate ions. The efficacy of this treatment was assessed by comparing standard and surface-treated Nitinol disks and braids, equivalent to flow diverters. Static and dynamic (Chandler loop) blood incubation tests showed a drastic reduction of thrombus formation on treated devices. Surface chemistry and proteomic analysis indicated a key role of phosphate and calcium ions in steering blood protein adsorption and avoiding coagulation cascade activation and platelet adhesion. A good endothelialization of the surface confirmed the biocompatibility of the treated surface. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Titanium alloys such as Nitinol are biocompatible and show favorable mechanical properties, which led to their widespread use in medical implants. However, in contact with blood their surface triggers the activation of the intrinsic coagulation cascade, which may result in catastrophic thrombotic events. The presented results showed that a phosphate functionalization of the titanium oxide surface suppresses the activation of both coagulation cascade and platelets, avoiding the subsequent formation of a blood clot. This novel approach has therefore a great potential for mitigating the risks associated to either thrombosis or bleeding complications (due to systemic anticoagulation) in patients with cardiovascular implants.

### Keywords
Platelet adhesion, Antithrombogenic treatment, Cardiovascular devices, Intrinsic coagulation pathway, Hemocompatibility, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Head of Research Department of Obstetrics University Hospital Zurich Schmelzbergstrasse 12 PATH G48 / PF 125 CH-8091 Zürich Switzerland
University Hospital Zurich

### Submitter
Katharina Gegenschatz

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Ehrbar
Head of Research Department of Obstetrics University Hospital Zurich Schmelzbergstrasse 12 PATH G48 / PF 125 CH-8091 Zürich Switzerland


