### Accession
PXD013482

### Title
Changes in the turnover of the cellular proteome during metabolic reprogramming: A role for mtROS in proteostasis

### Description
The role played by protein turnover in metabolic reprogramming is unknown. Herein, using a SILAC approach, we have studied the changes in the half-life of two hundred and sixty-six proteins of energy metabolism and of translation during the metabolic switch induced by the prolyl hydroxylases inhibitor dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG). DMOG induces HIF-1α expression and triggers the activation of glycolysis and the concurrent inhibition of mitochondrial respiration in colon cancer cells. Changes in the activity of energy provision pathways correlated with increased turnover rates of glycolytic enzymes and the stabilization of mitochondrial proteins. Moreover, reprograming also stabilized the proteins of translation. The partial DMOG-mediated arrest of the synthesis of mitochondrial and translation proteins results from the inhibition of the mTORC1/p70SK/S6 signaling pathway. In contrast, DMOG stimulated the synthesis of glycolytic enzymes, emphasizing the opposite and differential regulation of the two pathways of energy provision. Addition of MitoQ, a mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) scavenger, stabilized the turnover of cellular proteins similarly as when protein degradation is inhibited with leupeptin, a serine-protease inhibitor. Overall, the results show that the higher the activity of a pathway the lower is the half-life of the proteins involved and suggest a role for mtROS in cellular proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed with Tris-NaCl buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02% sodium azide, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, the complete protease inhibitors cocktail EDTA-free, Roche, and the Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 × 106 cells/ml for 15 min on ice. Extracts were centrifuged at 11,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein extracts (30 µg), were suspended in 100 µl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). The run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel to concentrate the proteome. The band was visualized by Coomassie staining (GelCode™ Blue Stain Reagent_ThermoFisher), excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (1:1), were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC and the thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark, followed by in situ digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Gel pieces were shrunk using acetonitrile and dried out in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Supernatants were dried-down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) until the mass spectrometric analysis.  The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 l of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS (reverse phase liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry) in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 180-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 135 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 180 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), charge state rejection +1, collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation mode in linear ion trap (LIT) followed by twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 60 second periods.  Protein from purified ribosomes were precipitated in methanol-chloroform and dissolved in 8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide, according to a method previously described. Urea concentration was reduced to 2 M with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the samples digested overnight at 37º C with recombinant MS-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), with a ratio of 25:1. After digestion, samples were desalted using ZipTip (Merck) as described. Nano LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis of the trypsin digested ribosomal fraction was performed using an Eksigent 1D- nanoHPLC coupled to a 5600TripleTOF QTOF mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Framinghan, MA, USA). The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column Eksigent chromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size. The trap column was a chromXP, 3 µm particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 98% water / 2% acetonitrile (LabScan, Gliwice, Poland) at 30 µL/min. The nanopump operated under gradient elution conditions at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min, using 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile / 20% water as mobile phase B. Gradient elution was: isocratic conditions of 96% A: 4% B for five minutes, a linear increase to 40% B in 60 min, followed by a washing step of seven minutes of 95% B. Injection volume was 5 µL. The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to the mass spectrometer. Full scan (m/z 350-1250) MS spectra followed by tandem MS CID spectra of the 25 most abundant ions were obtained in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from SILAC raw data was carried out using PEAKS Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Database search was performed against uniprot-homo sapiens.fasta 12/03/2018 containing 71790 sequences (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions with a filter charge between 2 and 4 and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation and 13C(6) 15N(2) K, 13C(6) 15N(4) R Silac Label. False  discovery  rates  (FDR)  for  peptide  spectrum  matches  (PSM) was  limited  to  0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified.  For the identification of ribosomal proteins, MS and MS/MS data were used to search against the UniprotKb database using a Mascot v.2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) containing the sequences of interest. Peptides with scores above threshold were selected, and based on these individual scores protein identifications were assigned. Search parameters were: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized proline and methionine as variable ones. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 25 ppm and 0.6 Da for MS and MS/MS spectra, respectively, and 1 missed cleavage was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The role played by protein turnover in metabolic reprogramming is unknown. Herein, using a SILAC approach, we have studied the changes in the half-life of 266 proteins of energy metabolism and of translation during the metabolic switch induced by the prolyl hydroxylases inhibitor dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG). DMOG induces HIF-1&#x3b1; expression and triggers the activation of glycolysis and the concurrent inhibition of mitochondrial respiration in colon cancer cells. Changes in the activity of energy provision pathways correlated with increased turnover rates of glycolytic enzymes and the stabilization of mitochondrial proteins. Moreover, reprogramming also stabilized the proteins of translation. The partial DMOG-mediated arrest of the synthesis of mitochondrial and translation proteins results from the inhibition of the mTORC1/p70SK/S6 signaling pathway. In contrast, DMOG stimulated the synthesis of glycolytic enzymes, emphasizing the opposite and differential regulation of the two pathways of energy provision. Addition of MitoQ, a mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) scavenger, stabilized the turnover of cellular proteins similarly as when protein degradation is inhibited with leupeptin, a serine-protease inhibitor. Overall, the results show that the higher the activity of a pathway the lower is the half-life of the proteins involved and suggest a role for mtROS in cellular proteostasis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013482.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Atp synthase, Mitochondrial ros, Glycolysis, Silac., Prolyl hydroxylases

### Affiliations
Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,  28049 Madrid, SPAIN
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

### Submitter
Ana García Aguilar

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel Cuezva Marcos
Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,  28049 Madrid, SPAIN


