### Accession
PXD024815

### Title
MS1-only data acquisition of human gut microbiome data treated with 5 drugs at different concentrations.

### Description
We tested the ability of MS1-only data to identify the effects of drugs at varying concentrations on a human gut microbiome. We processed a human stool sample and cultured the processed microbiome in vitro under anaerobic condition for 48 hours using the rapidAIM assay. The microbiome was treated with either azathioprine, ciprofolxacin, diclofenac, nicatidine, paracetamol or control DMSO. Each drug was used at three different concentrations

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS analysis was performed using an Q Exactive with Easy-nLC 1200. All 48 samples samples were run in a randomized order. Peptides were separated on a tip column (75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (1.9 μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water was used as buffer A, and 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile was used as buffer B. A 10 cm  analytical column  and 15 minute LC gradient was used. The MS only has full scans with a resolution of 70000, scan range from 200 to 1400 m/z, no dependent scans following.

### Data Protocol
MS1 level peptide features were identified using the OpenMS suite of tools for MS data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human gut microbiome, Ms1-only

### Affiliations
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Caitlin Simopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


