### Accession
PXD003529

### Title
Activation of the ATR kinase by the RPA-binding protein ETAA1

### Description
The ATR kinase is a master regulator of cellular responses to DNA damage and replication stress that is activated by a complex mechanism involving its binding partner ATRIP, RPA-coated ssDNA, the 9-1-1 complex and TopBP1. Here, we discovered a new ATR activation mechanism in human cells, mediated by the uncharacterized protein ETAA1 (Ewing’s tumor-associated antigen 1). From a comprehensive proteomic survey of protein recruitment to DNA double-strand break-modified chromatin, we identified ETAA1 as a factor that accumulates at DNA damage sites via an RPA-binding motif, and which has an important role in promoting cell survival and preventing replication fork breakage after genotoxic insults. Mechanistically, we show that ETAA1 harbors a conserved domain that potently and directly stimulates ATR kinase activity independent of TopBP1 and 9-1-1, and which is essential for the function of ETAA1 in the DNA damage response. Consistently, ablation of ETAA1 shows profound synthetic lethality with TopBP1 knockdown, resulting from massive replication fork collapse and abrogation of ATR-dependent signaling. Finally, we show that ETAA1 levels in cancer cell lines inversely correlate with their dependency on TopBP1 for ATR activation, and that overexpression of ETAA1 partially restores ATR-dependent signaling after loss of TopBP1. Together, these findings establish a new mechanism of ATR activation in human cells that operates in parallel with, but independent of, the canonical TopBP1-mediated pathway.

### Sample Protocol
- CHROMASS sample preparation for chromatin associated proteins isolated from Xenopus egg extracs (see Räschle et all Science 2015) - Easyphos sample preparation for monitoring phosphorylation induced by nuclear expression of ETAA1-AAD (see Humphrey SJ, Azimifar SB, Mann M. High-throughput phosphoproteomics reveals in vivo insulin signaling dynamics. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Sep;33(9):990-5. )

### Data Protocol
Raw files processed with MaxQuant Vers. 1.5.3.15 and analzyed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of the ATR kinase following perturbations to DNA replication relies on a complex mechanism involving ATR recruitment to RPA-coated single-stranded DNA via its binding partner ATRIP and stimulation of ATR kinase activity by TopBP1. Here, we discovered an independent ATR activation pathway in vertebrates, mediated by the uncharacterized protein ETAA1 (Ewing's tumour-associated antigen 1). Human ETAA1 accumulates at DNA damage sites via dual RPA-binding motifs and promotes replication fork progression and integrity, ATR signalling and cell survival after genotoxic insults. Mechanistically, this requires a conserved domain in ETAA1 that potently and directly stimulates ATR kinase activity independently of TopBP1. Simultaneous loss of ETAA1 and TopBP1 gives rise to synthetic lethality characterized by massive genome instability and abrogation of ATR-dependent signalling. Our findings demonstrate that parallel TopBP1- and ETAA1-mediated pathways underlie ATR activation and that their combined action is essential for coping with replication stress.

### Keywords
Chromass, Dsb repair, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


