### Accession
PXD043249

### Title
Proteomic sequencing of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae CEN.pk  2-1D for HCAKing system

### Description
The HACKing system can rapidly and multiplexed integrate genes from a metabolic pathway into the target sites of chromosomes, which rationally formed a synthetic bicistron. This sequencing provides available target sites with different protein expressing levels.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae CEN.PK2-1D cells were cultivated in YPD medium at 30 °C with shaking at 250 rpm for 24 h to reach exponential growth phase. 4D Label-free qualitative proteomics analysis was performed by PTM BIO (China).  After protein extraction, trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8).

### Data Protocol
The resulting databases were searched against all entries of the S. cerevisiae proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/4932; downloaded March 2020) concatenated with a reverse decoy database.  The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the initial and the main searches, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.04 Da.  The false discovery rate was adjusted to <1% and the minimum score for peptides was set to >40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcaking system, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
no
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology

### Submitter
JIE MENG

### Lab Head
Dr Shuobo Shi
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology


