### Accession
PXD018834

### Title
Chaperonin CCT8 is essential for T cell development and function

### Description
T cells rely for their development and function on the correct folding and turnover of proteins generated in response to a broad range of molecular cues. Here we demonstrate that the eukaryotic type II chaperonin complex CCT is indispensable for T cell development, function, stress-response, and metabolism. CCT-deficient thymoyctes are compromised in their selection, differentiation, and late stage maturation. The lack of CCT expression prevents a normal response to T cell activation induced changes in the proteome, stops the formation of nuclear actin filaments and impairs a normal cells stress response. Consequently, T cell homeostatic maintenance and receptor-mediated stimulation of proliferation are impaired in CCT-deficient T cells leading to activation-induced cell death. Furthermore, Th2 polarization digresses in the absence of CCT-controlled protein folding leading paradoxically to continued IFN-expression. As a result, CCT-deficient T cells fail to generate an efficient immune protection against helminths as they are unable to sustain a coordinated recruitment of the innate and adaptive immune systems. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that both normal thymopoiesis and peripheral T cell biology are critically dependent on CCT-controlled proteostasis and that its absence is incompatible with protective immunity.

### Sample Protocol
7575 naïve CD4 cells were isolated from lymph nodes of CCT8T+/+ and CCT8T-/- mice at 4-8 weeks of age by FACS sorting directly into lysis buffer (RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) + 4 % IGEPAL CA-360 (Merck)) for timepoint 0 hrs. At the same time, 106 cells/mL FACS sorted, naïve CD4 T cell were activated in vitro using a combination of plate bound anti-CD3 (2 ug/mL) (BioLegend) and soluble anti-CD28 (2 ug/mL) (BioLegend) antibodies for 24 hrs before 7575 live cells were sorted directly into lysis buffer. Samples were stored at -20 °C until further processing. Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using a modified SP3 method (Sielaff et al., 2017). After thawing, 25 units of Benzonase (Merck) was added and samples incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at room temperature and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. 2 µL of carboxyl-modified paramagnetic beads were added to the samples (beads were prepared as in Hughes et al)(Hughes et al., 2014) along with acetonitrile to a concentration of 70 % (v/v). To facilitate protein binding to the beads, samples were vortexed at 1,000 rpm for 18 minutes. The beads were then immobilized on a magnet, the supernatant discarded, and beads washed twice with 70 % (v/v) ethanol and once with 100 % acetonitrile. Washed beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 ng trypsin (Promega) by brief bath sonication and incubated at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, beads were resuspended by brief bath sonication and acetonitrile was added to 95 % (v/v). Samples were vortexed at 1,000 rpm for 18 minutes to bind peptides, then beads were immobilized on the magnet for 2 minutes and the supernatant discarded. Beads were resuspended in 2 % DMSO, immobilized on the magnet for 5 minutes and the supernatant transferred to LC-MS vials which were stored at -20 °C until analysis.  Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). A 75 µm x 500 mm C18 EASY-Spray column with 2 µm particles (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient which increased from 2-35 % buffer B over 60 minutes (A: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in water; B: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). MS1 Precursor scans were performed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution using an AGC target of 4e5 and a maximum cycle time of 1 second. Precursors were selected for MS/MS using an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and were fragmented using HCD at a normalized collision energy setting of 28. Fragment spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the Rapid scan rate using an AGC target of 4e3.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from each of the independent experiments were searched separately against the Uniprot mouse database (Retrieved 2017/03/15; 59094 entries) using MaxQuant(Cox and Mann, 2008) (version, 1.6.2.6). Trypsin specificity with 2 missed cleavages was specified, along with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein n-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled. Protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ(Cox et al., 2014) algorithm within MaxQuant and identifications were filtered to a 1 % false discovery rate on the peptide-spectral match and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
T cells rely for their development and function on the correct folding and turnover of proteins generated in response to a broad range of molecular cues. In the absence of the eukaryotic type II chaperonin complex, CCT, T cell activation induced changes in the proteome are compromised including the formation of nuclear actin filaments and the formation of a normal cell stress response. Consequently, thymocyte maturation and selection, and T cell homeostatic maintenance and receptor-mediated activation are severely impaired. In the absence of CCT-controlled protein folding, Th2 polarization diverges from normal differentiation with paradoxical continued IFN-&#x3b3; expression. As a result, CCT-deficient T cells fail to generate an efficient immune protection against helminths as they are unable to sustain a coordinated recruitment of the innate and adaptive immune systems. These findings thus demonstrate that normal T cell biology is critically dependent on CCT-controlled proteostasis and that its absence is incompatible with protective immunity.

### Keywords
T cell development, Mouse, T cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute (TDI), Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute (TDI), Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom


