### Accession
PXD003551

### Title
Ki-67 organises heterochromatin during cell proliferation

### Description
Antigen Ki-67 is a nuclear protein expressed in proliferating mammalian cells. It is widely used in cancer histopathology but its functions remain unclear. Here, we show that Ki-67 controls heterochromatin organisation. Altering Ki-67 expression levels did not significantly affect cell proliferation in vivo. Ki-67 mutant mice developed normally and cells lacking Ki-67 proliferated efficiently. Conversely, upregulation of Ki-67 expression in differentiated tissues did not inhibit cell cycle arrest. Ki-67 interactors included proteins involved in nucleolar processes and chromatin regulators. Ki-67 depletion disrupted nucleologenesis but did not inhibit pre-rRNA processing. In contrast, it altered gene expression. Ki-67 silencing also had wide-ranging effects on chromatin organisation, disrupting heterochromatin compaction and long-range genomic interactions. Trimethylation of histone H3K9 and H4K20 at heterochromatin was strongly reduced. Overexpression of human or Xenopus Ki-67 induced ectopic heterochromatin formation. Altogether, our results suggest that Ki-67 expression in proliferating cells spatially organises heterochromatin, thereby controlling gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins were reduced, alkylated, analysed in a 4-20% gradient gel (BioRad) and entire lanes were sliced. Tryptic peptides were prepared for mass spectrometry, essentially as described , and then concentrated with a pre-column (Thermo Scientific, C18 PepMap100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 A) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min using 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated with a C18 reversed-phase capillary column (Thermo Scientific, C18 PepMap100, 75 μm × 250 mm, 3 μm, 100 A) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using the following gradient: 8-28% acetonitrile in 40 min and then from 28-42% in 10 min. The HPLC system was coupled online to a Q-TOF Maxis Impact (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Up to 30 data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode. MS/MS raw data were analysed using Data Analysis software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) to generate the peak lists.

### Data Protocol
The Homo sapiens Complete Proteome database  (downloaded on Uniprokb 20131108, contains 88,266 sequences) was queried locally using the Mascot search engine v.2.2.07 (Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com) and with the following parameters: 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine, phosphorylation of Threonine and Serine as variable modifications. MS tolerance was set to 20ppm for parent ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Antigen Ki-67 is a nuclear protein expressed in proliferating mammalian cells. It is widely used in cancer histopathology but its functions remain unclear. Here, we show that Ki-67 controls heterochromatin organisation. Altering Ki-67 expression levels did not significantly affect cell proliferation in vivo. Ki-67 mutant mice developed normally and cells lacking Ki-67 proliferated efficiently. Conversely, upregulation of Ki-67 expression in differentiated tissues did not prevent cell cycle arrest. Ki-67 interactors included proteins involved in nucleolar processes and chromatin regulators. Ki-67 depletion disrupted nucleologenesis but did not inhibit pre-rRNA processing. In contrast, it altered gene expression. Ki-67 silencing also had wide-ranging effects on chromatin organisation, disrupting heterochromatin compaction and long-range genomic interactions. Trimethylation of histone H3K9 and H4K20 was relocalised within the nucleus. Finally, overexpression of human or Xenopus Ki-67 induced ectopic heterochromatin formation. Altogether, our results suggest that Ki-67 expression in proliferating cells spatially organises heterochromatin, thereby controlling gene expression.

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Heterochromatin, Mki67, Antigen ki-67, Ki-67 interactome

### Affiliations
INRA
Montpellier Institute of Molecular Genetics, IGMM, CNRS UMR 5535, 34293 Montpellier, France University of Montpellier, Faculty of Sciences, 34095 Montpellier, France

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Fisher
Montpellier Institute of Molecular Genetics, IGMM, CNRS UMR 5535, 34293 Montpellier, France University of Montpellier, Faculty of Sciences, 34095 Montpellier, France


