### Accession
PXD012632

### Title
STRUCTURAL WEAKENING OF THE COLONIC MUCUS BARRIER IS AN EARLY EVENT IN ULCERATIVE COLITIS PATHOGENESIS

### Description
The colonic inner mucus layer protects us from pathogen invasion and commensal-induced inflammation. Mucus abnormalities are common in ulcerative colitis (UC), but their cause and importance are unknown. The aim of this study was to determine the role of compositional mucus barrier alterations in UC. In this single-center case-control study, sigmoid colon biopsies were obtained from UC patients with ongoing inflammation (n=36) and in remission (n=28), and from 47 patients without inflammatory bowel disease. Mucus samples were collected from biopsies ex vivo, and their protein composition analyzed by mass spectrometry. Mucus barrier integrity and goblet cell response to microbial challenge were also assessed for a subset of patients. The core colonic mucus proteome was shown to consist of a small set of 29 secreted proteins. Patients with active UC had reduced levels of major structural components, including the mucin MUC2 (p<0.0001), also in mucus from non-inflamed segments, and their goblet cell secretory response to microbial stimulus was abrogated. Functional mucus barrier failure was observed in a subset of UC patients with and without active inflammation, and accompanied by alterations in proteins associated with mucus secretion and luminal organization. This study represents the first characterization and comparison of the mucus proteomes of the inflamed and non-inflamed colon. Core mucus structural components were reduced in active UC, also in mucus from non-inflamed segments. Thus, weakening of the mucus barrier is likely to occur early in UC pathogenesis, and represents a novel target for intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus protein samples were mixed 1:1 (vol/vol) in 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 6 M GuHCl (pH 8); solubilized and reduced overnight at 37°C on a thermomixer (Eppendorf). The mucus was digested using a modified version of the filter aided sample preparation method (FASP). Briefly, solubilized mucus samples were transferred to molecular mass cut-off filter units (10 kDa, Nanosep, Pall Lifescience) and centrifuged at 7,500 x g for 10 min. (5415R, Eppendorf). Following a washing step using 200 µl 6 M GuHCl and disposal of the flow through, proteins were alkylated on-filter for 20 min. by the addition of 100 µl 50 mM iodoacetamide in 6 M GuHCl (pH 8), and centrifuged. Buffer exchange was achieved by the addition of 200 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), followed by centrifugation (repeated twice). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using 200 ng of trypsin (Promega) in 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Tryptic digests were transferred to clean tubes by centrifugation at 10,000 x g and the filters were eluted once more by the addition of 100 µl 250 mM NaCl. The samples were acidified and cleaned using micro scale C18 stage tips, dried under vacuum and re-dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Nano-liquid chromatography-tandem MS was carried out on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 was used for data processing and peptide quantification, and proteins were identified by Andromeda. Database searches were performed against the human SwissProt protein database (v2014_1, 20,181 entries) with the following settings: 1) one missed cleavage allowed; 2) precursor tolerance: 7 ppm; 3) fragment ion tolerance: 0.5 Da; 4)  fixed modification: carbamidomethyl on cysteine; 4) variable modifications: oxidized methionine and acetylated protein N-terminal. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identifications was set to 1% based on a minimum of one unique peptide per protein, and were grouped when based on the same set of peptides. The peptide match between runs option was limited to a retention time window of 2 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms and ibd, Mucus, Colon, Ileum

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Gothenburg
Medical Chemistry

### Submitter
S.S van der Post

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar C Hansson
Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Gothenburg


