### Accession
PXD007273

### Title
Single-shot top-down proteomics with capillary zone electrophoresis-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry for identification of nearly 600 Escherichia coli proteoforms

### Description
Capillary zone electrophoresis-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (CZE-ESI-MS/MS) has been recognized as an invaluable platform for top-down proteomics. However, the scale of top-down proteomics from CZE-MS/MS is still limited due to the low loading capacity and narrow separation window of CZE. In this work, for the first time we systematically evaluated dynamic pH junction method for focusing of intact proteins during CZE-MS. The optimized dynamic pH junction based CZE-MS/MS system approached 1-µL loading capacity, 90-min separation window and high peak capacity (~280) for separation of Escherichia coli proteome. The results represent the largest loading capacity and the highest peak capacity of CZE for top-down characterization of complex proteomes. About 2,800 proteoform-spectrum matches, nearly 600 proteoforms, and 200 proteins were identified from an Escherichia coli lysate by single-shot CZE-MS/MS with spectrum-level false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. The number of proteoforms is over three times higher than that from previous single-shot CZE-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli (E.coli, strain K-12 substrain MG1655) was cultured in LB medium at 37 oC with 225 rpm shaking until OD600 reaches 0.7. E.coli cells were harvested by centrifuge at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. Then the E. coli cells were washed with PBS three times.  The E.coli cells were then lysed in a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and protease inhibitors. The cell lysis was assisted by sonication with a Branson Sonifier 250 (VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) on ice for 10 minutes. After centrifugation (18,000 x g for 10 min), the supernatant containing the extracted proteins was collected. A small aliquot of the extracted proteins was used for BCA assay to determine the protein concentration. The leftover protein extracts were stored at -80 ˚C before use.  1 mg of E.coli proteins in 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) were denatured at 37 oC, reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Then, the proteins were desalted with a C4-trap column (Bio-C4, 3 µm, 300Å, 4.0 mm i.d., 10 mm long) from Sepax Technologies, Inc. (Newark, DE).  A HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, 1260 Infinity II) was used. The HPLC eluate from the trap column was collected and further lyophilized with a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried protein sample was redissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) to get about 2 mg/mL protein concentration (theoretical concentration based on 100% recovery from the whole sample preparation process) for CZE-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the E.coli RAW files were analyzed with the TopFD(TOP-Down Mass Spectrometry Feature Detection) and TopPIC (TOP-Down Mass Spectrometry Based Proteoform Identification and Characterization) pipeline.TopFD is an improved version of MS-Deconv. It converts precursor and fragment isotope clusters into monoisotopic masses and find possible proteoform features in CZE-MS data by combining precursor isotope clusters with similar monoisotopic masses and close migration time (the isotopic clusters may have different charge states). The RAW files were first transferred into mzXML files with Msconvert tool. Then, spectral deconvolution was performed with TopFD to generate msalign files. Finally, TopPIC (version 1.1.3) was used for database search with msalign files as input. E. coli (strain K12) UniProt database (UP000000625, 4307 entries, version June 7, 2017) was used for database search. The spectrum-level false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the target-decoy approach. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The maximum number of unexpected modifications was 2. The precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were 15 ppm. The maximum mass shift of unknown modifications was 500 Da. The identified proteoform-spectrum matches (PrSMs) were filtered with a 1% FDR at the spectrum level. In order to reduce the redundancy of proteoform identifications, we considered the proteoforms identified by multiple spectra as one proteoform ID if those spectra correspond to the same proteoform feature reported by TopFD or those proteoforms are from the same protein and have similar precursor masses (within 1.2 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Capillary zone electrophoresis-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (CZE-ESI-MS/MS) has been recognized as an invaluable platform for top-down proteomics. However, the scale of top-down proteomics using CZE-MS/MS is still limited due to the low loading capacity and narrow separation window of CZE. In this work, for the first time we systematically evaluated the dynamic pH junction method for focusing of intact proteins during CZE-MS. The optimized dynamic pH junction-based CZE-MS/MS approached a 1 &#x3bc;L loading capacity, 90 min separation window, and high peak capacity (&#x223c;280) for characterization of an Escherichia coli proteome. The results represent the largest loading capacity and the highest peak capacity of CZE for top-down characterization of complex proteomes. Single-shot CZE-MS/MS identified about 2800 proteoform-spectrum matches, nearly 600 proteoforms, and 200 proteins from the Escherichia coli proteome with spectrum-level false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. The number of identified proteoforms in this work is over three times higher than that in previous single-shot CZE-MS/MS studies. Truncations, N-terminal methionine excision, signal peptide removal, and some post-translational modifications including oxidation and acetylation were detected.

### Keywords
E.coli, Top-down proteomics, Cze-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


