### Accession
PXD017864

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of Histoplasma capsulatum treated with monoclonal antibodies

### Description
Multi-omics analysis of Histoplasma capsulatum treated with monoclonal antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted protein fraction was suspend in 100 μL of 8M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and protein concentration was determined by a BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The samples were reduced by adding fresh dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM with incubation at 37°C for 1 hour with 800 rpm shaking. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated in the dark at 37°C with 800 rpm shaking. Samples were diluted 8 folds with 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0. CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM and samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 800 rpm shaking using USB Trypsin at a proportion of 1 μg trypsin/50 μg protein. After trypsin incubation, digested samples were desalted using 1 mL Discovery C18 SPE columns (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) and dried to 100 μL using a speedvac concentrator (Savant, Holbrook, NY). Peptide concentration was determined by a BCA protein assay.  Digested peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC system with a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with an acetonitrile gradient and analyzed online by nanoelectrospray ionization. Mass spectra were collected in a range of 400–2000 m/z and 35,000 resolution at 400 m/z. Then the top 12 most intense parent ions were fragmented using a 2.0 m/z isolation window, 30% normalized collision energy, and 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z, before being dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Collected LC-MS/MS data were searched against the H. capsulatum G186AR sequences from Uniprot (downloaded August 15, 2016) using MaxQuant. The searches were performed considering a parent ion mass tolerance of 20 and 4.5 ppm prior and after mass recalibration, respectively. For searching, tryptic digestion in both termini was required and 2 missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a static modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. Peptide-spectral matches and proteins were both filtered with a false-discovery rate <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies play a central role in host immunity by directly inactivating or recognizing an invading pathogen to enhance different immune responses to combat the invader. However, the cellular responses of pathogens to the presence of antibodies are not well-characterized. Here, we used different mass spectrometry techniques to study the cellular responses of the pathogenic fungus <i>Histoplasma capsulatum</i> to monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against HSP60, the surface protein involved in infection. A proteomic analysis of <i>H. capsulatum</i> yeast cells revealed that mAb binding regulates a variety of metabolic and signaling pathways, including fatty acid metabolism, sterol metabolism, MAPK signaling and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. The regulation of the fatty acid metabolism was accompanied by increases in the level of polyunsaturated fatty acids, which further augmented the degree of unsaturated lipids in <i>H. capsulatum</i>'s membranes and energy storage lipids, such as triacylglycerols, phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylethanolamines and phosphatidylinositols. MAb treatment also regulated sterol metabolism by increasing the levels of cholesterol and ergosterol in the cells. We also showed that global changes in the lipid profiles resulted in an increased susceptibility of <i>H. capsulatum</i> to the ergosterol-targeting drug amphotericin B. Overall, our data showed that mAb induction of global changes in the composition of <i>H. capsulatum</i> membranes can potentially impact antifungal treatment during histoplasmosis.

### Keywords
Fungi, Antifungal, Histoplasma capsulatum, Monoclonal antibodies, Lipid metabolism, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


