### Accession
PXD015506

### Title
In vitro expanded and activated polyclonal γδ memory T cells for treatment of cancer

### Description
γδ-T lymphocytes are cells of the innate immune system exerting potent natural cytotoxicity against bacteria, viruses and tumours. This ability, coupled with their negligible alloreactivity, makes them attractive for adoptive immunotherapy approaches. To achieve a cell product suitable for clinical use, a protocol offering the possibility to generate and expand high numbers of polyclonal γδ-T cells is required. In this study, we designed a robust protocol to either manually or automatically expand high numbers of functional polyclonal memory γδ-T cells under good manufacturing practice conditions, with the additional possibility of gene-modification to improve anti-tumour activity, proving the feasibility of establishing an allogeneic “third-party T-cell bank” for off-the-shelf use. Engineered artificial antigen-presenting cells (aAPCs) expressing CD86/41BBL/CD40L and the cytomegalovirus (CMV)-antigen-pp65 were used for γδ-T cell production. The presence of CMV-pp65 and CD40L proved to be crucial for expansion of the memory Vδ1 subpopulation. To allow clinical translation and guarantee patient safety, aAPCs were stably transduced with an inducible suicide gene. The proposed cell product represents an attractive therapeutic option endowed with broad clinical applications, including treatment of viral infections in highly immunocompromised patients, treatment of aggressive malignancies refractory to conventional approaches and, ultimately, innovative platform for development of off-the-shelf CAR-T-cell products.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed, solubilized, denatured and reduced using a solution of 6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Afterward, the samples were loaded into a 30 kDa filtration devices and mixtures of sequencing grade of Lys C and Trypsin were added at a ratio of 1:50 and 1:100 (mg enzyme: mg protein), respectively. After an overnight digestion at 37C, peptides were collected with one wash of 50% CH3OH, 45% H2O, 5% TFA. After this step, the phosphopeptides were enriched and then purified, following the guidelines outlined in Titansphere Phos-TiO kit (GL Sciences Cat. No. 5010–21312). The enrichment samples were acidified and desalted on C18 StageTips before injection to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-Spray C18 LC column (75-mm ID £ 50 cm, 2 mm, 100 A) thermostated at 55C with a non-linear gradient of 2–60% solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 180 min with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ionization mode. The phosphoproteomic data analysis was done using LFQ calculated by MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and statistical analysis by Perseus tools. In a more specific way, it was used Photon Plugin, interactive software for the identification of functional proteins and reconstruction of signaling pathways through integrated analysis of phosphoproteomic data (confidence >0.75) and protein-protein interaction networks (string db).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Γδ  t cells cancer

### Affiliations
Ist. G. Gaslini - Core Facilities - Proteomica Clinica
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini - Core Facilities - Proteomica Clinica


