### Accession
PXD008217

### Title
Proteomic Evidence of Ancient Mongolian Dietary Dairy Sources in Ancient Dental Calculus

### Description
To investigate dairy consumption in ancient Mongolia, we analysed dental calculus samples from four Late Bronze Age (LBA, 1500-1000 BCE) individuals for proteomic evidence of milk proteins. As many archaeological sites before Mongolia's Iron Age suffer from a dearth of occupational materials, looking to biomolecular markers of dietary intake can open new investigational avenues into ancient economies. In this case, we use a previously established method of extracting proteins from calculus to explore the consumption of dairy products at LBA Khirigsuur sites in northern Mongolia's Hovsgol Aimag. Seven of nine individual's calculus contained peptides from the whey protein Beta-lactoglobulin from Ovis, Capra hircus, Bos, and general Bovidae species.  Aside from proteomics, these and 16 other individuals from the site were analysed for aDNA. We found that 18 of the 20 were primarily from one genetic ancestral group, and Ancient North Eurasian (ANE). One of the outliers represents a combination of ANE and Western Steppe Herder (WSH), with the other a combination of ANE and Eastern Asian (EE). This finding, while important in its own right, evidences the earliest known dairy consumption in Mongolia, and supports a widely held assumption that pastoralism was a primary subsistence strategy in the ancient Eastern Steppes. The combined proteomic and DNA evidence suggest that Western Steppe dairy animals and technology entered Mongolia before genetic admixture.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from 12 dental calculus samples of 9 archaeological individuals were analysed in this shotgun metaproteomic study. Extractions were completed using a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation protocol, previously published in Warinner et al., 2014, at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History's Proteomics Lab in Jena, Germany. Extracted peptides were stored in a -80C freezer until taken to the Functional Genomics Centre in Zurich, Switzerland (FGCZ) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data from the MS/MS analysis was converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) using the MSConvert program using the 100 most intense peaks in each spectrum. These files were searched concurrently against two databases with included decoys: Swissprot and the Human Oral Microbiome Database. To avoid including unreliable results false discovery rates were adjusted to 5% and peptide hits were filtered to include only peptides with ion scores >59, as suggested by the Mascot search program (Matrix Science TM, version 2.5). Tryptic peptides were searched using the enzyme setting for Trypsin, with up to three missed cleavages allowed. Searches included carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ), oxidation of methionine (M), and Oxidation of proline (P) were set as variable modifications. Additionally, peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, with an MS/MS ion tolerance of 0.01 Da. Using an in house data analysis tool, we only considered peptides with an E-value < 0.001. Peptide FDR was generally under 1%, and protein FDR was under 5% for each individual search. Peptides matching to dairy proteins were further investigated using BLAST (NCBI) to further confirm protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dental calculus, Dairy, Dental plaque, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Shevan Wilkin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jessica Hendy
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History


