### Accession
PXD006291

### Title
HiRIEFII proteomics and proteogenomics of A431 cells and five histologically normal tissues

### Description
High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS was used to analyze samples from the human A431 cell line and also samples of histologically normal tissues. The high analytical depth afforded by HiRIEF permitted proteogenomics on these two sample sets (A431 cells and normal tissues).  The A431 data was obtained from a time course experiment upon Gefitinib treatment (EGFR inhibition) of A431 cells with harvests at 2h, 6h and 24h after treatment as well of untreated cells. Isobaric tag labelling of peptide samples with TMT10plex was used. Biological triplicate controls (TMT channels 126, 127N, 127C), duplicate 2h (128N, 128C), duplicate 6h (129N, 129C) and triplicate 24h (130N, 130C, 131) samples were employed. The normal tissues data was obtained from two separate TMT10plex sets. TMT set1 was composed of 9 samples, all from different individuals, including three placenta samples (126, 127N, 127C) two liver samples (128N, 128C), two kidney samples (129N, 129C), two tonsil samples (130N, 130C), plus an internal pooled standard (131). TMT set2 was composed of 8 samples, all from different individuals, including one tonsil sample (126), two liver samples (127C, 128N), two kidney samples (128C, 129N), three testis samples (129C, 130N, 130C), plus an internal pooled standard (131). The internal pooled standard was made by combining equal aliquots of the tryptic peptide mixtures from each of the 17 tissue samples.

### Sample Protocol
The harvested cells (or tissue samples) were lysed with SDS buffer (4%SDS, 1mM Dithiothreitol, 25mM HEPES pH 7.6). Protein extracts were then digested to peptides using the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Prep) protocol. Each peptide mixture sample was labeled with the respective TMT10plex reagent prior to pooling into TMT sets. The A431 TMT set was divided into 4 aliquots of 400ug each, in preparation for Immobilized pH Gradient IsoElectric Focusing (IPG-IEF) with 4 different pI ranges (3-10, 3.7-4.9, 6-9, 6-11). The two sets with normal tissues were each separated by two IPG-IEF ranges, 3-10 and 3.7-4.9, again using aliquots of 400ug of total peptide amount.  Each HiRIEF fraction was run in LC-MS using a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo) and a nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo) installed on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo). The curved gradient (curve 6 in the Chromeleon software) then proceeded from 3% mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 45% B in 50min followed by wash at 99%B and re-equilibration. Total LC-MS run time was 74min. Online LC-MS was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 150ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  The total MS acquisition time was ~14 days for the A431 set and ~15 days for the two normal tissues sets. Finally, to validate the novel peptides identified from the proteogenomics search, 130 synthetic peptides were purchased from JPT, labeled with TMT channel 126, and run in batches amounting to a total of 54 LC-MS runs (half of were run which after hydrogen peroxide treatment so as to force the oxidation of methionine residues).

### Data Protocol
For the standard proteomics results deposited in the repository, all MS/MS spectra were searched by MSGF+ and post processed with Percolator under the Galaxy platform (https://usegalaxy.org) using a separate target-decoy strategy. The reference databases used were the human protein database of Ensembl 75. We set the precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm; carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT-10plex on lysine and N-terminus as fixed modifications; and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Quantitation of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. These searches produced as result outputs one PSMs table, one peptides table, and three protein tables (proteincentric = ENSP accessions, genecentric = ENSG accessions, and symbolcentric = gene symbols). For proteogenomics searches, a concatenated database strategy as well as a full genome 6FT (six frame translation) strategy was employed. All findings were filtered with Class Specific FDR, and further curated and validated in a process that is a major theme in the article to which this data pertains.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics enable the discovery of novel peptides (from unannotated genomic protein-coding loci) and single amino acid variant peptides (derived from single-nucleotide polymorphisms and mutations). Increasing the reliability of these identifications is crucial to ensure their usefulness for genome annotation and potential application as neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy. We here present integrated proteogenomics analysis workflow (IPAW), which combines peptide discovery, curation, and validation. IPAW includes the SpectrumAI tool for automated inspection of MS/MS spectra, eliminating false identifications of single-residue substitution peptides. We employ IPAW to analyze two proteomics data sets acquired from A431 cells and five normal human tissues using extended (pH range, 3-10) high-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) pre-fractionation and TMT-based peptide quantitation. The IPAW results provide evidence for the translation of pseudogenes, lncRNAs, short ORFs, alternative ORFs, N-terminal extensions, and intronic sequences. Moreover, our quantitative analysis indicates that protein production from certain pseudogenes and lncRNAs is tissue specific.

### Keywords
Testis, Human, Placenta, Tonsil, Liver, Kidney, A431

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Science For Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Science For Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden


