### Accession
PXD035716

### Title
Identification of AKTIP protein interaction partners in breast cancer cells MCF7

### Description
AKTIP (also named FTS) was initially identified as an interacting partner of AKT. However, the binding between AKTIP and AKT appears to be context dependent. In this study, the protein binding partners of AKTIP was determined by immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry using samples of breast cancer cells MCF7.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing and LC-MS/MS were performed at the Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong. Cell lysates (5mg) of MCF7 cells overexpressing HA-tagged AKTIP were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-HA antibody or IgG control to pull down AKTIP binding proteins. The eluted proteins were loaded in 8% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie blue. Gel slices were subjected to reduction by 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific), alkylation by 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma) and protein digestion by trypsin (1 ng/µL; overnight at 37°C). Tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted from the gel with 50% Acetonitrile (ACN; J.T. Baker)/5% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100% ACN and were desalted using C18 StageTips. Eluted peptides were analyzed with nanoelute UHPLC coupled to Bruker timsTOF pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 and were searched against the Human UniProt FASTA database (Apr 2020; 74,824 entries). Proteins with at least one unique peptide detected in sample immunoprecipitated with anti-HA antibody but were absent in sample immunoprecipitated with IgG control were considered as AKTIP-interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent deletion of 16q12.2 is observed in luminal breast cancer, yet the causal genomic alterations in this region are largely unknown. In this study, we identify that loss of AKTIP, which is located on 16q12.2, drives tumorigenesis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;)-positive, but not ER&#x3b1;-negative, breast cancer cells and is associated with poor prognosis of patients with ER&#x3b1;-positive breast cancer. Intriguingly, AKTIP-depleted tumors have increased ER&#x3b1; protein level and activity. Cullin-associated and neddylation-dissociated protein 1 (CAND1), which regulates the cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases, protects ER&#x3b1; from cullin 2-dependent proteasomal degradation. Apart from ER&#x3b1; signaling, AKTIP loss triggers JAK2-STAT3 activation, which provides an alternative survival signal when ER&#x3b1; is inhibited. AKTIP-depleted MCF7 cells and ER&#x3b1;-positive patient-derived organoids are more resistant to ER&#x3b1; antagonists. Importantly, the resistance can be overcome by co-inhibition of JAK2/STAT3. Together, our results highlight the subtype-specific functional consequences of AKTIP loss and provide a mechanistic explanation for the enriched AKTIP copy-number loss in ER&#x3b1;-positive breast cancer.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Fts, Aktip, Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Hong Kong
Assistant Professor,  School of biomedical Sciences,  Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Lydia Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Dr CHEUNG, Lydia Wai Ting
Assistant Professor,  School of biomedical Sciences,  Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong


