### Accession
PXD009612

### Title
Sodium valproate is protective in a transgenic zebrafish model of Machado Joseph disease

### Description
The neurodegenerative disease Machado Joseph disease (MJD, also known as spinocerebellar ataxia-3) is a fatal disease that impairs control and co-ordination of movement. MJD is caused by expansion of a trinucleotide (CAG) repeat region within the ATXN3 gene, encoding a long polyglutamine (polyQ) region within the ataxin-3 protein. As transcription regulation is one of the functions of the ataxin-3 protein, weWe aimed to examine whether zebrafish expressing polyQ expanded ataxin-3 had altered levels of histone acetylation, and to establish test whether treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor sodium valproate was protective for the the first transgenic zebrafish.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion Whole lysates (n=3 for each treatment) separated by SDS-PAGE for 5 mins (~1 cm into the gel), and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Stained proteins were excised from the gel and prepared for in-gel trypsin digestion as described (PMID 17406544). Briefly, gel pieces were equilibrated and dehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8 and 50 mM NH4HCO3/50% (v/v) acetonitrile pH 7.8 respectively, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. The protein gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 55oC for 30 mins and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hr in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were digested with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl) overnight at 37oC. Following digestion, tryptic peptides were passively diffused in the presence of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/2 % (v/v) formic acid (2x) in a bath sonicator and collected. The acetonitrile was evaporated by vacuum centrifugation, and tryptic peptides were desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and eluted in 50 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Reverse phase (C18) liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Peptide fractions were separated on a nanoLC system (Thermo) employing a 100 min gradient (2%–50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 95 mins followed by 90% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 mins) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized into Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 1.8 kV electrospray voltage. FT-MS analysis on the Q-Exactive was carried out with a 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS (scan range m/z 350-1800); and MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x105 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 60 and 100 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 15,000 counts and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 30 %.  Spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo) incorporating the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Sciences, UK) and the Danio rerio NCBI RefSeq protein database (05/05/2017, Sequences 46751). Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for maximum three missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01.  Reverse phase (C18) liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Peptide fractions were separated on a nanoLC system (Thermo) employing a 100 min gradient (2%–50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 95 mins followed by 90% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 mins) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized into Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 1.8 kV electrospray voltage. FT-MS analysis on the Q-Exactive was carried out with a 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS (scan range m/z 350-1800); and MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x105 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 60 and 100 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 15,000 counts and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 30 %.

### Data Protocol
Spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo) incorporating the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Sciences, UK) and the Danio rerio NCBI RefSeq protein database (05/05/2017, Sequences 46751). Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for maximum three missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01.  Label-free quantitative proteomics was carried out by calculating the normalised spectral abundance factors (NSAF) (PMID 16944946), which takes into account the length of a given protein as well as the total amount of protein in a given sample. A fraction (0.5) of a spectral count was added to all samples to account for missing values and total spectral counts for at least one condition was set to a minimum of 5. NSAF values were log2-transformed and Student’s t-tests were used to identify significant (P ≤0.05) changes in protein abundance between transgenic zebrafish expressing ataxin-3 84Q treated with the vehicle and sodium valproate. Statistical data preparation and tests were done using Microsoft Excel. Enriched GO annotations and signalling pathways were identified using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN) to predict activation and inhibition of cellular pathways upon treatment. The mass spectrometry proteomics data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (26) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD005131 (Username: reviewer51075@ebi.ac.uk; Password: i6pPz1LY) Protein lysates generated above were also examined via proteomic profiling……. Data analysis Data analysis was performed using SPSS software. All group comparisons involved use of a one-way ANOVA, followed by a Tukey post-hoc test to identify differences. Densitometric analysis of vehicle treatment versus sodium valproate treatment from proteomic data is compared using a Student t-test. Statistically significant differences are defined as p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD, also known as&#xa0;spinocerebellar ataxia type 3)&#xa0;is a fatal&#xa0;neurodegenerative&#xa0;disease that&#xa0;impairs&#xa0;control&#xa0;and coordination of movement.&#xa0;Here we tested whether treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium valproate (valproate) prevented a movement phenotype that develops in larvae of a transgenic zebrafish model of the disease. We found that treatment with valproate improved&#xa0;the&#xa0;swimming of the MJD zebrafish, affected levels of acetylated histones 3 and 4, but also increased expression of polyglutamine expanded human ataxin-3.&#xa0;Proteomic analysis of protein lysates generated from the treated and untreated MJD zebrafish also predicted that valproate treatment had activated the&#xa0;sirtuin&#xa0;longevity signaling&#xa0;pathway and this was confirmed by findings of increased SIRT1 protein levels and sirtuin activity in valproate treated MJD zebrafish and HEK293 cells expressing ataxin-3 84Q, respectively. Treatment with resveratrol (another compound&#xa0;known to activate&#xa0;the sirtuin pathway), also improved swimming in the MJD zebrafish. Co-treatment with valproate alongside EX527, a SIRT1 activity inhibitor, prevented induction of autophagy by valproate and the beneficial effects of valproate on the movement in the MJD zebrafish, supporting that they were both dependent on sirtuin activity. These findings provide&#xa0;the first evidence of sodium valproate inducing activation of the sirtuin pathway. Further, they indicate that drugs that target the sirtuin&#xa0;pathway, including sodium valproate and resveratrol, warrant further investigation for the treatment of MJD&#xa0;and&#xa0;related neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Machado joseph disease, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Ataxin-3, Zebrafish, Polyq

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia


