### Accession
PXD015782

### Title
Identification of MRCKA as an integral component of ovarian cancer signaling and a therapeutic target

### Description
High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is the most lethal gynecological cancer with few effective targeted therapies. HGSOC tumors exhibit genomic instability with frequent alterations in the protein kinome; however, only a small fraction of the kinome has been therapeutically targeted in HGSOC. Using multiplexed inhibitor beads and mass spectrometry (MIB-MS), we mapped the kinome landscape of HGSOC patient tumors and tumors isolated from HGSOC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models.  Kinome profiling of HGSOC tumors uncovered a prevalent MIB-MS kinome signature consisting of established HGSOC driver kinases, as well as several kinases previously unexplored in HGSOC.  Loss-of-function analysis targeting the tumor kinome signature in HGSOC cells nominated CDC42BPA (also known as MRCKA) as a putative therapeutic target.  Characterization of MRCKA knockdown in established HGSOC cell lines demonstrated MRCKA was integral to signaling that regulated the cell cycle checkpoint and focal adhesion/ actin remodeling, and depletion of MRCKA impaired cell migration, proliferation and survival.  Moreover, small molecule inhibition of MRCKA using BDP9066 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in HGSOC cells, as well as blocked spheroid formation, supporting MRCKA as a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of HGSOC.

### Sample Protocol
Using methanol/chloroform protein precipitation methods, 4 mg lysate (2 mg OVCAR4 siNT2 or siCDC42BPA and 2 mg of s-SILAC reference sample) was mixed and precipitated, resuspended in 360 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and digested with 20 μL of 1% Protease Max (Promega) plus 20 μg of Promega Trypsin/LysC mix for 4 hours at 37°C with vigorous shaking. Samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 25 minutes, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 25 minutes in the dark, and alkylation was quenched with 5 mM DTT for 15 minutes. Samples were then digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C in an incubator shaker. Peptides were cleaned by subsequent elution from C-18 (Phenominex) and Hypercarb/Hypersep PGC columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) and dried via speed-vac. Peptides were resuspended in 100 μl 0.1% formic acid and quantified using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer at A280 absorbance. TiO2 beads (GL Sciences) were resuspended in binding buffer (2M lactic acid in 50% ACN) at a concentration of 100 μg/μl and added to the peptides at a ratio of 4mg beads per 1 mg peptide. Prior to the addition of the TiO2 beads, lactic acid and acetonitrile were added to the peptides to make the concentration 2M lactic acid and 50% ACN.  Samples were vortexed and incubated for 30 min with end over end rotation. Following incubation, samples were centrifuged for 1 minute at 8000g and the supernatant was added to fresh TiO2 beads for a second 30 minute incubation. The beads from both incubations were combined and washed three times with 1 mL binding buffer, then three times with 1 mL 50% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads with 600 μL 5% ammonium hydroxide in 50% ACN by vortexing and passed through C-18 stage tips. 100 μl 80% ACN was passed through the stage tip and peptides were dried in a speed-vac and subsequent LC-/MS/MS analysis was performed. Proteolytic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 on a Thermo Easy-Spray C18 PepMap 75µm x 50cm C-18 2 µm column with a 240 min gradient of 4-25% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min at 50°C. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer utilizing a top 15 methodology in which the 15 most intense peptide precursor ions were subjected to fragmentation. The AGC for MS1 was set to 3x106 with a max injection time of 120 ms, the AGC for MS2 ions was set to 1x105 with a max injection time of 150 ms, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis of SILAC experiments was performed using Maxquant software 1.6.1.0 and searched using andromeda 1.5.6.0 against the swiss-prot human protein database (downloaded on July 26, 2018). The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. All settings were default and searched using acetylation of protein N-terminus, oxidized methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications with a maximum number of modifications per peptide being 5. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm and maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da. SILAC quantification was performed using MaxQuant by choosing multiplicity as 2 in group-specific parameters and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels. Match between runs was employed and the significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of < 1%. The MaxQuant normalized ratios “Phospho(STY).txt” were used for quantitation data analysis in Perseus software (1.6.2.3). s-SILAC phosphosite ratios were processed in the following manner: MaxQuant normalized s-SILAC ratios were transformed 1/(x) to generate light / heavy ratios, followed by log2/(x) transformed. Phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine (pSTY) sites were filtered for only those that were confidently localized (class I, localization probability ≥ 0.75) followed by filtering for phosphosites identified in at least 70% of runs leaving 2906 phosphosites. Log2- transformed s-SILAC values were normalized to each column by subtracting its median. Imputation of missing values was performed where in the s-SILAC data, a width of 0.3 and the downshift of 0.5, was employed. Quantitative differences in s-SILAC ratios amongst control siRNAs or MRCKA siRNA treatments was determined using a two-sample student’s T-test with the following parameters, (S0 0.1, and Side, Both) using p value < 0.05. Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA) [20] software (https://casecpb.shinyapps.io/ksea/ ) that uses pre-existing phosphoproteomics databases to determine candidate active kinases was used to predict changes in kinase activity following MRCKA knockdown. A .csv file was generated from the two-sample student’s T-test comparing control siRNA vs MRCKA siRNA treated cells Perseus export matrix that included Protein ID, Gene ID, Peptide, Residue.Both, p value and fold change. Parameters used in KSEA analysis were as follows; PhosphoSitePlus + NetworkKIN, Set NetworkKIN score cutoff = 2, [for plot] Set p-value cutoff = 0.05, [for plot] Set substrate count cutoff = 10. A Volcano plot was then generated in RStudio 1.1.423 using ggplot2and ggrepel libraries using KSEA Kinase Scores to visualize kinases predicted to activated or inhibited.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cdc42bpa, Mrcka, High grade serous ovarian carcinoma

### Affiliations
Cancer Biology Department, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Fox Chase Cancer Center

### Submitter
James Duncan

### Lab Head
Dr James Stuart Duncan
Cancer Biology Department, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA


