### Accession
PXD014616

### Title
The liver,spleen,brain,intestine and kidney tissue of the Oreochromis niloticus which infected with Streptococcus agalactiae LC-MSMS

### Description
The Oreochromis niloticus was infected with S.agalactiae strain YM001, than collected the liver,spleen,brain,intestine and kidney tissue for proteome

### Sample Protocol
The samples were individually milled to a power in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. We then mixed 150 mg of the powder from each sample with 1 ml of lysis buffer containing Tris-base (pH 8), 8M Urea, 1% SDS, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) in a glass homogenizer. The homogenate was incubated on ice for 20 min and then centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube, and protein concentration was determined with a Bradford assay. And then added 4 volumes 10 mM DTT in cold acetone to a sample extract, vortexed well, placed samples at -20°℃for 2 h or overnight. Centrifuged and collected pellet to wash twice with cold acetone. Finally dissolved the pellet by dissolution buffer containing Tris-base (pH=8), 8M Urea. The supernatant from each sample, containing precisely 0.1 mg of protein, DTT reduction, iodoacetamide alkylation, and was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 16h. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted with C18 cartridge to remove the high urea, and desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Desalted peptides were labeled with TMT reagents (thermofisher), following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermofisher Scientific). For 0.1 mg of peptides,1 unit of labeling reagent was used. Peptides were dissolved in 20 µl of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate solution (TEAB, pH 8.5), and the labeling reagent was added to 70 µl of isopropanol. After incubation for 1 h, the reaction was stopped with 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5). Differently labeled peptides were mixed equally and then desalted in 100 mg SCX columns (strata-x-c, Phenomenex: 8B-S029-EBJ). A ~600 microgram TMT-labeled peptide mix was fractionated using a C18 column (waters BEH C18 4.6 × 250 mm, 5 µm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC operating at 1ml/min. The column oven was set as 50 °C. Mobile phases A (2% acetonitrile, 20mM NH4FA, adjusted pH to 10.0 using NH3·H2O) and B (98% acetonitrile, 20mM NH4FA, adjusted pH to 10.0 using NH3·H2O) were used to develop a gradient elution. The solvent gradient was set as follows: 3–8% B, 5min; 8–18% B, 12 min; 18–32% B, 11 min; 32–45% B, 7 min; 45–80% B, 3 min; 80% B, 5 min; 80–5%， 0.1min， 5% B, 7 min. The tryptic peptides were monitored at UV 214 nm. Eluent was collected every minute and then merged to 15 fractions. The samples were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 20µl of 0.1% (v/v) FA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile in water for subsequent analyses. Fractions from the first dimension RPLC were dissolved with loading buffer and then separated by a C18 column (150 µm inner-diameter, 360 µm outer-diameter × 15 cm, 1.9µm C18, Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile solution; a series of adjusted 60 min gradients according to the hydrophobicity of fractions eluted in 1D LC with a flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied. Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 320℃. Full MS scan resolution was set to 60000 with AGC target value of 3e6 for a scan range of 350-1500 m/z. A data-dependent top 40 method was operated during witch HCD spectra was obtained at 15000 MS2 resolution with AGC target of 1e5 and maximum IT of 45 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation window, and NCE of 30, dynamically excluded of 60s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against *** database by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus and TMT 10-plex of tyrosine, lysine were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 miscleavage sites were allowed. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Reporter Quantification (TMT 10-plex) was used for TMT quantification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, the significant ratios, defined as p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > *(ratio > * or ratio < * [fold change, FC]), were used to screen the differentially expressed proteins (DEP).   Gene Ontology (GO) and InterPro (IPR) analysis were conducted using the interproscan-5 program against the non-redundant protein database (including Pfam, PRINTS, ProDom, SMART, ProSiteProfiles, PANTHER) , and the databases COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) were used to analyze the protein family and pathway. The probable interacting partners were predicted using the STRING-db server (http://string.embl.de/) based on the related species. STRING is a database of both known and predicted protein-protein interactions. The enrichment pipeline was used to perform the enrichment analysis of GO, IPR, COG and KEGG, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Streptococcus agalactiae</i> is an important pathogen for tilapia meningitis. Most of the infected tilapia die rapidly in production, when the way to study the pathogenic mechanism of bacteria on host through chronic infection in laboratory is not comprehensive and accurate enough to elucidate the real pathogenic mechanism. The objective of this study was to investigate the mechanism of acute bacterial meningitis of tilapia caused by <i>Streptococcus agalactiae</i> (GBS), and provide a theoretical basis for its prevention and treatment. Duel RNA-seq, proteome analysis, histopathological analysis, plasma biochemical indexes, and blood routine examination were performed on tilapias infected with fish-derived GBS attenuated strain YM001 and its parental virulent strain HN016. The results showed that the contents of white blood cell (WBC), monocytes (MON), and neutrophil (NEU) were significantly lower in the HN016 group compared to that in the YM001 group (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Histopathological examination showed that there were partially lesions in the examined tissues of tilapia infected by HN016, while no obvious histopathological changes occurred in the YM001 group. The differential expressed genes (DEGs) and differential expressed proteins (DEPs) between YM001 and HN016 were mainly enriched in the beta-lactam resistance pathway (oppA1, oppA2, oppB, oppC, oppD, oppF, and mrcA). The DEGs DEPs between YM001-brain and HN016-brain were mainly enriched in the complement and coagulation cascades signaling pathway (C2a, c4b, c3b, c7, CD59, ITGB2, and ITGAX). The present study indicates that the interaction between phagocytes and GBS mediated by the activated complement system is the key to GBS inducing tilapia acute bacterial meningitis. The low survival ability caused by reduced &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics resistance is one of the important reasons for why YM001 lost its pathogenicity to tilapia.

### Keywords
Spleen, Brain, Oreochromis niloticus, Lc-msms, Intestine, Liver, S.agalactiae, Kidney

### Affiliations
Guangxi academy of fishery sciences
Guangxi Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
ming chen

### Lab Head
Dr Fish disease control and prevention laboratory
Guangxi academy of fishery sciences


