### Accession
PXD010990

### Title
Real-time molecular diagnosis of tumors using water-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry technology

### Description
This dataset contains MS imaging raw data as well as the SCiLS file used to confirm the regions in dog sarcoma biopsies classified by the SpiderMass system after analysis of the consecutive tissue section. All the tissues were gathered during dog sarcoma surgeries, snap-frozen and analysed later in the lab. The images were acquired on a MALDI LTQ orbitrap XL hybrid instrument.

### Sample Protocol
After removal, the fresh biopsies were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use. When possible, distant healthy tissues and tumor margins were sampled as well. The tissues were warmed up to -20 °C in a cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Nanterre, France) before preparation, and, using a metallic tissue cutting matrix (Ted Pella. Redding, California, USA) as a guide to obtain a neat surface, the tissues were cut into two halves and one was kept frozen in case further experiments would be needed. On the other half, a 1 mm thick slice was cut to be used for the SpiderMass analysis. The remaining tissue was cut at 10 µm with the cryotome. Two sections were deposited onto polylysine-coated slides by finger-thawing. One was used for Mass Spectrometry Imaging (MSI) analysis while the other was stained with HPS and served as morphological control. This workflow was designed to ensure that the tissue used for MSI reflects the true composition of the tissue surface analyzed by SpiderMass and of the morphological control. For MALDI-MSI experiments, slides were taken out of storage, immediately dehydrated under vacuum at room temperature for 30 min, and scanned using a slide scanner (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). DHB matrix (20 mg/mL in 7:3 (v/v) MeOH/0.1% TFA in water) was manually sprayed using a syringe pump connected to an electrospray nebulizer operating at a 300 µL/h flow rate with compressed nitrogen flow pressure maintained at 1.1 bar. The nebulizer was moved uniformly throughout the entire tissue for 10 to 12 min according to tissue size. The homogeneity of the crystals was examined under a light microscope after spraying. The tissues were then analyzed using a MALDI LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an N2 laser (model MNL-100; LTB Lasertechnik, Berlin GmbH) which has a maximum repetition rate of 60 Hz. The maximum energy per pulse was set to 10 µJ and acquisition was performed in positive mode at 30,000 mass resolution (centered at m/z 400). Each spectrum was generated using one microscan at one microscan per step. The automatic gain control (AGC) feature was turned off and the number of laser shots was set to 10. The raster step size was set to 70 μm.

### Data Protocol
The generated images were then converted to imzML format using the manufacturer software ImageQuest and exported to SCiLS. Spectral normalization was performed using the DHB peak at m/z 177. Medium edge-preserving spatial denoising, peak picking using orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP), and peak alignment by centroid matching to the mean spectrum were applied to generate the set of peaks used in subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Histopathological diagnosis of biopsy samples and margin assessment of surgical specimens are challenging aspects in sarcoma. Using dog patient tissues, we assessed the performance of a recently developed technology for fast ex&#xa0;vivo molecular lipid-based diagnosis of sarcomas. The instrument is based on mass spectrometry (MS) molecular analysis through a laser microprobe operating under ambient conditions using excitation of endogenous water molecules. Classification models based on cancer/normal/necrotic, tumor grade, and subtypes showed a minimum of 97.63% correct classification. Specific markers of normal, cancer, and necrotic regions were identified by tandem MS and validated by MS imaging. Real-time detection capabilities were demonstrated by ex&#xa0;vivo analysis with direct interrogation of classification models.

### Keywords
Laser microprobe, Sarcoma, Non-invasive, Spidermass, Real-time, Surgery, Molecular signatures, Diagnostic, Ambient ionization mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM), Inserm U1192 - Université de Lille, Faculté des Sciences, Campus Cité Scientifique, Bât SN3, 1er étage, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex. Phone: +33 (0)3 20 43 41 94; Fax: +33 (0)3 20 43 40 54
PRISM- University of Lille 1

### Submitter
Jusal Quanico

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM), Inserm U1192 - Université de Lille, Faculté des Sciences, Campus Cité Scientifique, Bât SN3, 1er étage, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex. Phone: +33 (0)3 20 43 41 94; Fax: +33 (0)3 20 43 40 54


