### Accession
PXD001981

### Title
Secretome of P2X7 receptor -  Macrophage activation and polarization modify P2X7 receptor secretome influencing the inflammatory process

### Description
In order to determine P2X7R secretome we analyzed the proteins present in cell-free supernatants from wild-type (P2rx7+/+) or P2rx7-/- bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) polarized either to M1 or M2 and subsequently treated with ATP. BMDMs were primed with LPS (M1) or IL-4 (M2) for 4 hours and the proteins secreted during this step were extensively washed with PBS before ATP was added in fresh buffer. The complex mixture of proteins obtained in the macrophages supernatants after ATP stimulation were fractionated using one dimension gel electrophoresis and 10 bands were selected for LC-MS/MS analysis based in their presence in higher intensity in P2rx7+/+ supernatant compared with P2rx7-/- supernatant.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty micrograms of cell-free supernatant protein were precipitated with 6 volume of cold acetone overnight at -20ºC. Protein pellet was then resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer supplemented with Beta-mercaptoethanol (4% v/v) and resolved in 4–12% precast Criterion polyacrylamide gels (Biorad). Gels were run at 150 V and stained overnight with Comassie blue R-250 (0.1% w/v). The 10 gel slices obtained from the SDS-PAGE gel lanes were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. First proteins contained in selected gel bands were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol (DTT, 20 mM) and iodoacetamide (55 mM), respectively, and then digested by trypsin (proteomics grade, Sigma) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M (2006) In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 1: 2856-2860).  The tryptic peptides were analyzed by capillary reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled online with MS/MS. The column, BioBasic-18, 5 microm particles, 300 Å pore size, 0.18 mm ID-100 mm L (Thermo Scientific), was connected to an Surveyor MS Pump Plus (Thermo Scientific) and then coupled with an ion trap mass spectrometer (LXQ, Thermo Scientific). The flow rate was set at 100 microl/min but split to a flow rate of 2 microl/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1 % formic acid / 2 % methanol in water and B was 0.1 % formic acid in methanol. The peptide samples were injected and gradient elution was done under the following conditions: 5 % B in 3 min; a linear increase of 5 % to 70 % B in 30 min; 70 % for 16 min; 5 % B for 43 min. The ion trap MS was operated in a data-dependent MS/MS mode where the 15 most abundant peptide molecular ions in every MS scan were sequentially selected for collision-induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 34 %. Dynamic exclusion was applied to minimize repeated selection of peptides previously selected for collision-induced dissociation. The capillary temperature and electrospray voltage were set to 200 ºC and 3.5 kV, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against Mus musculus UniProtKB protein database (69036 sequences, released at May 9, 2011) with the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (ThermoScientific). The following search parameters were applied: default charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+ were used; a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed with an average peptide mass tolerance of 1.5 Da. A fragment ion search tolerance of 0.8 Da was permitted. Fixed modification on cysteine was carbamidomethylation and a variable modification was oxidation of methionine. All data were searched against a decoy database. The peptide level score cut-off for each of the runs was automatically adjusted to ensure a 1 % false discovery rate throughout the experiments. A positive identification was assigned when two or more unique peptides were identified.

### Publication Abstract
The activation of P2X7 receptor (P2X7R) on M1 polarized macrophages induces the assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome leading to the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the establishment of the inflammatory response. However, P2X7R signaling to the NLRP3 inflammasome is uncoupled on M2 macrophages without changes on receptor activation. In this study, we analyzed P2X7R secretome in wild-type and P2X7R-deficient macrophages polarized either to M1 or M2 and proved that proteins released after P2X7R stimulation goes beyond caspase-1 secretome. The characterization of P2X7R-secretome reveals a new function of this receptor through a fine-tuning of protein release. We found that P2X7R stimulation in macrophages is able to release potent anti-inflammatory proteins, such as Annexin A1, independently of their polarization state suggesting for first time a potential role for P2X7R during resolution of the inflammation and not linked to the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. These results are of prime importance for the development of therapeutics targeting P2X7R.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Bmdm, P2x7r

### Affiliations
Inflammation and Experimental Surgery Unit LAIB Building - 4th floor (lab 4.20) IMIB-Arrixaca Ctra. Buenavista s/n 30120 El Palmar (Murcia). Spain
IMIB-Arrixaca

### Submitter
Carlos de Torre Minguela

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos de Torre Minguela
Inflammation and Experimental Surgery Unit LAIB Building - 4th floor (lab 4.20) IMIB-Arrixaca Ctra. Buenavista s/n 30120 El Palmar (Murcia). Spain


