### Accession
PXD017648

### Title
pepper fruit LC-MSMS

### Description
Comprehensive Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Pepper Fruit Development Provides Insight into Plant Signaling Transduction

### Sample Protocol
3.1.Plant growth and sampling One pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) varieties, ‘SJ11-3’ were provided by Hunan Vegetable Research Institute (Changsha, China), and grown in a greenhouse (16 h of light at 30±2 ℃ and 8 h of darkness at 20±2 ℃). Fruits at the following developmental stages, immature green (IMG; 20 days after anthesis (DAA)), mature green (MG; 30 DAA), breaker (Br; 40 DAA) and mature red (MR; 50 DAA), were collected. Fruit pericarps at each developmental stage were collected and pooled from three individual plants. The fruits pericarp tissue were frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at -80°C for phosphoproteome analyses, Three biological replicates in each time point were performed. 3.2.Protein extraction and FASP digestion The amount samples were adding SDT Buffer to extract the protein [71].The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was stored at -80 °C. Around 200 ugof proteins were taken from each sample and trypsin hydrolysis was performed by FASP method [71]. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 3.3.TMT Labeling and Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides by the TiO2 beads About 600 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent [72] according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides were mixed, concentrated by a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 500 μL 1×DHB buffer. Then, TiO2 beads were added and agitated for 2 hour. The centrifugation was carried out for 1 min at 5000 g, resulting the beads. And washed with 50 uL of washing buffer I three times and then 50 uL of washing buffer II three times to remove the remaining non-adsorbed material. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 uL of elution buffer three times, followed by lyophilization and MS analysis. 3.4.HPLC and LC-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. A 4-hour linear gradient was then performed: 0-55% buffer B for 220 min, 55-100% buffer B for 8 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 12 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled with Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 240 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method, which dynamically selected the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300 - 1800 m/z) for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3×106, maximum inject time to 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion duration to 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MaxQuant software version1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany). The search was performed using the uniprot_capsicum annuum_178676_20170905 database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=Capsicum+annuum&sort=score) . Phosphoproteins were identified with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme with the number of missed cleavages up to 2, carbamidomethyl as the fixed modification, oxidation as the variable modification. The charge states of peptides were +1, +2 and + 3. Peptide mass tolerances were set at ±20 ppm for all MS1 spectra acquired, and fragment mass tolerances were set at 0.1 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. False discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤0.01. Phosphoproteins identified in at least two of the three replicates were considered for expression analysis. The protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. Normalizes all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. For LFQ, a fold change of ≥1.2 or ≤0.8 were regarded as significantly up- or down-regulated, respectively. 3.5.Gene ontology (GO) and KEGG annotation Sequences of phosphoproteins were retrieved from the UniProtKB database (Release 2016_10). The retrieved sequences were locally searched against the NR database using the NCBI BLAST+ and InterProScan to find homologous sequences from which the functional annotation can be transferred to the studied sequences. Blast2GO was then used to annotate sequences and map gene ontology (GO)  (Version 3.3.5). The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts. Then the sequences of phosphoproteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KOs and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. The corresponding KEGG pathways were extracted. 3.6.Motif prediction The sequence information of 13 amino acids ( including the modification sites and ±6 amino acids  of the modified sites) were extracted to predict the possible conservative motifs by using the MEME （http://meme-suite.org/index.htm）.

### Publication Abstract
Limited knowledge is available for phosphorylation modifications in pepper (<i>Capsicum annuum</i> L.), especially in pepper fruit development. In this study, we conducted the first comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis of pepper fruit at four development stage by Tandem Mass Tag proteomic approaches. A total of 2639 unique phosphopeptides spanning 1566 proteins with 4150 nonredundant sites of phosphorylation were identified, among which 2327 peptides in 1413 proteins were accurately quantified at four different stages. Mature Green (MG) to breaker stage showed the largest number of differentially expressed phosphoproteins and the number of downregulated phosphoproteins was significantly higher than that of upregulated after MG stage. Twenty seven phosphorylation motifs, including 22 pSer motifs and five pThr motifs and 85 kinase including 28 serine/threonine kinases, 14 receptor protein kinases, six mitogen-activated protein kinases, seven calcium-dependent protein kinases, two casein kinases, and some other kinases were quantified. Then the dynamic changes of phosphorylated proteins in ethylene and abscisic acid signaling transduction pathways during fruit development were analyzed. Our results provide a cascade of phosphoproteins and a regulatory network of phosphorylation signals, which help to further understand the mechanism of phosphorylation in pepper fruit development.

### Keywords
Pepper；fruit；development；lc-msms

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Hunan Agricultural University

### Submitter
zhoubin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhoubin Liu
College of Horticulture, Hunan Agricultural University


