### Accession
PXD047412

### Title
A Spatiotemporal Proteomic Map of Human Adipogenesis

### Description
White adipocytes function as the major energy reservoir in humans by storing large amounts of triglycerides. Their dysfunction is associated with metabolic disorders. However, the mechanisms underlying cellular specialization during adipogenesis remain unknown. Here, we generated a spatiotemporal proteomic atlas of human adipogenesis to gain insights into cellular remodeling and the spatial reorganization of metabolic pathways to optimize cells for lipid accumulation. Our study highlights the coordinated regulation of protein localization and abundance during adipogenesis. More specifically, we identified a compartment-specific regulation of protein levels to reprogram branched chain amino acid and one-carbon metabolism to provide building blocks and reduction equivalents for lipid synthesis. Additionally, we identified C19orf12 as a differentiation induced adipocyte-specific lipid droplet (LD) protein, which interacts with the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) complex of LD associated mitochondria and modulates adipocyte lipid storage. Overall, our study provides a comprehensive resource for understanding human adipogenesis and for future discoveries in the field.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion, peptide Purification: Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, scraped, boiled for 5 min at 95°C 1000rpm in 2% SDC buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5) and sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor, 15 * 30s at high intensity). Protein concentration was determined via BCA Protein Assay (Thermo, 23225). Prior digested overnight (37°C, 1000 rpm) with a 1:50 ratio (protein:enzyme) of trypsin (Sigma, t6567) and LysC (Wako, 129-02541), proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA at 40°C in the dark for 10min. peptides were acidified by adding equal 1:1 (v:v) of isopropanol, 2% TFA. After centrifugation for 10 min at 15,000 rpm, supernatants were loaded onto activated triple layer styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated STAGE tips (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore). Peptides were washed with 100 µl ethylacetate 1% TFA, 100 µl 30% Methanol 1% TFA and 150 µl 0.2% TFA and eluted with 60 µl elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH). Peptides were lyophilized and dissolved in 10 µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA).  LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis 500 ng of peptides was performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and FAIMS (CV50) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at 60°C on 50 cm columns with an inner diameter of 75 μm packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH). The peptides were separated over 1h by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1 formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Starting with 5% of buffer B, this fraction was increased stepwise to 45% over 45 min followed by a wash-out at 95%, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized and transferred from the LC system into to the gas phase using electrospray ionization (ESI). A data independent (DIA) tandem mass spectrometry 1h method was used. One ms1 scan (300-1650 m/z, max. ion fill time of 45 ms, normalized AGC target = 300%, R= 120.000 at 200 m/z) was followed by 66 ms2 fragment scans of unequally spaced windows (fill time = 22 ms, normalized AGC target = 1000%, normalized HCD collision energy = 30%, R= 15.000).

### Data Protocol
DIA Raw files were demultiplexed with Spectronauts HTRMS converter and analyzed with Spectronaut (v15.7.220308.50606). Phosphoproteomic data was analyzed using MaxQant Version Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus, Rstudio, Circos Table Viewer and Microsoft Excel. Annotations were extracted from UniProtKB, Gene Ontology (GO), the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), CORUM and Phosphosite Plus. For proteome analysis quantified proteins were filtered for at least two valid values among three biological replicates in at least one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3. Significantly regulated proteins between the three conditions were determined by ANOVA (FDR 0.01). Hierarchical clustering, 1D annotation enrichment, and Fisher’s exact test were performed in Perseus. To identify proteins with conserved temporal trajectory, proteins were filtered for temporal profiles whose correlations are positive in all dual comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Adipocyte, Sgbs, Wat, C19orf12, Mpan, Organelle proteomics, Ocm, Proteomic ruler, Pcp, Bcaa, Slc25a10, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany


