### Accession
PXD029079

### Title
Circuit-wide Proteomics Profiling Reveals Brain Region-specific Protein Signatures in the WKY Rats with Endogenous Depression

### Description
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is considered as a neural circuit-based polygene syndrome that is mainly triggered by genetic susceptibility and stress factors. The present study employed the Wistar Kyoto (WKY) rat as an animal model with endogenous depression to further investigate the molecular basis of its genetic susceptibility to depression by performing quantitative protemoics analyses of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), nucleus accumbens (NAc), and hippocampus (Hip), respectively.

### Sample Protocol
After protein extraction and trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the protocol of the manufacturer of the TMT kit. The labelled samples were loaded onto an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm i.d., 250 mm length; Santa Clara, CA, USA) for high pH reverse-phase HPLC.The peptides were dissolved in a solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm in length, 75 μm i.d.; Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo). The gradient consisted of an increase in a solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 9% to 26% (0-60 min), from 26% to 40% (60-82 min), and from 40% to 80% (82-86 min), and the solvent B was then held at 80% for the last 4 min. The EASY-nLC 1000 Ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo) was used at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min. Then, the peptides were subjected to nanospray-ionization (NSI), followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60 000. The peptides were selected for MS/MS using a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 28. The ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30 000. A data-dependent scan (DDA) procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied to select the top 10 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 50,000 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4 to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was set from 350 to 1 550, and the fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Rattus_Uniprot_10116 (29 955 sequences), which was concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme with no more than 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. The carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, while both the oxidation on Met and the acetylation and deamidation (NQ) of protein N-terminus were specified as the variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Depression; wistar kyoto rats; proteomics; medial prefrontal cortex; nucleus accumbens; hippocampus

### Affiliations
Fujian Medical University
Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital

### Submitter
Jiangfeng Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaochun Chen
Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital


