### Accession
PXD029031

### Title
Canagliflozin regulates ferroptosis to ameliorate heart failure in rats with preserved ejection fraction

### Description
Chronic heart failure (CHF), with whether reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) or preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), is the end-stage of various cardiovascular diseases and severely affects the patients’ lifespan. There has been no effective drugs to improve clinical outcomes for a long time. Sine the recent years, as a hypoglycemic drug, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor (SGLT2i) has aroused great attention due to it’s cardiovascular benefits. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear, particularly regarding ferroptosis, a newly defined mechanism of iron-dependent non-apoptotic cell death in heart failure (HF). Here, we discovered and demonstrated that ferroptosis was a key mechanism in rat model of high-salt diet-induced HF, characterized by iron overloading and lipid peroxidation, which was blocked by canagliflozin administration. These findings highlight that targeting ferroptosis serves as a cardioprotective strategy for HF prevention and canagliflozin might display cardiovascular benefits through ferroptosis mitigation.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics experiment and the targeted nanoLC­MS/MS analysis of left ventricular apical tissue sampled from three different groups were performed. After a series of steps, such as sample lysis, BCA assay, acetone precipitation, protein alkylation, protein digestion, TMT labeling, SDC cleanup, peptide desalting and High­pH pre­fractionationin, peptide were collected.

### Data Protocol
For each fraction, 1ug peptide were separated and analyzed with a nano­UPLC (EASY­nLC1200) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano­electrospray ion source. Separation was performed using a reversed­phase column (100um ID ×15 cm, Reprosil­Pur120 C18­AQ, 1.9um, Dr. Math). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN (phase A) and 90% ACN, 0.1% FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 90 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 2% to 5% for 2 min, 5% to 22% for 68 min, 22% to 45% for 16 min, 45% to 95% for 2 min, 95% for 2 min. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 (@200 m/z) and m/z range of 350­1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 45k with a fixed firstmass of 110m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3E6 with max IT 30 ms, and 1E5 for MS2 with max IT 96 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32%, and isolation window of 0.7 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 45 s, single charged peaks and peaks with charge exceeding 6 were excluded from the DDA procedure. Vendor’s raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.15.0) on a linux OS server (debian­9). After the completion of database search, the polypeptides and proteins matching to decoy database were filtered out, and the remaining data were used for subsequent analysis. Statistical methods were used to screen differentially expressed proteins. The screened protein must have a definite gene name. The screening criteria for these proteins were unique peptide ≥1, P-VALUE <0.05 and FOLD CHANGE <0.83 or FOLD CHANGE >1.2. We mapped the genes to nodes in the Gene Ontology database, and used GO for functional enrichment analysis. The differentially expressed proteins between the HFpEF group and the Cana group were classified and displayed according to the Biological Process (GO_BP) method. By analyzing the metabolic pathways that were significantly enriched, it was possible to understand which pathways had undergone significant systemic changes under different experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, hypoglycemic drugs belonging to sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) have generated significant interest due to their clear cardiovascular benefits for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) since there are no effective drugs that may improve clinical outcomes for these patients over a prolonged period. But, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear, particularly its effects on ferroptosis, a newly defined mechanism of iron-dependent non-apoptotic cell death during heart failure (HF). Here, with proteomics, we demonstrated that ferroptosis might be a key mechanism in a rat model of high-salt diet-induced HFpEF, characterized by iron overloading and lipid peroxidation, which was blocked following treatment with canagliflozin. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029031. The ferroptosis was evaluated with the levels of acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4, glutathione peroxidase 4, ferritin heavy chain 1, transferrin receptor, Ferroportin 1, iron, glutathione, malondialdehyde, and 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal. These findings highlight the fact that targeting ferroptosis may serve as a cardioprotective strategy for HFpEF prevention and suggest that canagliflozin may exert its cardiovascular benefits partly via its mitigation of ferroptosis.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Canagliflozin, Lipid peroxidation, Ferroptosis, Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor

### Affiliations
Department of Geriatric Cardiology, Hebei General Hospital, No. 348 Heping Road, Xinhua District, Hebei, 050000, China.
Hebei General Hospital

### Submitter
Ma Sai

### Lab Head
Dr Yifang Guo
Department of Geriatric Cardiology, Hebei General Hospital, No. 348 Heping Road, Xinhua District, Hebei, 050000, China.


