### Accession
PXD023889

### Title
Ultra-deep and time-resolved in vivo ubiquitinome profiling by DIA-MS reveals USP7 targets on a proteome-wide scale

### Description
By simultaneously capturing thousands of ubiquitination sites, mass spectrometry (MS)-based ubiquitinomics provides system-level understanding of ubiquitin signaling. Here we present a scalable workflow for deep and precise in vivo ubiquitinome profiling, coupling an improved sample preparation protocol with data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry and neural network-based data processing, specifically optimized for ubiquitinomics. Compared to data-dependent acquisition (DDA), our method more than triples the number of quantified ubiquitinated peptides, to 70,000 identifications in single LC-MS runs. At the same time, it significantly improves robustness and quantification precision, thus for the first time enabling large-scale ubiquitinomics screens. We further report a novel strategy for capturing targets of deubiquitinases (DUBs), by simultaneously recording the dynamics of the ubiquitinome and the proteome and at high temporal resolution upon enzyme inhibition. Applying it to the anticancer target USP7, we accurately time ubiquitination and consequent changes in abundance of more than 8,000 proteins, thereby mapping novel putative USP7 targets. We show a strikingly fast modulation of the ubiquitinome when inhibiting USP7 and discover hundreds of ubiquitination sites that are regulated within minutes. Yet only a small fraction of those are degraded, thus dissecting the degradative and non-degradative scope of USP7 action. Mapping the impact of different USP7 inhibitors on the ubiquitinome, we observe substantial overlap of their signatures, but also marked differences. Our method enables for the first time to rapidly profile the mode-of-action of candidate drugs targeting DUBs or ubiquitin ligases at an unprecedented depth.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (for experiments in Fig. 1a) or the 660 nm assay (all other experiments, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 mg of urea lysate for each replicate was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 45 min and then alkylated with 10 mM CAA for 30 min in the dark before digestion. Proteins were digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix overnight at 37°C (SDC lysates) or at room temperature (urea lysates) with a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. For urea samples, the digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final amount of 0.1% (v/v) and peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak tC18, WAT036790) as follows: a) conditioning with 5 ml of ACN; b) conditioning with 5 ml of 50% ACN/0.1% FA; c) equilibration with 4 x 5 ml of 0.1% TFA; d) loading of the sample, e) washing with 4 x 5 ml 0.1% TFA, f) elution with 2 x 3 ml 50% ACN/0.1% FA. For SDC-lysed samples, the digestion was stopped by adding two volumes of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA, followed by sonication for 1 min using an ultrasonic probe device (energy output ~40%). The peptides were desalted using 30 mg (for <1 mg of input, 8B-S029-TAK) or 100 mg (for up to 2 mg of input, 8B-S029-EBJ) Strata-X-C cartridges (Phenomenex) as follows: a) conditioning with 1 ml/3 ml (for 30 mg and 100 mg cartridges, respectively) of isopropanol; b) conditioning with 1 ml/3 ml of 80% ACN/5% NH4OH; c) equilibration with 1 ml/3 ml of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA; d) loading of the sample; e) washing with 2 x 1 ml/3 ml of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA; f) washing with 1 ml/3 ml of 0.2% TFA; g) elution with 2 x 1 ml/3 ml of 80% ACN/5% NH4OH. The eluates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized overnight. K-GG peptide enrichment was performed as described with some minor modifications18. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 1 ml of cold immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 40 µl of a 25 % slurry of cross-linked K-GG antibody-bead conjugate (corresponding to 10 µl beads/IP) for 2 h at 4°C with end-over-end rotation. Beads were then washed twice with 1 ml of IP buffer and an additional time with cold Milli-Q® water. After removing all the supernatant, the beads were incubated with 200 µl of 0.15 % TFA at room temperature while shaking at 1,400 rpm. After briefly spinning, the supernatant was recovered and desalted using in-house prepared, 200 µl two plug StageTips47 with SDB-RPS (3M EMPORETM, 2241; for SDC) or C18 (3M EMPORETM, 2215; for urea). SDB-RPS StageTips were conditioned with 60 µl isopropanol, 60 µl 80% ACN/5% NH4OH and 100 µl 0.2% TFA. The K-GG enrichment eluate (0.15% TFA) was directly loaded onto the tips followed by two washing steps of 200 µl 0.2% TFA each. Peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/5% NH4OH. For C18, StageTips were equilibrated with 60 µl ACN and 2 x 60 µl 0.1% FA before sample loading. StageTips were washed with 2 x 60 µl or 0.2% TFA and peptides eluted with 60 µl of 50% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptides were Speedvac dried and then resupended in 10 µl of 0.1% FA, of which 4 µl were injected into the mass spectrometer. For total proteome measurements, a 50 µl aliquot of desalted peptide eluate was transferred to a 0.5 ml tube, Speedvac dried and resuspended in 15 µl of 0.1% FA. The peptide concentration was estimated using a NanodropTM device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and adjusted to 0.4 µg/µl with 0.1% FA, of which 2 µl (800 ng) were injected into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files acquired with data-dependent acquisition mode were analyzed using MaxQuant 20, version 1.6.17.0 (maxquant.org), with data-independent acquisition - using DIA-NN 24, version 1.7.17 (https://github.com/vdemichev/DIA-NN). Reviewed UniProt entries (human, SwissProt 11-2020 [9606], 42,395 entries; yeast [559292], SwissProt 11-2020, 6,750 entries and E. coli [83333], SwissProt 01-2021, 4,532 entries) were used as protein sequence database for both MaxQuant and DIA-NN searches. For MaxQuant, the standard settings were used (enzyme = trypsin/P, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and protein N-terminus acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications) and K-GG was added as a variable modification. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) was enabled where indicated. For DIA-NN, one missed cleavage and a maximum of two variable modifications per peptide were allowed (acetylation of protein N-termini, N-terminal excision of methionine and oxidation of methionine). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and K-GG was added in case of ubiquitinomics. Unless specified, all ubiquitinomics data analyses were carried out using library-free analysis mode in DIA-NN. All proteome data analyses were performed in library-free mode. For details on setup of DIA-NN searches, see Figure S11. For library-free searches, ‘deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ was enabled. ‘Match-between-runs’ (MBR) was enabled. This instructs DIA-NN to follow the two-step workflow as described previously 24. Briefly, DIA-NN first generates a spectral library from DIA data using all identifications in the specified raw files. The library generation is performed using both global (experiment-wide) and run specific precursor FDR filters of 1%. This library is then used as a spectral library in a second search. The quantification strategy was set to ‘Robust LC (high precision)’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitinomics, Data independent acquisition, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Usp7

### Affiliations
Evotec München GmbH
Evotec München GmbH Am Klopferspitz 19a 82152 Planegg

### Submitter
Martin Steger

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Steger
Evotec München GmbH Am Klopferspitz 19a 82152 Planegg


