### Accession
PXD014016

### Title
Complexome profiling of heart mitochondria from mouse expressing alternative oxidase

### Description
Ciona intestinalis alternative oxidase (AOX) is a mitochondrial respiratory enzyme that acts as an alternative electron sink for ubiquinol (reduced quinone) when the cytochrome bc1 complex (complex III) and/or cytochrome c oxidase (complex IV) are inhibited or impaired (El-Khoury et al., 2014). AOX thus enables electron flux through the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) and thereby prevents reverse electron transport from succinate dehydrogenase (complex II) to NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) and mitochondrial ROS production, restores redox balance and Krebs cycle activity. As a non-proton-motive enzyme, however, AOX does not directly support ATP production. Previously, a mouse model was generated that despite ubiquitous expression of AOX revealed no deviations from normal physiology and which now is used as model to test mitochondrial disease paradigms (Szibor et al., 2017).

### Sample Protocol
A first dimensional BN electrophoresis gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G 250 (Serva) and the appropriate lane cut into 96 fractions. Proteins in the gel fractions were digested using Trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) essentially as described (Heide et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Proteins were identified using a mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB released in 6/2015 supplemented with Ciona intestinalis alternative oxidase (AOX). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus, oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. The false discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of proteins and peptides was 1%. Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance. Slice numbers of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex III dimer (483 Da), complex IV (213 Da), complex V (538 Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing complex I, III dimer and one copy of complex IV (1676 Da) were used for native mass calibration.  References: Cox J, Mann M (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26: 1367–1372. El-Khoury R, Kemppainen KK, Dufour E, Szibor M, Jacobs HT, Rustin P (2014) Engineering the alternative oxidase gene to better understand and counteract mitochondrial defects: state of the art and perspectives. Br J Pharmacol 171: 2243–2249. Heide H, Bleier L, Steger M, Ackermann J, Dröse S, Schwamb B, Zörnig M, Reichert AS, Koch I, Wittig I, et al. (2012) Complexome profiling identifies TMEM126B as a component of the mitochondrial complex I assembly complex. Cell Metabolism 16: 538–549. Szibor M, Dhandapani PK, Dufour E, Holmström KM, Zhuang Y, Salwig I, Wittig I, Heidler J, Gizatullina Z, Gainutdinov T, et al. (2017) Broad AOX expression in a genetically tractable mouse model does not disturb normal physiology. Dis Model Mech 10: 163–171.

### Publication Abstract
Electron transfer from all respiratory chain dehydrogenases of the electron transport chain (ETC) converges at the level of the quinone (Q) pool. The Q redox state is thus a function of electron input (reduction) and output (oxidation) and closely reflects the mitochondrial respiratory state. Disruption of electron flux at the level of the cytochrome bc<sub>1</sub> complex (cIII) or cytochrome c oxidase (cIV) shifts the Q redox poise to a more reduced state which is generally sensed as respiratory stress. To cope with respiratory stress, many species, but not insects and vertebrates, express alternative oxidase (AOX) which acts as an electron sink for reduced Q and by-passes cIII and cIV. Here, we used Ciona intestinalis AOX xenotopically expressed in mouse mitochondria to study how respiratory states impact the Q poise and how AOX may be used to restore respiration. Particularly interesting is our finding that electron input through succinate dehydrogenase (cII), but not NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (cI), reduces the Q pool almost entirely (&gt;90%) irrespective of the respiratory state. AOX enhances the forward electron transport (FET) from cII thereby decreasing reverse electron transport (RET) and ROS specifically when non-phosphorylating. AOX is not engaged with cI substrates, however, unless a respiratory inhibitor is added. This sheds new light on Q poise signaling, the biological role of cII which enigmatically is the only ETC complex absent from respiratory supercomplexes but yet participates in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Finally, we delineate potential risks and benefits arising from therapeutic AOX transfer.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Alternative oxidase

### Affiliations
BioMediTech & Tampere University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Arvo Ylpön katu 34 (ARVO), FI-33520 Tampere, Finland
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Marten Szibor
BioMediTech & Tampere University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Arvo Ylpön katu 34 (ARVO), FI-33520 Tampere, Finland


