### Accession
PXD014821

### Title
The structure of human thyroglobulin

### Description
Thyroglobulin protein is the precursor of thyroid hormones, which are essential for growth, development and control of metabolism in vertebrates. Hormone synthesis from thyroglobulin (TG) occurs in the thyroid gland via the iodination and subsequent coupling of pairs of tyrosine amino acids, whose positions in TG have not been clearly identified. Tyrosine proximity within TG is thought to enable the coupling reactions but the lack of a three-dimensional structure of TG has prevented mechanistic understanding. Here we determined the structure of full-length human thyroglobulin at ~3.4 Å resolution by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). To enable perturbation experiments we expressed human TG in human HEK cells and showed it to be active in hormone production. We identified all hormogenic tyrosine pairs in the structure and verified them via site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro hormone production assays. Analysis revealed that proximity, flexibility and solvent exposure of the tyrosines are key characteristics of the hormogenic sites. To support the validity of our insights, we engineered the small bacterial protein MBP (maltose binding protein) to produce thyroid hormones with similar efficiency as TG. Finally, our study provides an essential framework to further understand the production and regulation of thyroid hormones, including in thyroid diseases.

### Sample Protocol
A recombinant TG aliquot was buffer-exchanged using a Superose 6 Increase 3.2/300 GE Healthcare column pre-equilibrated with 20 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl and relevant fractions were joined and incubated for 2 h on ice at 0.5 mg/mL with or without 1 mM BS3. The crosslinking reaction was quenched adding 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and the product was injected onto a Superose 6 Increase 3.2/300 column pre-equilibrated in T200 buffer for analysis of the oligomerisation state and further analysed by SDS-PAGE. Gel bands corresponding to crosslinked TG were excised and digested with trypsin (Pierce, Germany) following the in-gel digestion protocol (Shevchenko et al., 2006) with minor modifications accounting to TGs high content of Cysteines. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted and desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  Enrichment of crosslinked peptides was accomplished by Size-exclusion chromatography (Leitner et al., 2012) using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column connected to an Äkta Pure FPLC System (GE Healthcare). Mobile phase consisted of 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid running at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. The earliest five peptide-containing fractions (50 µl each) were collected and dried in a Vacuum concentrator.  LC-MS/MS analysis occurred using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Samples were resuspended in 1.6% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid and injected onto an EASY-Spray column of 50 cm length (Thermo Scientific) running at 300 nl/min. Gradient elution using water with 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was accomplished using optimised gradients for each SEC fraction (from 2% acetonitrile phase  to 45% over 90 min, followed by a linear increase to 55% and 95% over 2.5 min each). Each fraction was analysed in duplicates. The settings of the mass spectrometer were as follows: Data-dependent mode with 3s-Top-speed setting; MS1 scan in Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution over 400 to 1,600 m/z; MS2-scna trigger only on precursors with z = 3-6+; fragmentation by HCD employing a decision tree logic with optimised collision energies (Kolbowski et al., 2017); MS2 scan in Orbitrap at resolution of 30,000; dynamic exclusion was enabled upon single observation for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Generation of fragment spectra peak lists from raw mass spectrometric data used msConvert (version 3.0.11729) (Chamber et al., 2012) operating under default settings. Precursor m/z were recalibrated as described (Lenz et al., 2018). For the crosslink search using Xi (Mendes et al., 2018), TGs Isoform 1 sequence without N terminal signal peptide sequence but extra residues from TEV-cleavage were considered. Decoy sequences were generated by reversing the protein sequence. For the search MS1 and MS2 errors were allowed up to 3 and 10 ppm, respectively. Tryptic peptides (full trypsin specificity) with up to four missed cleavages were allowed. BS3’s reaction specificity was restricted to the side chains of lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, as well as the protein N termini. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed; oxidation on methionine, hydrolysed / aminolysed BS3 from hydrolysis or ammonia quenching on a free cross-linker end were set as variable modifications. Identified crosslinked peptide candidates were filtered to an FDR of 2% on residue-pair-level using XiFDR (Fischer et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Thyroglobulin (TG) is the protein precursor of thyroid hormones, which are essential for growth, development and the control of metabolism in vertebrates<sup>1,2</sup>. Hormone synthesis from TG occurs in the thyroid gland via the iodination and coupling of pairs of tyrosines, and is completed by TG proteolysis<sup>3</sup>. Tyrosine proximity within TG is thought to enable the coupling reaction but hormonogenic tyrosines have not been clearly identified, and the lack of a three-dimensional structure of TG has prevented mechanistic understanding<sup>4</sup>. Here we present the structure of full-length human thyroglobulin at a resolution of approximately 3.5&#xa0;&#xc5;, determined by cryo-electron microscopy. We identified all of the hormonogenic tyrosine pairs in the structure, and verified them using site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro hormone-production assays using human TG expressed in HEK293T cells. Our analysis revealed that the proximity, flexibility and solvent exposure of the tyrosines are the key characteristics of hormonogenic sites. We transferred the reaction sites from TG to an engineered tyrosine donor-acceptor pair in the unrelated bacterial maltose-binding protein (MBP), which yielded hormone production with an efficiency comparable to that of TG. Our study provides a framework to further understand the production and regulation of thyroid hormones.

### Keywords
Thyroxine; t3; t4; thyroid hormone; tyrosine iodination; cryo-em

### Affiliations
TU Berlin, Bioanalytics, J. Rappsilber PhD
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany. Wellcome Center for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Ludwig Sinn

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber, PhD
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany. Wellcome Center for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.


