### Accession
PXD019118

### Title
5224 Payne May 2020 Data Characterize proteins binding to nanoparticle surfaces

### Description
Characterize proteins binding to nanoparticle surfaces.

### Sample Protocol
On-particle samples in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were supplemented with 0.2% Rapigest (Waters) acid labile surfactant. They were then reduced with 10 mM dithiolthreitol at 40C for 30 min and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Approximitly 500 ng of sequencing grade trypsin was added directly to the particles and digestion was allowed to occur overnight at 37C. Following digestion, samples were acidified for 2 hrs with 1.0% TFA to hydrolyze the Rapigest surfactant.  Digested peptides were lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 15 uL of 0.2% formic acid/2% acetonitrile. Each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation either on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC equipped with a 1.7 µm HSS T3 C18 75 µm I.D. X 250 mm reversed-phase column (NanoFlow data) or a Waters MClass UPLC equipped with a 1.7 um BEH C18 1mm I.D. x 10 cm reversed phase column (high flow data).  The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  For nano-flow, 3 µL was injected and peptides were trapped for 3 min on a 5 µm Symmetry C18 180 µm I.D. X 20 mm column at 5 µl/min in 99.9% A.  The analytical column was then switched in-line and a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 40% B was performed over 30 min at 400 nL/min. For high-flow, 10 uL was injected directly onto the column with a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 40% B was performed over 15 min at 80 uL/min. The analytical column was connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) through an electrospray interface operating in a data-dependent mode of acquisition. The instrument was set to acquire a precursor MS scan from m/z 375-1500 at R=120,000 (target AGC 2e5, max IT 50 ms) with MS/MS spectra acquired in the ion trap (target AGC 5e3, max IT 100 ms).  For all experiments, HCD energy settings were 30v and a 20 s dynamic exclusion was employed for previously fragmented precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) and then submitted to independent Mascot searches (Matrix Science) against a SwissProt (Bos Taurus taxonomy) containing both forward and reverse entries of each protein (8,654 forward entries).  Search tolerances were 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da on C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (+15.9949 Da on M) was considered a dynamic mass modifications. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (v4.4, Proteome Software) and scoring thresholds were set to achieve a peptide false discovery rate of 1% using the PeptideProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Nanoparticles used in biological settings are exposed to proteins that adsorb on the surface forming a protein corona. These adsorbed proteins dictate the subsequent cellular response. A major challenge has been predicting what proteins will adsorb on a given nanoparticle surface. Instead, each new nanoparticle and nanoparticle modification must be tested experimentally to determine what proteins adsorb on the surface. We propose that any future predictive ability will depend on large datasets of protein-nanoparticle interactions. As a first step towards this goal, we have developed an automated workflow using a liquid handling robot to form and isolate protein coronas. As this workflow depends on magnetic separation steps, we test the ability to embed magnetic nanoparticles within a protein nanoparticle. These experiments demonstrate that magnetic separation could be used for any type of nanoparticle in which a magnetic core can be embedded. Higher-throughput corona characterization will also require lower-cost approaches to proteomics. We report a comparison of fast, low-cost, and standard, slower, higher-cost liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry to identify the protein corona. These methods will provide a step forward in the acquisition of the large datasets necessary to predict nanoparticle-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Nano particle

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Soderblom
Duke University Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource


