### Accession
PXD021107

### Title
Stage-specific protein regulation during somatic embryo development of Carica papaya L. ‘Golden’

### Description
Somatic embryogenesis is an important biotechnological technique for large-scale propagation of elite genotypes. Correlations of stage-specific compounds associated with somatic embryo development can help elucidate the ontogenesis of Carica papaya L. somatic embryos and improve tissue culture protocols. To identify the stage-specific proteins that are present during the differentiation of C. papaya somatic embryos, proteomic analyses of embryos at the globular, heart, torpedo and cotyledonary stages were performed. Comparative proteomic analysis revealed a total of 801 proteins, 392 of which were classified as differentially accumulated proteins in at least one of the developmental stages. The globular stage presented a higher number of unique proteins (16), 7 of which were isoforms of 60S ribosomal proteins, suggesting high translational activity at the beginning of somatic embryogenesis. Proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism accumulated to a high degree at the early developmental stages, after which they decreased with increasing development, contributing to cell homeostasis in early somatic embryos. On the other hand, a progressive increase in the accumulation of vicilin, late embryogenesis abundant proteins and chloroplastic proteins leading to somatic embryo maturation was observed. Additionally, the differential accumulation of acetylornithine deacetylase and S-adenosylmethionine synthase 2 proteins correlated with increased contents of putrescine and spermidine, suggesting that polyamine metabolism is important to somatic embryo development. Taken together, the results showed that somatic embryo development in C. papaya is regulated by the differential accumulation of proteins, with ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins being more abundant during the early somatic embryo stages, while proteins involved in seed maturation are more abundant during the late stages.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Immature fruits of C. papaya ‘Golden’ were kindly provided by Caliman Agricola Co., which is located in Linhares, Espírito Santo (ES), Brazil (19°23'S 40°40'W), and immature seeds from these fruits were used as explants to induce somatic embryogenic cultures.  Maturation of embryogenic cultures Embryogenic cultures were obtained as described by Vale et al. (2018). After the multiplication phase, the embryogenic cultures were transferred to maturation media according to the methods of Vale et al. (2018). The embryogenic cultures were maintained in a growth chamber in the dark at 25 ± 1 °C for 7 days. Thereafter, the cultures were grown under a 16 h photoperiod provided by GreenPower TLED 20 W WmB lamps(Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV, Amsterdam, Netherlands) at 55 μmol m-2 s-1 for 21 days according (Almeida et al. 2019). The number of somatic embryos in each developmental stage (globular, heart, torpedo and cotyledonary) was determined at 7, 14, 21 and 28 days of maturation using a stereomicroscope and an Axiocam ERc5s 0.5X digital camera (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). The number of somatic embryos was obtained from 10 biological replicates, with each biological replicate comprising one Petri dish containing three colonies of calli. For proteomic analyses, samples at each somatic embryo developmental stage were collected and stored at -80 °C until analysis.  Protein extraction Proteomic analyses were performed using samples (three biological replicates, 300 mg FM each sample) of somatic embryos at the globular, heart, torpedo and cotyledonary stages. The samples were macerated in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The samples were then transferred to microtubes that contained 1 mL of extraction buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Triton X-100, 1% dithiothreitol (DTT, GE Healthcare, Piscataway, USA), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma-Aldrich), and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany), vortexed for 5 min and then chilled on ice for 30 min. The samples were subsequently vortexed for 30 min at 8 °C and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were subsequently collected, and the protein concentrations were measured using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare).  Protein digestion Before the trypsin digestion step, protein samples were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform method to remove any interference from the samples (Nanjo et al. 2012). After the protein precipitation, the samples were resuspended in 7 M urea/2 M thiourea solution for proper suspension. Tryptic protein digestion (1:100 enzyme:protein, V5111, Promega, Madison, USA) was subsequently performed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described by Burrieza et al. (2019). The resulting peptides were quantified according to the A205 nm protein and peptide method using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).  Mass spectrometry analyses Mass spectrometry was performed using a nanoACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatograph (UPLC) coupled to a Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK). Runs consisted of three biological replicates of 1 µg of digested peptides. During separation, the samples were loaded onto a nanoACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 5 μm trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μL min-1 for 3 min and then onto a nanoACQUITY M-Class HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed-phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL min-1, with a column temperature of 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia; Fairfield,  USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution started with 5% B, which then increased from 5 to 40% B until 91.12 min and then from 40 to 99% B until 95.12 min, after which it was maintained at 99% until 99.12 min. The elution then decreased to 5% B until 101.12 min, after which it was maintained at 5% B until the end of run, at 117.00 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), at 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility (HDMSE), and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode; ion mobility wave velocity program starting at 800 m s-1 and ending at 500 m s-1. The transfer collision energy increased from 25 to 55 V in high-energy mode, the cone and capillary voltages were 40 and 2800 V, respectively, the pressure of the nano-flow gas was 0.5 bar, the purge gas flow rate was 150 L h-1, and the source temperature was 100 °C. For the time-of-flight (TOF) parameters, the scan time was set to 0.6 s in continuous mode, with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol μL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra were subsequently acquired by MassLynx v4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and database searching were performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS; v3.0.2; Waters) and ISOQuant workflow software (Distler et al. 2014; Distler et al. 2016). The spectra were processed by PLGS using a low-energy threshold of 150 (counts), an elevated energy threshold of 50, and an intensity threshold of 750. In addition, the analysis was performed using the following parameters: two missed cleavages, a minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to 3, a minimum fragment ion per protein equal to 7, a minimum peptide per protein equal to 2, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to a maximum of 1%, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. The proteomic data were processed against the information of the C. papaya protein databank from Phytozome v12.1 (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html). Comparative label-free quantification analyses were performed via ISOQuant software v1.7, with previously described settings and algorithms used (Distler et al. 2014; Distler et al. 2016). The protein identification parameters in ISOQuant were set as follows: an FDR of 1%, a peptide score greater than six, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, and at least two peptides per protein. Label-free quantification was estimated using the TOP3 quantification approach (Silva et al. 2006), followed by multidimensional normalization implemented within ISOQuant (Distler et al. 2014). The protein sequences were ultimately functionally characterized by OmicsBox software (www.biobam.com/omicsbox/). Those sequences associated with biological processes not identified by OmicsBox were manually complemented with online BLAST tools of the UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/blast/), NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and Phytozome (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html#) databases. The data were analyzed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) (P < 0.05) followed by the Student–Newman–Keuls (SNK) test using R software (R Core Team 2014). P-values were corrected by the Benjamin-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Principal component analysis (PCA) of the differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) was performed using the ggbiplot package of R software (R Core Team 2014). Moreover, a heatmap of the 68 DAPs presenting a pattern of variation that was associated with the progression of somatic embryo development was plotted using the HemI toolkit (Deng et al. 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis is an important biotechnological technique for large-scale propagation of elite genotypes. Identifying stage-specific compounds associated with somatic embryo development can help elucidate the ontogenesis of Carica papaya L. somatic embryos and improve tissue culture protocols. To identify the stage-specific proteins that are present during the differentiation of C. papaya somatic embryos, proteomic analyses of embryos at the globular, heart, torpedo and cotyledonary developmental stages were performed. Mass spectrometry data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD021107. Comparative proteomic analyses revealed a total of 801 proteins, with 392 classified as differentially accumulated proteins in at least one of the developmental stages. The globular-staged presented a higher number of unique proteins (16), and 7 were isoforms of 60S ribosomal proteins, suggesting high translational activity at the beginning of somatic embryogenesis. Proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism accumulated to a high degree at the early developmental stages and then decreased with increasing development, and they contributed to cell homeostasis in early somatic embryos. A progressive increase in the accumulation of vicilin, late embryogenesis abundant proteins and chloroplastic proteins that lead to somatic embryo maturation was also observed. The differential accumulation of acetylornithine deacetylase and S-adenosylmethionine synthase 2 proteins was correlated with increases in putrescine and spermidine contents, which suggests that both polyamines should be tested to determine whether they increase the conversion rates of globular- to cotyledonary-staged somatic embryos. Taken together, the results showed that somatic embryo development in C. papaya is regulated by the differential accumulation of proteins, with ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins more abundant during the early somatic embryo stages and seed maturation proteins more abundant during the late stages.

### Keywords
Somatic embryogenesis, Polyamines, C. papaya, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia  Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro Av. Alberto Lamego 2000 Campos dos Goytacazes-RJ, Brazil 28013-602
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia  Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro Av. Alberto Lamego 2000 Campos dos Goytacazes-RJ, Brazil 28013-602


