### Accession
PXD021014

### Title
Compartmentalized proteomic profiling outlines the crucial role of the Classical secretory pathway during recombinant protein production in Chinese hamster ovary cells

### Description
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells have been widely employed for production of recombinant proteins (RP) for research and therapeutic purposes. Indeed, this expression system was used for production of most of approved antibodies (84%) in 2015-2018 period. The success of this cell line for RP production relies on several advantages that comprise but are not limited to a safety viral profile, human compatible glycosylation, development of specific culture mediums and supplements, availability of sub-lines with different capabilities and the improvement in design of DNA vectors and selection strategies that allows to obtain higher producer clones in an easier way. Given the high importance of this cell line, a deeper knowledge of their biology through genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic studies has been gained in the last years. These studies have aid in the exploration of molecular and cellular mechanisms that could explain cell behavior and to propose new targets to improve production and quality of RP. Some of these transcriptomic and proteomic profiles have been acquired under low temperature, butyrate addition, hyperosomotic pressure, protein degradation phenotypes, cellular engineering, production stability and productive phenotypes. In case of productive phenotypes, several whole cell proteomic studies have been previously reported, where cell populations secreting fusion proteins, monoclonal antibodies (mAb) and antibody fragments, at different specific productivity (Qp), have been compared.  However, because of this information has been obtained from whole cell homogenates, highlighted categories represent abundant proteins and have limited coverage of proteome from some organelles such as the classical secretory pathway. Due to the central role of this pathway in protein and lipid metabolism, organelle biogenesis, cell cycle, apoptosis and proliferation, and to be recognized as a bottleneck for protein secretion in mammalian cells, its characterization through subcellular proteomics represents a promising strategy for identification of key targets. In fact, over-expression of some proteins from endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi Apparatus has increased the Qp of HEK293 and CHO cells producing different RP.  Recently, proteomic reports of subcellular compartments from a variety of cells have been extensively used to study the protein composition of organelles, protein dynamics and discovering of novel proteins involved in the secretion pathway. Thus, this approach was applied to the secretory pathway of CHO cells to identify novel proteins linked to Qp in the present study. Differential proteomics from all remaining compartments was also carried out, giving new lights over other cellular mechanisms associated to the higher producer phenotype. The novel differentially expressed proteins (DEP) found will improve the engineering strategies of CHO cells that will have a positive impact on titer and quality of RP.  Cell lines CHO DP-12 clone #1933 CRL-12444 and clone #1934 CRL-12445, which secrete a mAb against human interleukin 8 (IL-8), were used as cell models of recombinant CHO cell lines producing the same RP at different Qp. Our goal is that the processing of raw proteomics data and the identification and classification of DEP belonging to the classical secretory pathway will allow to propose a model by which the increase in the productivity of CHO cells has been associated with the deregulation of proteins from this pathway that show differential expression among the clones under study.  This strategy of subcellular proteomics allowed us to identify a large number of new targets and cell pathways with respect to previous whole cell proteomic studies, which can improve the understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind RP production and provide the basis to design new sub-lines with stronger capabilities.

### Sample Protocol
The present proteomic study employed two recombinant CHO cell lines growing in suspension, sampled at exponential growth phase and subjected to subcellular fractionation. Proteins were recovered from each fraction after acetone precipitation, dried and subjected to proteomic processing. Cell lines CRL-12444 and CRL-12445 were cultured in CDM4CHO medium supplemented with 6 mM stable glutamine, 0.002 mg/mL insulin and 200 nM methotrexate, at 37ºC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere in a humidified incubator, using 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks with a fill volume of 20%, and agitated at 60 rpm. Two biological replicates, consisting each of 9 individual flasks grouped, were employed for differential proteomics. Cell density and viability were recorded every 24 h by cell counting in a Newbauer chamber using the trypan blue dye exclusion method.  Collected cells were centrifuged, washed three times in phosphate buffer at 4ºC, carefully suspended in 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 at a 3-6 x 107 cells/mL density, and incubated for 30 min on ice, with inversions of tubes every 10 min. Before homogenization, 1 mM PMSF and 10% (v/v) SigmaFast Protease Inhibitor Cocktail were added to the cell suspension. Cells were transferred to a Dounce homogenizer and broken up with 25 strokes, on ice. Immediately, cold sucrose was added to restore osmolarity at a final concentration of 0.25 M. Homogenates were immediately subjected to differential and isopycnic subcellular fractionation.  Differential centrifugation was done by centrifugation of homogenates at different times and centrifugal forces at 4ºC. Nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal pellets were collected at 3,000 x g for 10 minutes, 9,000 x g for 15 minutes and 100,000 x g for one hour, respectively. Supernatant from last centrifugation step was named as the cytosol.  Subsequently, nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal pellets were diluted in 0.25 M sucrose in HEPES buffer, deposited on top of sucrose gradients for isopycnic separation and centrifuged at 154,693 x g for 3 hours at 4ºC. Nuclear and mitochondrial suspensions were separated in a 30-60% sucrose gradient, while microsomal preparations were separated in a 10-60% sucrose gradient. Visible bands were collected from each gradient for further protein precipitation, comprising a total of 9 fractions coming from nuclear, mitochondrial and microsomal gradients (three bands from each gradient). Thus, 10 subcellular fractions (9 bands from gradients plus the cytosol) were obtained from each biological replicate of each cell line, adding a total of 40 samples for proteomic processing.      Proteins from all subcellular fractions were recovered by acetone precipitation. In brief, NaCl was first added at 100 mM, followed by addition of 4 volumes of 80% (v/v) cold acetone, mixing and overnight incubation at -20ºC. After centrifugation, protein precipitate was washed twice with cold acetone and air dried.  Approximately, 200 µg of protein pellet were solubilized in 50 µL guanidinium buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 5 mM Tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine, 10 mM chloracetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and incubated at 99 °C for 10 min. After measure of protein concentration, 100 µg were digested overnight (12 hours) using trypsin. TFA was added at 0.5% (v/v) and 20 µg of digested peptides were stage tipped. Liquid chromatography was performed on a capillary-flow UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (capLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a 15 cm C18 easy spray column 50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm Acclaim PepMap C18 column at flow rates of 1.2 µL/min (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using a stepped gradient going from 3% to 45% of acetonitrile over 120 min, the samples were sprayed into a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated in Top 12 Data dependent acquisition mode. First of a fullscan was collected at 60,000 resolution; AGC Target 3.0e6; maximum injection time 50 ms, followed by up to 12 MS2 scans at 15,000 resolution, maximum injection time 30 ms, HCD collision energy set to 28% and dynamic exclusion set to 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
Settings for MaxQuant analysis were chosen as follows: carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation of methionine residues were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively; trypsin as enzyme while allowing one missed cleavage and the FDR was set to 1%. Data were searched against the CHO proteome from Uniprot (UP000001075) while including a list of known contaminants. Tolerance of 20 ppm was set for first search mass and MS/MS. Before analysis of proteomic data, protein groups marked as contaminants and identified in reverse database and by PTM were discarded. Protein groups were reduced by selecting the protein member with the highest number of unique peptides, razor plus unique peptides, total peptides, full length or position in group, in this same order of priority. The sequences from identified proteins were aligned against Mus musculus reference proteome UP000000589, due to a deeper knowledge and better annotation status, using BLAST+ v2.2.24. Best hit for each protein was selected for subsequent data analysis. All subsequent analyses of differential expression were done individually for each subcellular compartment in R language (v3.5.1). Data were normalized by Normalyzer v1.1.1 and the two best performance methods (VSN-G, Loess-G or RLR-G) from 12 provided by this software were selected for each subset of data. Before imputation of missing values from each dataset, their density and cumulative fraction were plotted versus log2 transformed intensities, by using Differential Enrichment analysis of Proteomics data (v1.4.0), dplyr (v0.7.7) and ggplot2 (v3.1.0) libraries. This distribution was compared with that of proteins without missing values in order to choose the most appropriate imputation method. Missing values in each subset data were imputed by QRILC method from imputeLCMD package (v2.0) using default parameters. Protein expression was compared using Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) and Reproducibility-Optimized Test Statistic (ROTS). A cut-off of two-fold change and FDR ≤ 0.05 were used in the SAM package, while B=1000, K=2000 and the same FDR were used for ROTS. DEP were mapped and classified by BlastKOALA from Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) v14.0 and the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, EASE < 0.05) v6.8.  Defined sets of genes were statistically compared using javaGSEA desktop application. Mus musculus Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) GO terms were obtained from prebuilt gene sets in GO2MSIG. Collapse dataset to gene symbols and metric for ranking genes were set to “false” and “diff of classes”, respectively. FDR < 0.25 was selected as cut-off value for statistical significant gene sets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Classical secretory pathway, Proteomics, Chinese hamster ovary cell

### Affiliations
Laboratorio C036, Departamento Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Ciudad Universitaria, Ciudad de México, México
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,  Cd. Universitaria, Coyoacán, Ciudad de México

### Submitter
Saumel Perez Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Norma Adriana Valdez Cruz
Laboratorio C036, Departamento Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Ciudad Universitaria, Ciudad de México, México


