### Accession
PXD010047

### Title
Tomosyn is upregulated by IgE and functions as a PKC-regulated fusion clamp in mast cell degranulation

### Description
The regulation of soluble N ethylmaleimide sensitive factor attachment receptor (SNARE) mediated membrane fusion by upstream signaling events is poorly understood. Here we show that the SNARE binding protein tomosyn-1 negatively regulates type I IgE Fc receptor (FcRI) induced degranulation of mast cells. After FcRI stimulation, tomosyn-1 (also STXBP5) was phosphorylated on serine and threonine residues and dissociated from the SNARE protein syntaxin 4 (STX4), followed by association with syntaxin 3 (STX3). Protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) prevented these activities. We identified PKC as the major kinase required for tomosyn-1 threonine phosphorylation and for the regulation of the interaction with STXs. Incubation with high IgE concentrations induced tomosyn-1 expression in cultured mast cells. In basophils from allergic patients with normal total IgE serum titers tomosyn-1 expression was lower than in patients with high IgE titers who expressed tomosyn-1 to the same extent as non-allergic subjects. Our findings identified tomosyn-1 as a negative regulator of mast cell degranulation that required PKC to switch its interaction with STX partners during fusion. The IgE-mediated upregulation of tomosyn-1 in allergic patients may represent a counter-regulatory mechanism to limit disease development.

### Sample Protocol
BMMCs lysates from resting or IgE-stimulated cells were immunoprecipitated in triplicates with mouse anti-tomosyn. Proteins on beads were digested overnight at 37°C in 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/mL; Promega). The resulting peptides were sequentially extracted with 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were acidified with 0.1% formic acid. All digests were analyzed by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy nano-LC Proxeon 1000 system (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
For the peptide and protein identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) and with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following variable modifications (2 maximum per peptide) were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (N-term of protein). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. The SwissProt database (02/16) with the Mus musculus taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Abundances of proteins were measured by the precursor ions area node of Proteome Discoverer 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ige fc receptor, Phosphorylations, Immunoprepicipitations, Mouse, Q-exactive plus, Mast cells

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Dr. Ulrich Blank Department  chair and team leader Mast cells and Basophils in Inflammation and Remodeling Inserm U 1149 & CNRS ERL8252 Université Paris-Diderot Faculté de Médecine Site X. Bichat 16, rue Henri Huchard F-75870 Paris Cedex 18 FRANCE

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Blank
Dr. Ulrich Blank Department  chair and team leader Mast cells and Basophils in Inflammation and Remodeling Inserm U 1149 & CNRS ERL8252 Université Paris-Diderot Faculté de Médecine Site X. Bichat 16, rue Henri Huchard F-75870 Paris Cedex 18 FRANCE


