### Accession
PXD019343

### Title
A multi-omics approach unravels new toxins with potential antimicrobial, antiviral and antitumoral activities in the venom of Acanthoscurria rondoniae

### Description
The Araneae order is considered one of the most successful group among venomous animals in the world. An important factor for this success is the production of venoms, a refined biological fluid rich in proteins, short peptides and cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs). These toxins may present pharmacologically relevant biological actions, as antimicrobial, antiviral and anticancer activities, for instance. Therefore, there is an increasing interest in the exploration of venom toxins for therapeutic reasons, such as drug development. However, the process of peptide sequencing and mainly the evaluation of potential biological activities of these peptides is laborious, considering the low yield of venom extraction and the high variability of toxins present in spider venoms. Here we show a robust methodology for identification, sequencing, and initial screening of potential bioactive peptides found in the venom of Acanthoscurria rondoniae. This methodology consists in a multi-omics approach involving proteomics, peptidomics and transcriptomics analyses allied to in silico predictions of antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral and anticancer activities. Through the application of this strategy, a total of 92,889 venom gland transcripts were assembled and 84 novel toxins were identified at the protein level, including 7 short peptides and 10 fully sequenced CRPs (belonging to 7 toxin families). In silico analysis revealed that 7 CRPs families have potential antimicrobial or antiviral activities, while 2 CRPs and four short peptides are potentially anticancer. Taken together, our results demonstrate an effective multi-omics strategy for the discovery of new toxins and in silico screening of potential bioactivities. This strategy may be useful in toxin discovery, as well as in the screening of activities for the vast diversity of molecules produced by venomous animals.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic digestion For proteomics analyses, a crude venom pool aliquot of 50 mg of proteins was digested with trypsin. For peptidomics analyses, five out of the six aliquots were submitted to proteolytic digestion using a different enzyme for each aliquot. The vacuum-dried aliquots were dissolved to 50 µL of digestion buffer according to the enzyme: NH4HCO3 50 mM for trypsin and Asp-N; phosphate buffer 50 mM for Glu-C; Tris/HCl 100 mM, CaCl2 10 mM for chymotrypsin and Tris/HCl 100 mM, CaCl2 0.5 mM for thermolysin. The sixth aliquot was directly dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis to characterize the toxins in their native (mature) forms.  To digest the toxins, volumes of 25 µL of 0.2% Rapigest surfactant (Waters, MA, USA) were added to each sample, which were incubated at 80 ºC for 15 minutes. Samples were reduced with 2.5 µL of DTT 100 mM for 30 minutes at 60 ºC and then alkylated with 2.5 µL of IAA 300 mM for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. After reduction and alkylation, the enzymes were added in an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated at 37 ºC for 30 minutes. Except for thermolysin, in which a ratio of 1:250 was used and the incubation was performed at 75 ºC for 15 minutes. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% to stop the digestions. Samples were filtered using Ultrafree -MC PVDF 0,22 µm filters (Millipore), vacuum-dried and stored at -20 ºC until MS analysis. Mass Spectrometry: peptidomics For peptidomics analysis, digested and native peptide fractions were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solution A). Aliquots of 1 L were automatically injected by a nano chromatography EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) into a 15 cm x 50 µm Acclaim PepMap™ C18 column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 7-45% of solution B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min for 60 min. Spray voltage was set at 2.5 kV and the mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1,500 followed by MS/MS acquisition using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) of the five most intense ions from the MS scan. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 70,000 and 17,500 resolution (at 200 m/z), respectively. Unassigned and +1 charge states were not subjected to fragmentation. The maximum injection times and AGC targets were set to 25 ms and 3E6 for full MS, and 40 ms and 1E5 for MS/MS. The minimum signal threshold to trigger fragmentation event, isolation window and stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) were set to, respectively, 2.5E4 cps, 1.4 m/z and 26, 28 and 30. A dynamic peak exclusion was applied to avoid the same m/z selection for the next 5 seconds. All samples were analyzed in duplicates. Mass Spectrometry: proteomics  The proteomics analysis of the digested crude venom pool was performed on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Five mL of peptide samples were loaded online in a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 µm particles, 180 µm x 20 mm length; Waters) for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 µL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid). The mixtures of trapped peptides were subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7 µm particles, 75 mm x 150 mm; Waters) over 90 min at 275 nL/min. Data were acquired in the data independent acquisition mode HDMSE with ion mobility separation in the m/z range of 50-2000 and in the resolution mode. Peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) and energies were alternated between 4 eV and a ramp of 15-65 eV for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.25 s (Abreu et al., 2017; Pedroso et al., 2017). The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. For lock mass correction, Glu-Fibrinopeptide B (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled for 0.5 s every 60 s. The venom pool was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative peptidomics and proteomics For quantitative peptidomics, mass spectrometry raw data of the native venom peptides were loaded in Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). Briefly, a reference run for the duplicates was automatically selected. The retention times of precursor ions were processed for alignment, peak picking and normalized to the reference run using default parameters. The normalized data was exported from Progenesis QI for proteomics in .csv format and further analysis were made in Microsoft Excel (Microsoft), where precursor ions with an intensity below 5.0x105 or with redundant m/z values were excluded from subsequent analysis. Quantitative proteomics was also performed in Progenesis QI for proteomics with the same processing parameters. After processing, a .mgf file of all MS/MS spectra was exported to PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) for protein identification (as described in “Toxin Sequencing”). The identification results were exported back to Progenesis as a .xml file. Venom proteins were quantified by the average signal intensity of the three most intense tryptic peptides of each protein (Silva et al., 2006). Only proteins identified with a minimum of three peptides and in at least two of the three replicates were considered for further analysis.  Toxin sequencing  Mass spectrometry raw data of digested venom fractions were loaded and processed in PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc.). De novo analysis was performed according to the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.025 Da, maximum of one non-specific cleavage, maximum of 2 missed cleavages and enzyme set according to the sample. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and Asn/Gln deamidation, Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Database searches were performed with the same parameters of de novo analysis against the previously built A. rondoniae venom gland transcriptome (92,939 sequences and 251 common contaminants) utilizing de novo sequenced peptides with average local confidence (ALC) scores ≥50%. Post-translational modifications and homology searches were performed through PEAKS PTM and SPIDER modules, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by the decoy fusion method (Zhang et al., 2012) and set to a maximum of 1%. Mature toxin validation  Primary structures of toxins identified by de novo and database search were submitted to analysis on the Spider|ProHMM module of ArachnoServer 3.0 (Pineda et al., 2018) in order to predict the cleavage sites of signal peptide and propeptide, ultimately resulting in the prediction of its mature sequences. The predicted mature sequences were then confronted with the sequences obtained experimentally, and if a correspondence was observed, the toxin was considered fully sequenced by LC-MS/MS. Mature sequences were also submitted to analysis in the MS-Product module of ProteinProspector v5.22 (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm), which provides theoretical fragmentations and precursor ion m/z values. The theoretical m/z values of precursor ions with charges ranging from +2 to +9 were compared to those assigned in Progenesis QI for proteomics and also manually validated in the raw data of the native toxins through Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). If a peak corresponding to a m/z value of a mature toxin was found in the raw data and the consensus sequence was supported by MS/MS data, the presence of the toxin in the venom was validated.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Araneae</i> order is considered one of the most successful groups among venomous animals in the world. An important factor for this success is the production of venoms, a refined biological fluid rich in proteins, short peptides and cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs). These toxins may present pharmacologically relevant biological actions, as antimicrobial, antiviral and anticancer activities, for instance. Therefore, there is an increasing interest in the exploration of venom toxins for therapeutic reasons, such as drug development. However, the process of peptide sequencing and mainly the evaluation of potential biological activities of these peptides are laborious, considering the low yield of venom extraction and the high variability of toxins present in spider venoms. Here we show a robust methodology for identification, sequencing, and initial screening of potential bioactive peptides found in the venom of <i>Acanthoscurria rondoniae</i>. This methodology consists in a multiomics approach involving proteomics, peptidomics and transcriptomics analyses allied to <i>in silico</i> predictions of antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and anticancer activities. Through the application of this strategy, a total of 92,889 venom gland transcripts were assembled and 84 novel toxins were identified at the protein level, including seven short peptides and 10 fully sequenced CRPs (belonging to seven toxin families). <i>In silico</i> analysis suggests that seven CRPs families may have potential antimicrobial or antiviral activities, while two CRPs and four short peptides are potentially anticancer. Taken together, our results demonstrate an effective multiomics strategy for the discovery of new toxins and <i>in silico</i> screening of potential bioactivities. This strategy may be useful in toxin discovery, as well as in the screening of possible activities for the vast diversity of molecules produced by venomous animals.

### Keywords
Antitumoral peptides, Cysteine-rich peptides, Proteomics, Antiviral peptides, Peptidomics, 33 antimicrobial peptides, Multi-omics, Acanthoscurria rondoniae

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of Sao Paulo
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of Sao Paulo


