### Accession
PXD012631

### Title
Yeast Heatshock SILAC LC-MSMS

### Description
Yeast cells were incubated at 25˚C, unless otherwise stated.  For SILAC, cells were grown in light labeled (0.03mg/ml Lys0, 0.02mg/ml Arg0) or heavy labeled (0.03mg/ml Lys4, 0.02mg/ml Arg6) amino acid in synthetic defined medium with 2% dextrose for at least 7 generations. heat shock was performed in a shaking water bath at 45˚C for 20 minutes before harvest. Equal OD600 of cells from both labels were collected at mid log phase (OD¬600=0.8-1) by centrifugation at 3,220xg for 5 minutes at 4˚C, washed twice with cold 1×TBS (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl), mixed, and re-suspended in equal volume of 2×Native lysis buffer (200mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 2mM PMSF, 2×Protease Inhibitor Cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich), 2mM 1,10-Phenanthroline). Re-suspended cells were snap-frozen drop by drop in liquid nitrogen. The resulting cells pellets were lysed by cyro-grinding in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle mounted on an electric driver (OPS Diagnostics). The lysate was thawed on ice and further diluted 3 times by adding ice-cold 1×Native lysis buffer and 1% NP40 (final concentration). Total cell lysate was pre-cleared twice by centrifugation at 1,000×g at 4˚C for 15min. Pellet fraction was separated by centrifugation at 16,100×g at 4˚C for 15min. The insoluble protein pellet was washed twice with ice-cold 1×Native lysis buffer containing 1% NP40 and re-solubilized in 1×Laemmli Sample Buffer (62.5mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 2% SDS, 10% Glycerol). Protein concentrations were determined by using BioRad DC™ Protein Assay.

### Sample Protocol
200μg of protein samples from pellet, supernatant or total cell lysate fractions were in-gel trypsin digested as previously described.51 The resulting peptides were desalted with high-capacity C18 (Phenomenex) STAGE Tips before an offline high pH reversed-phase chromatography fractionation as previously described.52 Fractions were collected at 2 minutes intervals. The resulting fractions were pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 8 fractions. Each fraction was then dried in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf). Mass spectra were acquired on an Impact II (Bruker) on-line coupled to either an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) or a nanoElute (Bruker) liquid chromatography (LC). The LC was equipped with a 2-cm-long, 100-μm-inner diameter trap column packed with 5 μm-diameter Aqua C-18 beads (Phenomenex) and a 40-cm-long, 50-μm-inner diameter fused silica analytical column packed with 1.9 μm-diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch).  Samples were ran with a 120 minutes gradient from 10% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile in water) to 17% Buffer B during the first 45 min, then Buffer B was increased to 35% by 90 min and to 80% at 95 min.  The scanning range was from m/z 200 Th to m/z 2000 Th. The data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode was set to fragment the 17 most abundant ions with the exclusion window of 0.4 minutes.

### Data Protocol
SGD_orf_trans_all_20110203 released from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (yeastgenome.org) with common contaminants with the latest version of MaxQaunt software when the data was generated (version 1.5.2.8. The searches were done using the default software settings, plus match-between-runs and re-quantification and an FDR set below 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Stress granules (SGs) are stress-induced membraneless condensates that store non-translating mRNA and stalled translation initiation complexes. Although metazoan SGs are dynamic compartments where proteins can rapidly exchange with their surroundings, yeast SGs seem largely static. To gain a better understanding of yeast SGs, we identified proteins that sediment after heat shock using mass spectrometry. Proteins that sediment upon heat shock are biased toward a subset of abundant proteins that are significantly enriched in intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). Heat-induced SG localization of over 80 proteins were confirmed using microscopy, including 32 proteins not previously known to localize to SGs. We found that several IDRs were sufficient to mediate SG recruitment. Moreover, the dynamic exchange of IDRs can be observed using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching, whereas other components remain immobile. Lastly, we showed that the IDR of the Ubp3 deubiquitinase was critical for yeast SG formation. This work shows that IDRs can be sufficient for SG incorporation, can remain dynamic in vitrified SGs, and can play an important role in cellular compartmentalization upon stress.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Yeast, Heatshock, Stress granule

### Affiliations
Michael Smith Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
UBC

### Submitter
Mang Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
Michael Smith Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


