### Accession
PXD002239

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Network Analysis in the Sea Urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus Reveals New Candidates in Egg Activation

### Description
Fertilization triggers a dynamic symphony of molecular transformations induced by a rapid rise in intracellular calcium. Most prominent are surface alterations, metabolic activation, cytoskeletal reorganization, and cell cycle reentry. While the activation process appears to be broadly evolutionarily conserved, and protein phosphorylation is known to play a key role, the signaling networks mediating the response to fertilization are not well described. To address this gap, we performed a time course phosphoproteomic analysis of egg activation in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, a system that offers biochemical tractability coupled with exquisite synchronicity. By coupling large-scale phosphopeptide enrichment with unbiased quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified striking changes in global phosphoprotein patterns at 2- and 5- min post fertilization as compared to unfertilized eggs. Overall, we mapped 8796 distinct phosphosite modifications on 2833 phosphoproteins, of which 15% were differentially regulated in early egg activation. Activated kinases were identified by phosphosite mapping, while enrichment analyses revealed conserved signaling cascades not previously associated with egg activation. This work represents the most comprehensive study of signaling associated with egg activation to date, providing both novel mechanistic insights and a valuable resource for the broader research community.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Sample preparation California purple sea urchins (S. purpuratus) were collected off the Goleta Pier in Goleta, CA and maintained in a chilled (12oC) open system seawater system with a diet of Macrocystis. Gametes were collected by intracoelomic injection of 0.55 M KCl and eggs were dejellied, washed, fertilized and cultured as described. Synchronicity was evaluated microscopically and samples of all replicas were cultured to ensure proper development through gastrulation to pluteus stage. At various times post sperm addition, fertilized eggs were collected by hand centrifugation, resuspended in 5 volumes of ice cold buffer G (see below), and quickly washed 3X by gentle resuspension and centrifugation using 5 volumes of buffer G each time.  As much buffer as possible was removed after the final wash. The dense egg suspension was transferred to a pre-chilled glass homogenizer. Phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP; Roche, Inc) and protease inhibitors (cOmplete; Roche, Inc) were added according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The eggs and zygotes were manually disrupted by homogenization using a Teflon pestle and monitored microscopically for lysis. The lysates were centrifuged at 4oC for 15 min at 10,000 g using a Sorvall SS34 rotor. The soluble supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged again as a final clearing step. Small aliquots of the cell free lysates were immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80oC. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Assay (Pierce Endogen, Inc). The composition of Buffer G was optimized based on considerations of the osmotic balance and cytosolic pH in unfertilized (pH 6.9) and fertilized (pH 7.4) eggs. Buffer G is similar to buffers that support protein and DNA synthesis in a sea urchin cell free system. The basic composition of Buffer G was: 40 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 300 mM glycine, 100 mM potassium gluconate, 2% glycerol, 50 mM HEPES, 10 mM EGTA. In our experiments, buffer G was prepared at pH 6.9 for unfertilized egg extract preparation and at pH 7.4 for that of post sperm addition extract preparation, using KOH to adjust the pH of the pre chilled buffers. In addition, the pH 6.9 buffer contained 4.19 mM CaCl2 while the pH 7.4 buffer contained 8.56 mM CaCl2.  2.3 Protein digestion  Gametes from a single female and a single male were used for one fertilization event. Three independent biological replicates were conducted, each with a different female-male pairing. Proteins were isolated from unfertilized (UF) eggs, and zygotes at 2 min- and 5 min-post fertilization (PF2, PF5). Proteins (2 mg/mL) were equilibrated in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 then reduced in 5 mM DTT for 1 hr and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight using a protein to trypsin ratio of 20:1. The peptides were desalted on Toptip C-18 columns (Glygen) and lyophilized to dryness.   2.4 HILIC separation and phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptides were processed as described previously [20]. Briefly, a 2.0 x 150-mm 5 µm particle TSKgel Amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system was used for first dimension separation. Twenty fractions were collected and one tenth of each was injected directly into an HPLC-coupled mass spectrometer (see below) to determine the global proeteome. The remainder of each sample was lyophilized to dryness before the phosphopeptide enrichment process using TiO2 coated magnetic beads (Pierce). 2.5 Second dimension separation and mass spectrometry analysis Peptides were loaded and separated in 2.5 cm reverse phase micro-capillary liquid trap columns packed with 5 m Luna C18 stationary phase (Phenomenex) and a 10 cm analytical column packed with 3 m Luna C18 stationary phase using the EASY-nLC system (Proxeon). The organic gradient was driven by the EASY-nLC system using 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as buffers A and 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. The separation was performed in 90 mins using a gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were electrosprayed from a nanospray ion source (Proxeon) directly into an Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) and subjected to data dependent fragmentation using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) for the TiO2 enriched phosphopeptides and using collision induced dissociation (CID) for regular peptides without enrichment as previously described.

### Data Protocol
2.6 Protein and peptide identification Peptide spectra were submitted for database searching and quantitation using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5; http://maxquant.org/) [24] using a UniProt/SwissProt protein database FASTA file modified to contain common contaminants such as BSA (Swiss-Prot accession number P02769). Search parameters were set to allow for two missed cleavage sites, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of STY residues. For HCD, MS/MS peaks were de-isotoped and searched using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm.  Stringent 1% false discovery rate thresholds were used to filter all candidate peptide, protein and phosphosite matches.  2.7 Normalization of phosphosites Raw intensities of phosphorylated peptides were extracted from the MaxQuant evidence files using a perl script.  For each biological replicate, peptide intensity was collapsed to a specific post translational modification site as opposed to a specific sequence. Single, double and multisite phosphorylations candidates were treated as different entities and scored accordingly. To be included in the analysis, a given modification had to be seen in at least one time point with two measurements. The entire phospho expression dataset (encompassing all 3 time points) was normalized using global loess normalization in the R normalizer package.

### Publication Abstract
Fertilization triggers a dynamic symphony of molecular transformations induced by a rapid rise in intracellular calcium. Most prominent are surface alterations, metabolic activation, cytoskeletal reorganization, and cell-cycle reentry. While the activation process appears to be broadly evolutionarily conserved, and protein phosphorylation is known to play a key role, the signaling networks mediating the response to fertilization are not well described. To address this gap, we performed a time course phosphoproteomic analysis of egg activation in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, a system that offers biochemical tractability coupled with exquisite synchronicity. By coupling large-scale phosphopeptide enrichment with unbiased quantitative MS, we identified striking changes in global phosphoprotein patterns at 2- and 5-min postfertilization as compared to unfertilized eggs. Overall, we mapped 8796 distinct phosphosite modifications on 2833 phosphoproteins, of which 15% were differentially regulated in early egg activation. Activated kinases were identified by phosphosite mapping, while enrichment analyses revealed conserved signaling cascades not previously associated with egg activation. This work represents the most comprehensive study of signaling associated with egg activation to date, suggesting novel mechanisms that can be experimentally tested and providing a valuable resource for the broader research community. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002239 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002239).

### Keywords
Calcium / egg activation / network analysis / phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Hongbo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
University of Toronto


