### Accession
PXD035014

### Title
A molecular insight into fluoride toxicity in skeletal muscle using invitro C2C12 and in vivo C57BL/6 mice models

### Description
Fluoride toxicity in multiple organs has been extensively reported in several decades of research. In-depth study coverage is available on teeth and bone tissues. But studies addressing skeletal muscle fluorosis are scanty. C57BL/6 mice were provided with sodium fluoride in drinking water for 60 days. Histological analysis, primary culture of skeletal muscle was performed. Protein expressions were analyzed by Immunocytochemistry, qRT-PCR, and western blotting techniques. Proteomic approach was considered to overview the entire proteome response. Exposure to sodium fluoride resulted in the loss of body weight in C57BL/6 mice. The compactness of the myofibre arrangement was distorted due to the treatment. Major reduction of contractile proteins such as actinin, troponin, and myosin further loss of mitochondrial proteins were confirmed by proteomic approach. Sodium fluoride treatment altered mitochondrial function. Further, loss of contractile proteins triggered skeletal muscle weakness.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomics analysis 20 mg sample (muscle tissue) were collected and washed thrice in ice-cold 1×PBS followed by lysis using buffer (1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM β glycerol phosphate in 50 mM TEABC, and 4% SDS). Lysates were probe sonicated on ice using Q-Sonica (Cole-Parmer, India), followed by centrifuging at 13,000g for 30min, and the supernatant was taken for further processing. Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Equal amounts of protein (1 mg) were taken and processed for reduction and alkylated with 10 mM DTT for 20min at 60 °C and 20 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature, respectively. Protein digestion was carried using TPCK-trypsin overnight at a ratio of 1:20 of enzyme/protein at 37°C. Digestion efficiency was evaluated by resolving the samples on 10% SDS-PAGE. Peptide desalting was carried out with the C-18 Stage Tip method, as described previously (33844560). The C-18 material was stacked onto 200 μL tips, activated with 100% ACN, and equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid. Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto the C-18 Stage Tip. The sample was passed twice, followed by washing with 0.1% formic acid and elution with 40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. The dried fractions were stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS searches were carried out using both MASCOT and SEQUEST search algorithms against Musmusculus protein database (version 92 with common contaminants) using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The workflow for both algorithms included spectrum selector, MASCOT, SEQUEST search nodes, peptide validator, event detector, precursor quantifier. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine, N-terminal protein acetylation were used and dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as a fixed modification. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavage was allowed. Target-decoy database searches used for calculation of false discovery rate (FDR) and for peptide identification FDR was set at 1 %. Feature mapper and precursor ion quantifier were used for label-free quantification. The normalization was done based on the total peptide amount in the quantification node of proteome discoverer.  Bioinformatics analysis  The differentially regulated proteins upon treatment with NaF were used for gene ontology analysis using the DAVID bioinformatics functional annotation tool. Pathway analysis on significantly altered proteins was done using the Reactome database. Domain analysis was done for the hypophosphorylated sites upon inhibition of CAMKK2 using MotifFinder, an online tool against NCBI-CDD conserved domain database (https://www.genome.jp/tools/motif/MOTIF.html) with E-value cutoff of 1.0. SankeyMATIC (BETA) (http://sankeymatic.com/build/) was used for the representation of pathway data. Rstudio with ggplots was used to make bubble plot, volcano plot, violin plot, and generation of heatmaps. For kinases Kinmap (http://www.kinhub.org/kinmap/), an online tool was used for the visualization of kinase tree.

### Publication Abstract
Sodium Fluoride (NaF) can change the expression of skeletal muscle proteins. Since skeletal muscle is rich in mitochondrial and contractile (sarcomeric) proteins, these proteins are sensitive to the effects of NaF, and the changes are dose-and time-dependent. In the current study, we have analysed the effect of high concentrations of NaF (80ppm) on mouse skeletal muscle at two different time points, i.e., 15 days and 60 days. At the end of the experimental time, the animals were sacrificed, skeletal muscles were isolated, and proteins were extracted and subjected to bioinformatic (Mass Spectrometric) analysis. The results were analysed based on changes in different mitochondrial complexes, contractile (sarcomeric) proteins, 26S proteasome, and ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The results showed that the mitochondrial proteins of complex I, II, III, IV and V were differentially regulated in the groups treated with 80ppm of NaF for 15 days and 60 days. The network analysis indicated more changes in mitochondrial proteins in the group treated with the higher dose for 15 days rather than 60 days. Furthermore, differential expression of (sarcomeric) proteins, downregulation of 26S proteasome subunits, and differential expression in proteins related to the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway lead to muscle atrophy. The differential expression might be due to the adaptative mechanism to counteract the deleterious effects of NaF on energy metabolism. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035014.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap, Sodium fluoride, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Centre, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangalore, Karnataka (State),India (C)
Ph.D. Scholar

### Submitter
Apoorva H Nagendra

### Lab Head
Dr Sudheer Shenoy P
Associate Professor, Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Centre, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangalore, Karnataka (State),India (C)


