### Accession
PXD020559

### Title
ATP13A3 is a major component of the enigmatic mammalian polyamine transport system

### Description
Polyamines, including putrescine (PUT), spermidine (SPD) and spermine (SPM), are abundant polycations supporting various cellular functions. Their cellular content is tightly controlled by biosynthesis, degradation and uptake or export via the polyamine transport system (PTS). However, the mammalian PTS remains poorly characterized. Mutated Chinese hamster ovary cells, CHO-MG, are frequently used to study the PTS owing to their phenotype of reduced polyamine uptake and resistance to methylglyoxal bis-(guanylhydrazone) (MGBG), a toxic polyamine biosynthesis inhibitor. Yet, the underlying genetic defect remains enigmatic. We recently proved that the P5B-type ATPase, ATP13A2, is a polyamine transporter and here, we analyzed whether the P5B-type ATPases are deficient in CHO-MG. Label-free shogun proteomics found that ATP13A3 expression is reduced in CHO-MG. Mutations in the ATP13A3 gene were found to critically disturb the protein sequence. Interestingly, depleting ATP13A3 in the wild-type CHO cells induced a CHO-MG phenotype, whereas its complementation in CHO-MG rescued the phenotype. Together, we demonstrate that defective ATP13A3 contributes to the CHO-MG phenotype, designating ATP13A3 as a new member of the mammalian PTS that may partially overlap in function with ATP13A2.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 8 membrane fraction samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. Sample preparation was based on methods reported earlier by Ning et al. in 2013 and 2015. (Ning et al. 2013 J Proteome Res, Ning et al. 2015 J Membrane Biol) For this purpose, 500 µL of a 100 mM HEPES solution were added to samples containing 100 µg protein in 500 µL 0.25 M sucrose and protease inhibitors to reach a final HEPES concentration of 50 mM. APols (Amphipol A8-35, Anatrace Products) was added to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were homogenized on ice by using a tip sonicator (VC100 Vibra-Cell, Sonics & Materials) using the following settings: 40 Hz amplitude, 5 s ON, 2 s OFF, 3 cycles, 7-9 W output. After sonication, samples were incubated at room temperature with shaking (650 rpm) for 10 min. Reduction of sample protein disulfide bonds was achieved by adding DTT (dithiothreitol, Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min at 50°C and 650 rpm. Alkylation was performed by adding IAA (iodacetamide, Fluka) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation at RT in the dark for 15 min at 650 rpm. Following reduction and alkylation, pH was adjusted with 10% FA (formic acid, Acros Organics) to a final concentration of 1% FA and samples incubated for 10 min at RT and 500 rpm. APols were precipitated by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 5 min at RT and supernatant discarded. The APols pellet was washed with 0.1% FA for 5 min at 500 rpm and precipitated again by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 5 min at RT. The supernatant was again discarded and the pellet solubilized in 200 µL of 100 mM TEAB (tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma Aldrich). 1 µg of trypsin was added to each sample and digestion performed overnight at 37°C and 800 rpm shaking. Samples were briefly spun down, the pH adjusted to a final FA concentration of 1% and incubated for 10 min at RT at 650 rpm. Apols were precipitated by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 min at RT and the supernatant, containing the tryptic peptides, transferred to MS vials and vacuum dried completely. Samples were stored at -20°C until measured by LC-MS/MS. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 30 µL loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (96:4, v/v)) and peptide concentration determined by measuring on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). (Mendes Maia et al. 2020 ACS Omega) 2 µg of peptide material of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). Peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality. The Ultimate 3000’s column oven was set to 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 min, starting at a flow rate of 750 nl/min switching to 300 nl/min after 15 min, followed by a 15-minutes washing phase plateauing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nl/min for 45 min followed by 5 min at 750 nl/min adding up to a total run length of 210 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.2 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375−1,500, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms), acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 × 105 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 1.5 Da, fixed first mass 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 28% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.9.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. (Cox et al. 2008 Nat Biotech, Cox et al. 2014 Mol Cell Proteomics) Spectra were searched against the Chinese hamster (CHO K1 cell line) SwissProt database (from September 2019 with 23,889 entries) and NCBI single protein databases for hamster ATP13A1, ATP13A2, ATP13A3 and ATP13A4. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage next to prolines with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues as wells as acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 5,040 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) after uploading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. (Tyanova et al. 2016 Nat Methods) Reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit resulting in 3,383 quantified proteins, which were subsequently used for further data analysis. These quantified proteins were subjected to a two-sided, unpaired t-test using permutation-based muliparameter correction with 1000 randomizations and a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Polyamines, such as putrescine, spermidine, and spermine, are physiologically important polycations, but the transporters responsible for their uptake in mammalian cells remain poorly characterized. Here, we reveal a new component of the mammalian polyamine transport system using CHO-MG cells, a widely used model to study alternative polyamine uptake routes and characterize polyamine transport inhibitors for therapy. CHO-MG cells present polyamine uptake deficiency and resistance to a toxic polyamine biosynthesis inhibitor methylglyoxal bis-(guanylhydrazone) (MGBG), but the molecular defects responsible for these cellular characteristics remain unknown. By genome sequencing of CHO-MG cells, we identified mutations in an unexplored gene, ATP13A3, and found disturbed mRNA and protein expression. ATP13A3 encodes for an orphan P5B-ATPase (ATP13A3), a P-type transport ATPase that represents a candidate polyamine transporter. Interestingly, ATP13A3 complemented the putrescine transport deficiency and MGBG resistance of CHO-MG cells, whereas its knockdown in WT cells induced a CHO-MG phenotype demonstrated as a decrease in putrescine uptake and MGBG sensitivity. Taken together, our findings identify ATP13A3, which has been previously genetically linked with pulmonary arterial hypertension, as a major component of the mammalian polyamine transport system that confers sensitivity to MGBG.

### Keywords
P5b-atpase, Polyamine transport system, Q exactive hf, Atp13a3, Putrescine, Polyamines, Cho cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular Transport Systems, Dpt. of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Vangheluwe
Laboratory of Cellular Transport Systems, Dpt. of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium


