### Accession
PXD020052

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of transcripts and proteins relative abundance during Plasmodium falciparum blood stages

### Description
We aimed to evaluate the relevance of mRNA study as a proxy of protein expression in sequestered parasites. To do so, we conducted a proteotranscriptomic analysis using five independent P. falciparum laboratory strains samples. RNA sequencing was performed on circulating ring stage parasites and LC-MS/MS on the corresponding sequestered mature forms. All analyzes were performed within the same development cycle for direct individual correlation. mRNA expression level was assessed at the circulating ring stage and the corresponding protein expression level was measured after 18h-24h of maturation to reach the mature trophozoite stage.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteins were extracted in sodium desoxycholate solution, digested using trypsin and separated on SCX filter tip. After drying, peptides from SCX StageTip fractions were solubilized in 10 μl of 0.1% TFA containing 10% acetonitrile (ACN). One μl was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Dionex, Thermo Fischer Scientific™). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length from Dionex) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQH2O and ending in 55% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid in milliQH2O. The Orbitrap Fusion™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific™) mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by stepped HCD MS/MS fragmentations acquired with the Ion Trap on the most abundant ions detected in top speed mode for 3 seconds. Resolution was set to 60,000 for full scans at AGC target 1.0e6 within 60 ms MIT. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 1.6 m/z, with AGC target 1.0e5 within 60 ms MIT. HCD Collision Energy was set at 30%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.1.0. Protein group lists were analyzed using the dedicated Perseus suite. The database used consisted of P. falciparum annotated proteins sequences (either 3D7, or ITG, or HB3) from PlasmoDB (v 43) and an incremented list of in-house frequent contaminant. The enzyme parameter was set to trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set at constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set at variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at seven amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least two ratio counts were required for LFQ. All experiments were analyzed simultaneously with the “match between runs” (MBR) option, with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 mn.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> is the main causative agent of human malaria. During the intraerythrocytic development cycle, the <i>P. falciparum</i> morphology changes dramatically from circulating young rings to sequestered mature trophozoites and schizonts. Sequestered forms contribute to the pathophysiology of severe malaria as the infected erythrocytes obstruct the microvascular flow in deep organs and induce local inflammation. However, the sequestration mechanism limits the access to the corresponding parasitic form in the clinical samples from patients infected with <i>P. falciparum</i>. To complement this deficiency, we aimed to evaluate the relevance of mRNA study as a proxy of protein expression in sequestered parasites. To do so, we conducted a proteotranscriptomic analysis using five independent <i>P. falciparum</i> laboratory strain samples. RNA sequencing was performed, and the mRNA expression level was assessed on circulating ring-stage parasites. The level of protein expression were measured by LC-MS/MS on the corresponding sequestered mature forms after 18-24 h of maturation. Overall, our results showed a strong transcriptome/transcriptome and a very strong proteome/proteome correlation between samples. Moreover, positive correlations of mRNA and protein expression levels were found between ring-stage transcriptomes and mature form proteomes. However, twice more transcripts were identified at the ring stage than proteins at the mature trophozoite stage. A high level of transcript expression did not guarantee the detection of the corresponding protein. Finally, we pointed out discrepancies at the individual gene level. Taken together, our results show that transcript and protein expressions are overall correlated. However, mRNA abundance is not a perfect proxy of protein expression at the individual level. Importantly, our study shows limitations of the "blind" use of RNA-seq and the importance of multiomics approaches for <i>P. falciparum</i> blood stage study in clinical samples.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum; rna-seq; fpkm; lc-ms/ms; label free quantification; transcriptomes; proteomes; transcripts and proteins expression correlation

### Affiliations
MERIT, IRD, Université de Paris, F-75006 Paris, France
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Gwladys Bertin
MERIT, IRD, Université de Paris, F-75006 Paris, France


