### Accession
PXD033846

### Title
APEX2 proximity labeling of PI(3)P dependent ER and early endosome membrane contact tether proteins

### Description
To understand the nature of ER and early endosome membrane contact site, we capitalized the MTM1 knock out (KO) HeLa cells that do not dissociate the ER and early endosome membrane contact upon nutrient starvation. By using the Doxycyclin inducible APEX2 fused Rab5A (early endosome marker) expressing stable cell lines of wildtype (WT) or KO cells, early endsome proximity proteins were acutely biotinyated during starvation. Subsequent biochemical fractionation were conducted to enrich ER membrane and biotinylated proteins were furhter enriched for Mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa WT or MTM1 KO cell line stably expressing doxycycline-inducible 3xHA-APEX2-Rab5A were seeded in 15 cm dishes with 17x10^5 cells (WT=6 dishes, KO=3 dishes) in the presence of doxycycline for 16 h prior to biotinylation. The next day cells at approximately 85% confluency were starved (EBSS, 2hr) and treated with 500 μM phenol-biotin and hydrogen peroxide to induce biotinylation, quenched, washed once with isolation buffer (225 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1 mM EGTA), and, finally, scraped into 1 ml of the same buffer resulting in approx. 2 ml total volume. 0.5 ml of this sample were saved (whole cell lysate, WCL) as a control. The remaining 1.5ml were homogenized using a 2 ml dounce homogenizer (approx. 100-120 strokes) on ice in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. To isolate light membranes containing the ER, the material was centrifuged twice at 600xg for 2 min each. The pellet (F1) including nuclei and cell debris was resuspended in 150 μl RIPA buffer. The remaining supernatant was centrifuged twice at 7,000xg for 20 min each. The resulting pellet (F2) including the mitochondrial fraction was resuspended in 150 μl RIPA buffer and further fractionated by centrifugation at 20,000xg for 60 min to pellet light ER membranes (F3). This ER-enriched membrane fraction was resuspended in150 μl RIPA buffer. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. To isolate biotinylated proteins, 130 μg of WCL or F3 fraction were rotated in the presence of Streptavidin Magnetic Beads. Eluted biotinylated proteins were reduced (5mM DTT, 30 min at 55°C), alkylated (15mM iodacetamide, 20 min at RT in the dark) and were submitted to LC-MS analysis (Samples from two independent experiments).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel digestion. In brief, gel bands were excised and protein digestion was carried out using trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. LC-MS measurement was achieved by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 system connected to a PepMap C-18 trap-column (0.075 mm x 50 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Scientific) and a 200 cm μPAC™ column was used (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) with 750 or 350 nl/ min flow rate with a 120 min gradient. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. MS1 scan were acquired in the Orbitrap with a range of 375 - 1500 m/z, mass resolution of 120,000, AGC target value of 4e5 and 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap with an AGC target value of 1e4 and 35 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions with charge states 2-4 were isolated with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and 40 sec dynamic exclusion. Precursor ions were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. Analysis of the raw data was done with MaxQuant (MQ) software version 1.6.2.6. MaxQuant standard settings were kept as default. In the search parameters two missed cleavage sites were included, the fixed modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable modifications to methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for MS1 scans and 20 ppm for MS2 scans. Match between runs option was enabled. The database search was done using Andromeda against the Human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database with common contaminants. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein level. Protein quantification was done based on at least 2 razor and unique peptides. Label-free quantification and iBAQ calculation were enabled. Statistical analysis was done on the ‘ProteinGroups’ table with Perseus version 1.6.7.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to fluctuating nutrient supply by adaptive changes in organelle dynamics and in metabolism. How such changes are orchestrated on a cell-wide scale is unknown. We show that endosomal signaling lipid turnover by MTM1, a phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P] 3-phosphatase mutated in X-linked centronuclear myopathy in humans, controls mitochondrial morphology and function by reshaping the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Starvation-induced endosomal recruitment of MTM1 impairs PI(3)P-dependent contact formation between tubular ER membranes and early endosomes, resulting in the conversion of ER tubules into sheets, the inhibition of mitochondrial fission, and sustained oxidative metabolism. Our results unravel an important role for early endosomal lipid signaling in controlling ER shape and, thereby, mitochondrial form and function to enable cells to adapt to fluctuating nutrient environments.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-ms, Membrane contact, Early endosome, Apex2, Er, Mtm1

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Wonyul Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Haucke
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)


