### Accession
PXD016020

### Title
The deubiquitinase USP7 stabilizes Maf proteins to promote myeloma cell survival

### Description
USP7, as a deubiquitination enzyme, controls ubiquitination and stability of Maf family  proteins. USP7 promotes Maf transcriptional activity. Moreover, USP7 is overexpressed in  multiple myeloma cells and its expression level is negatively correlated to the survival  of myeloma patients.

### Sample Protocol
For IP and LC-MS/MS analysis, HEK-293 cells were transiently transfected pcDNA3-MafB  plasmid. After 48 hrs, the transfected cells were lysed with lysed in TGH buffer (1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, protease inhibitors, and 1 mM Na3VO4). 10 mg protein/sample (3 groups: control, MafB transfected cell and MafB transfected cell treated with MG132) were extracted with  immobilized anti-MafB antibody. After 3 h incubation, thebeads were washed 3 times with  TGH buffer and twice with HPLC water. The proteins bound on M2 beads were eluted with 150 ul of 0.15% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), neutralized to 100 mM NH4HCO3, and digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptides from anti-MafB IP complexes were separated on a 50-cm Easy-Spray column with a 75-um inner diameter packed with 2 um C18 resin (Thermo Scientific, Odense Denmark). The peptides were eluted over 60 min (250 nl/min) using a 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system operating at 50 °C (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer by using a nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analyzed by using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). The Andromeda probabilistic search engine was used to search peak  lists against the UniProt database (2016 version, 21001 entries). The default search parameters were used. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and Gly-Gly addition to lysine as variable modifications. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. For statistical evaluation of the data obtained, the posterior error probability and false discovery rate were used. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides was permitted. Two miscleavages were allowed, and a minimum of seven amino acids per identified peptide were required. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. To match identifications across different replicates and adjacent fractions, the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled within a time window of 2 min. For the determination of protein levels, at least two unmodified peptides were required for LFQ calculation.

### Publication Abstract
The Maf proteins, including c-Maf, MafA, and MafB, are critical transcription factors in myelomagenesis. Previous studies demonstrated that Maf proteins are processed by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, but the mechanisms remain elusive. This study applied MS to identify MafB ubiquitination-associated proteins and found that the ubiquitin-specific protease USP7 was present in the MafB interactome. Moreover, USP7 also interacted with c-Maf and MafA and blocked their polyubiquitination and degradation. Consistently, knockdown of USP7 resulted in Maf protein degradation along with increased polyubiquitination levels. The action of USP7 thus promoted Maf transcriptional activity as evidenced by luciferase assays and by the up-regulation of the expression of Maf-modulated genes. Furthermore, USP7 was up-regulated in myeloma cells, and it was negatively associated with the survival of myeloma patients. USP7 promoted myeloma cell survival, and when it was inhibited by its specific inhibitor P5091, myeloma cell lines underwent apoptosis. These results therefore demonstrated that USP7 is a deubiquitinase of Maf proteins and promotes MM cell survival in association with Maf stability. Given the significance of USP7 and Maf proteins in myeloma genesis, targeting the USP7/Maf axle is a potential strategy to the precision therapy of MM.

### Keywords
Maf, Deubiquitinase, Myeloma, Usp7

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Moran
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


