### Accession
PXD008956

### Title
STAT3 labels a subpopulation of reactive astrocytes required for brain metastasis

### Description
The brain microenvironment imposes a particularly intense selective pressure on metastasis initiating cells, but successful metastasis bypass this control through mechanisms that are poorly understood. Reactive astrocytes are key components of this microenvironment, as they have been observed to confine brain metastasis without infiltrating the lesion. We describe a subpopulation of reactive astrocytes surrounding metastatic lesions that are characterized by the activation of STAT3 pathway. Blocking STAT3 signaling in this subpopulation of reactive astrocytes reduces experimental brain metastasis from different primary tumor sources, even at advanced stages of colonization. We conclude that brain metastatic cells induce and maintain the co-option of a pro-metastatic program driven by STAT3 in a subpopulation of reactive astrocytes. We also show that a safe and orally bioavailable treatment that inhibits STAT3 in patients with established brain metastasis and extracranial disease exhibits significant antitumor effects, especially in the CNS where several complete responses were achieved. Given that brain metastasis imposes significant morbidity and mortality, our experimental results suggest a novel treatment for increasing survival in patients with secondary brain tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Astrospheres were plated in phenol red free DMEM for 48 hours. Conditioned media was obtained from the two experimental conditions (pSTAT3- and pSTAT3+) and solubilized in urea and digested with Lys-C/trypsin using the standard FASP protocol. Every biological replicate (3) was divided into a total of four technical replicates during sample preparation and digestion. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis using an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant against a mouse protein database and the MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free protein quantification. Further data analysis was done with Perseus. Two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >2 or <-2 were considered as de-regulated among both experimental condition.

### Publication Abstract
The brain microenvironment imposes a particularly intense selective pressure on metastasis-initiating cells, but successful metastases bypass this control through mechanisms that are poorly understood. Reactive astrocytes are key components of this microenvironment that confine brain metastasis without infiltrating the lesion. Here, we describe that brain metastatic cells induce and maintain the co-option of a pro-metastatic program driven by signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in a subpopulation of reactive astrocytes surrounding metastatic lesions. These reactive astrocytes benefit metastatic cells by their modulatory effect on the innate and acquired immune system. In patients, active STAT3 in reactive astrocytes correlates with reduced survival from diagnosis of intracranial metastases. Blocking STAT3 signaling in reactive astrocytes reduces experimental brain metastasis from different primary tumor sources, even at advanced stages of colonization. We also show that a safe and orally bioavailable treatment that inhibits STAT3 exhibits significant antitumor effects in patients with advanced systemic disease that included brain metastasis. Responses to this therapy were notable in the central nervous system, where several complete responses were achieved. Given that brain metastasis causes substantial morbidity and mortality, our results identify a novel treatment for increasing survival in patients with secondary brain tumors.

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Brain metastasis, Stat3, Secretome

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
CNIO

### Submitter
Javier Munoz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


