### Accession
PXD042321

### Title
Comparing extraction method efficiency for high-throughput palaeoproteomic bone species identification.

### Description
12 Pleistocene bone samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS in order to characterize their proteome for species identification and potential protein damage characteristics, comparing several different protein extraction methods.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve Pleistocene bone specimens were drilled into a fine powder using a dental drill. Approximately 100 mg of bone powder from each sample was homogenized and separated into 5 mg across six Eppendorf tubes. We then compared the proteome recovery of six proteomic extraction methods. We assessed two simple methods broadly used for collagen peptide mass fingerprinting (ZooMS): ammonium bicarbonate and a conventional acid demineralization extraction method. Additionally, two EDTA-based methods with modifications in the digestion enzyme were tested in this study. Finally, a PAC extraction method and an EDTA-based method that combines demineralization and denaturation steps followed by protein digestion in situ were also compared. Both fractions were digested using different enzymes (trypsin or LysC), or a protease mix of the mentioned enzymes. They were analyzed separately via LC-MS/MS - an Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) in 60SPD-DDA mode coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480TM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in HCD mode.

### Data Protocol
The generated .raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant version 2.1.1.0 against the protein sequence database provided by Ruther et al. 2022, largely composed of 20 common skeletal proteins with entries across Mammalia. Oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), Gln -> pyro-Glu, Glu -> pyro-Glu, and proline hydroxylation were included as variable modifications, whereas NEM-derivatization of Cys was configured as a fixed modification for the PAC method. Initial searches were run in specific Trypsin/P digestion mode and allowed for up to two miscleavages. Up to five variable modifications were allowed. The internal MaxQuant contaminant list was replaced with a custom database (Ruther et al. 2022). All other settings were left on default. A second search was performed using semi-specific Trypsin/P digestion mode and up to four miscleavages were allowed, with all other settings left identical.

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput proteomic analysis of archaeological skeletal remains provides information about past fauna community compositions and species dispersals in time and space. Archaeological skeletal remains are a finite resource, however, and therefore it becomes relevant to optimize methods of skeletal proteome extraction. Ancient proteins in bone specimens can be highly degraded and consequently, extraction methods for well-preserved or modern bone might be unsuitable for the processing of highly degraded skeletal proteomes. In this study, we compared six proteomic extraction methods on Late Pleistocene remains with variable levels of proteome preservation. We tested the accuracy of species identification, protein sequence coverage, deamidation, and the number of post-translational modifications per method. We find striking differences in obtained proteome complexity and sequence coverage, highlighting that simple acid-insoluble proteome extraction methods perform better in highly degraded contexts. For well-preserved specimens, the approach using EDTA demineralization and protease-mix proteolysis yielded a higher number of identified peptides. The protocols presented here allowed protein extraction from ancient bone with a minimum number of working steps and equipment and yielded protein extracts within three working days. We expect further development along this route to benefit large-scale screening applications of relevance to archaeological and human evolution research.

### Keywords
Dda, Collagen, Non-collagenous proteins, Hts bone palaeoproteomics, Protein damage, Species identification

### Affiliations
Chaire de Paléoanthropologie, CIRB (UMR 7241–U1050), Collège de France
Section for Molecular Ecology and Evolution, Biomolecular Palaeoanthropology Lab, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Dorothea Mylopotamitaki

### Lab Head
Dr Frido Welker
Section for Molecular Ecology and Evolution, Biomolecular Palaeoanthropology Lab, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


