### Accession
PXD015758

### Title
Lysiphlebus fabarum (Hymenoptera: Braconidae: Aphidiinae) venom proteomic analysis

### Description
Venom injected at oviposition is crucial for successful reproduction in most parasitoid wasp species (Moreau & Asgari 2015; Poirié et al. 2014). The venom of the pea aphid parasitoid Aphidius ervi was analyzed previously using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach (Colinet et al. 2014) and we applied similar methods here to compare the venom composition in Lysiphlebus fabarum, that also used the pea aphid as host. Venom was extracted from the L. fabarum venom gland and analyzed using 1D gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. A total of 35 L. fabarum proteins were identified as putative venom proteins using these results combined with available transcriptomic data (Dennis et al. 2017) and the genomic data.

### Sample Protocol
The silver stained gel bands were cut into small blocks with a sterile scalpel blade. The blocks were destained, rinsed, then reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide, and incubated overnight at 37 °C in a microtube with 12.5 ng/ml trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The tryptic fragments were extracted, dried, reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid, and sonicated for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry using a hybrid Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) coupled to a nanoliquid chromatography (LC) Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). Samples were trapped with a C18 PepMap 300 trap column (300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 300 Å) and desalted with solvent A (water with 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min at a flow rate of 20 μL/min. Peptide separation was performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The analytical gradient was run with various percentages of solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) in the following manner: (1) 2.5–25% for 57 min, (2) 25–50% for 6 min, (3) 50-90% for 1 min, and (4) 90% for 10 min. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 within a mass range of 400–1,800 m/z. Ion accumulation was set at a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragmentation spectra of the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method) were acquired with high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27%.  All raw data files generated by MS were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermofisher scientific), to generate mgf files and searched against Lysiphebius database using the MASCOT software 2.3 (www.matrixscience.com). Search parameters were as follow:  variable modifications: methionine oxidation and carbamidomethyl-cysteine; mass tolerance: 10 ppm on parent ion and 0.02 Da on fragment ions, and a maximum of two tryptic missed cleavages. After the database search, using Mascot’s standard protein grouping algorithm, peptides of at least 6 amino acid long and with individual ions scores > 24 corresponding to identity or extensive homology (p<0.05) where validated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysiphlebus, Venom, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CNRS
INRA , CNRS , Université de Nice, Sophia Antipolis, France

### Submitter
Maya BELGHAZI

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Luc GATTI
INRA , CNRS , Université de Nice, Sophia Antipolis, France


