### Accession
PXD000956

### Title
Carbonic anhydrases, EPF2 peptide and a novel protease, CRSP, mediate CO2 control of stomatal development

### Description
Environmental stimuli, including elevated CO2, regulate stomatal development1-3 but the key mechanisms mediating the perception and relay of the CO2 signal to the stomatal development machinery remain elusive. To adapt CO2 intake to water loss, plants regulate the development of stomatal gas exchange pores in the aerial epidermis. Diverse plant species show a decrease in stomatal density in response to the continuing rise of atmospheric CO2 4. To date, one mutant, hic5, defective in cell wall wax biosynthesis, has been identified that exhibits a de-regulation of this CO2-controlled stomatal development response. Here we show that recently isolated Arabidopsis thaliana carbonic anhydrase double mutant plants6 exhibit an inversion in their response to elevated CO2, showing increased stomatal development at elevated CO2 levels. We have characterized the mechanisms mediating this response and demonstrate extracellular signaling in the regulation of CO2-controlled stomatal development by carbonic anhydrases. Transcriptomic RNA-Seq analyses show that the extracellular pro-peptide gene EPF2 7,8, but not EPF1 9, is induced at elevated CO2 in wild type, but not ca1ca4 mutant leaves. Moreover, EPF2 is essential for CO2 control of stomatal development. Using cell wall proteomic and CO2-dependent transcriptome analyses, we have identified a novel, CO2-induced extracellular protease, CRSP (CO2 Response Secreted Protease), as a mediator of CO2 controlled stomatal development. Our results identify mechanisms and genes that function in the repression of stomatal development in leaves during atmospheric CO2 elevation, including the CA1/CA4 carbonic anhydrases and the secreted protease CRSP that cleaves the pro-peptide EPF2, which in turn represses stomatal development.

### Sample Protocol
Apoplastic and secreted protein isolation. Rosettes of 10 soil grown plants (8 weeks old, or in the case of cotyledon apoplast extraction, cotyledons and hypocotyls of 5 day old seedlings) were vacuum-infiltrated with 0.3M Mannitol for 2 minutes at room temperature, after which leaves were spun at 200 g in a swinging bucket rotor at 4 °C for 15 minutes. The same leaves were re-infiltrated with 0.2M CaCl 2 in 0.3M Mannitol for 3 minutes under vacuum at room temperature after which leaves were spun at 200 x g in a swinging bucket rotor at 4 °C for 20 minutes. The pH of this extraction buffer was varied between 4 and 9 to maximize the capture of proteins based on their predicted pKa values. The centrifugation step produced 19 mL of apoplastic fluid which was run through an Amic on Ultra-15 filter column (15mL capacity) in a swinging bucket rotor at 4100 rpms and 4 °C. Flowthrough was run through the column 3 times to obtain a final volume of 300 μL in the filter cup. 30 μL of Protease in hibitor cocktail (Sigma) was added to the 300 μL protein sample. The 300 μL of protein solution was acidified with 1% TFA to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA. Millipor e ziptip pipette tips were used according to Engineer et al. 12 manufacturer’s protocols and prot ein samples were eluted in an Acetonitrile dilution series as follows: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% Acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The samples were desiccated and re-dissolved in 0.1 % TFA and 5% acetonitrile. The peptides were then extracted and desalted using Aspire RP30 desalting columns. For the isolation of secreted cysteine-rich peptides, two separate experiments including WT and the ca1ca4 mutant or WT and the crsp-1 mutant seedlings were cultured in 0.5x MS liquid medium under constant agitation and light for 10 days. Secreted proteins from the liquid growth medium were size fractionated to isolate peptides between 3 and 10 K Da using Amicon Ultra-15 filter columns. Cysteine-rich peptides were purified on a Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B (Sigma) with and without a dithiothreitol pre-reduction step. Eluted and flow-through samples were analyzed as described below. We have tried several proteomic approaches (including 35S promoter-driven EPF1 and EPF2 overexpression, inducible estradiol- mediated overexpression of EPF2, liquid culture of seedlings followed by enrichment of cysteine-rich secreted peptides and analyzing the apoplast proteomes of 5 day old cotyledons and hypocotyls and have not detected these low abundance EPF peptides from in planta samples.

### Data Protocol
raw ABSCIEX (TripleTOF 5600 or QSTAR Elite) files were searched using ProteinPilot 4.0 (ABSCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Environmental stimuli, including elevated carbon dioxide levels, regulate stomatal development; however, the key mechanisms mediating the perception and relay of the CO2 signal to the stomatal development machinery remain elusive. To adapt CO2 intake to water loss, plants regulate the development of stomatal gas exchange pores in the aerial epidermis. A diverse range of plant species show a decrease in stomatal density in response to the continuing rise in atmospheric CO2 (ref. 4). To date, one mutant that exhibits deregulation of this CO2-controlled stomatal development response, hic (which is defective in cell-wall wax biosynthesis, ref. 5), has been identified. Here we show that recently isolated Arabidopsis thaliana &#x3b2;-carbonic anhydrase double mutants (ca1&#xa0;ca4) exhibit an inversion in their response to elevated CO2, showing increased stomatal development at elevated CO2 levels. We characterized the mechanisms mediating this response and identified an extracellular signalling pathway involved in the regulation of CO2-controlled stomatal development by carbonic anhydrases. RNA-seq analyses of transcripts show that the extracellular pro-peptide-encoding gene EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR 2 (EPF2), but not EPF1 (ref. 9), is induced in wild-type leaves but not in ca1&#xa0;ca4 mutant leaves at elevated CO2 levels. Moreover, EPF2 is essential for CO2 control of stomatal development. Using cell-wall proteomic analyses and CO2-dependent transcriptomic analyses, we identified a novel CO2-induced extracellular protease, CRSP (CO2 RESPONSE SECRETED PROTEASE), as a mediator of CO2-controlled stomatal development. Our results identify mechanisms and genes that function in the repression of stomatal development in leaves during atmospheric CO2 elevation, including the carbonic-anhydrase-encoding genes CA1 and CA4 and the secreted protease CRSP, which cleaves the pro-peptide EPF2, in turn repressing stomatal development. Elucidation of these mechanisms advances the understanding of how plants perceive and relay the elevated CO2 signal and provides a framework to guide future research into how environmental challenges can modulate gas exchange in plants.

### Keywords
Protease, Arabidopsis, Stomata

### Affiliations
Chemistry biochemistry, University of California San Diego
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Majid Ghassemian
Chemistry biochemistry, University of California San Diego


