### Accession
PXD005960

### Title
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass Spectrometry Imaging: a novel Tool for the Identification and Classification of Amyloidosis

### Description
Amyloidosis is a group of diseases caused by extracellular accumulation of fibrillar polypeptide aggregates. So far, diagnosis is performed by Congo red staining of tissue sections in combination with polarization microscopy. Subsequent identification of the causative protein by immunohistochemistry harbors some difficulties regarding sensitivity and specificity. Mass spectrometry-based approaches have been demonstrated to constitute a reliable method to supplement typing of amyloidosis, but still depend on Congo red staining. In the present study matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging coupled with ion mobility separation (MALDI-IMS MSI) was used to investigate amyloid deposits in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue samples. We designed a peptide filter method enabling the identification of tryptic peptides derived from amyloidogenic and amyloid-associated proteins without additional tandem mass spectrometry. Utilizing the filter we found a universal peptide signature for amyloidoses independent from amyloid type and histoanatomical localization. Examining a validation cohort of cardiac biopsies including 66 amyloid and 31 non-amyloid cases, amyloidosis was diagnosed with high sensitivity and specificity. Furthermore, differences in the peptide composition of AL-lambda and ATTR amyloid were revealed and used to build a reliable classification model. Integrating the peptide filter in MALDI-IMS MSI analysis we developed a bioinformatics workflow facilitating the identification and classification of amyloidosis in a less time and sample consuming experimental setup. Our findings demonstrate also the feasibility to investigate the amyloid's composition, thus paving the way to establish classification models for the diverse types of amyloidoses and to shed further light on the complex process of amyloidogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Two micrometer thick tissue sections were cut using a microtome (Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany) and mounted onto histological glass slides (SuperFrost® Plus, Menzel-Gläser). After drying the FFPE tissue sections at 54 °C overnight paraffin was removed by immersing the sections in xylene (2 x 15 min) followed by rehydration in a series of different graded ethanol solutions (99 %, 70 % and 50 % each 2 x 2 min) and double distilled water (DDW, 2 x 1 min). Antigen retrieval was performed in a citric acid buffer (10 mM, pH 6.0) at 100 °C for 30 min utilizing a pressure cooker (Pascal S2800, DakoCytomation California, Inc., USA). The sections were cooled down in a water bath at 10 °C for 15 min, rinsed 10 times with DDW and dried in a desiccator at ambient temperature under a vacuum of -800 mBar for at least 15 min. On-tissue digestion was carried out by spraying 10 layers of a trypsin solution (0.05 µg/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3 with water/10 %ACN:OcGlc, 99.5:0.5, v/v, pH 8.1) with a constant flow rate (10 µL/min) onto the tissue section utilizing the SunCollect Micro Fraction Collector/MALDI Spotter (SunChrom, Friedrichsdorf, Germany) followed by incubation for 2 h at 37 °C in a humid environment using an in-house incubation chamber. A CHCA matrix solution (5 mg/mL in water/0.2 %TFA:ACN, 50:50, v/v) was applied over 8 layers with an increasing flow rate for the first four layers (1st at 20 µL/min, 2nd at 30 µL/min, 3rd at 40 µL/min and 4th-8th at 60 µL/min) resulting in a homogeneous crystallization.

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra were processed with the MassLynx software (Waters Corporation, Manchester, U.K.) including recalibration with an external lock mass (CHCA matrix-cluster signal at 825.101 m/z) and de-isotoping with the MaxEnt 3 algorithm (maximum molecular mass: precursor mass +20 Da, ensemble members: 1, iterations: 100, intensity threshold: 0.5%). Database searches of the processed spectra were performed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (v1.4.0.288, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germany) applying the MASCOT (v2.2.07) and SequestHT algorithms. The spectra were searched against a protein fasta database of human non-redundant proteins (20,183 entries, reviewed, downloaded from UniProt, 07.04.2017). The threshold for the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5 %. The parent and fragment ion tolerances were set at 25 ppm and ±0.2 Da, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with a maximum of one missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloidosis is a group of diseases caused by extracellular accumulation of fibrillar polypeptide aggregates. So far, diagnosis is performed by Congo red staining of tissue sections in combination with polarization microscopy. Subsequent identification of the causative protein by immunohistochemistry harbors some difficulties regarding sensitivity and specificity. Mass spectrometry based approaches have been demonstrated to constitute a reliable method to supplement typing of amyloidosis, but still depend on Congo red staining. In the present study, we used matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging coupled with ion mobility separation (MALDI-IMS MSI) to investigate amyloid deposits in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue samples. Utilizing a novel peptide filter method, we found a universal peptide signature for amyloidoses. Furthermore, differences in the peptide composition of AL&#x3bb; and ATTR amyloid were revealed and used to build a reliable classification model. Integrating the peptide filter in MALDI-IMS MSI analysis, we developed a bioinformatics workflow facilitating the identification and classification of amyloidosis in a less time and sample-consuming experimental setup. Our findings demonstrate also the feasibility to investigate the amyloid's protein composition, thus paving the way to establish classification models for the diverse types of amyloidoses and to shed further light on the complex process of amyloidogenesis.

### Keywords
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded, Maldi ms imaging, Ion mobility separation, Amyloidosis

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Germany
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel

### Submitter
Christoph Röcken

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Röcken
Department of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Germany


