### Accession
PXD025127

### Title
Microbiota regulation of proteolytic activity

### Description
Proteases constitute the largest enzyme gene family in vertebrates with intracellular and secreted proteases having critical roles in cellular and organ physiology. Intestinal tract contains diverse set of proteases mediating digestion, microbial responses, epithelial and immune signaling. Transit of chyme through the intestinal tract results in significant suppression of proteases.  Although endogenous protease inhibitors have been identified, the broader mechanisms underlying protease regulation in the intestinal tract remains unclear. The objective of this study was to determine microbial regulation of proteolytic activity in intestinal tract using phenotype of post-infection irritable bowel syndrome, a condition characterized by high fecal proteolytic activity. Proteases of host pancreatic origin (chymotrypsin like pancreatic elastase 2A, 3B and trypsin 2) drove proteolytic activity. Of the 14 differentially abundant taxa, high proteolytic activity state was characterized by complete absence of the commensal Alistipes putredinis. Germ free mice had very high proteolytic activity (10-fold of specific-pathogen free mice) which dropped significantly upon humanization with microbiota from healthy volunteers. In contrast, high proteolytic activity microbiota failed to inhibit it, a defect that corrected with fecal microbiota transplant as well as addition of A. putredinis. These mice also had increased intestinal permeability similar to that seen in patients. Microbiota β-glucuronidases mediate bilirubin deconjugation and unconjugated bilirubin is an inhibitor of serine proteases. We found that high proteolytic activity patients had lower urobilinogen levels, a product of bilirubin deconjugation. Mice colonized with β-glucuronidase overexpressing E. coli demonstrated significant inhibition of proteolytic activity and treatment with β-glucuronidase inhibitors increased it. The findings establish that specific commensal microbiota mediates effective inhibition of host pancreatic proteases and maintains intestinal barrier function through the production of β-glucuronidases. This suggests an important homeostatic role for commensal intestinal microbiota.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion   Gel bands were washed using 1:100mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile and subsequently dehydrated using acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in dark, respectively. The gel pieces were washed with 1:1 acetonitrile:100mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with acetonitrile. Trypsin (5ng/μl in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5mM calcium chloride) was added for in-gel digestion overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted sequentially using 50% acetonitrile 0.3% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile 0.3% formic acid. Peptides were desalted using the MCX-type STAGE tips (3M Empore SDB-XC filters) and dried in vacuo for storage at −80°C.   Liquid chromatography   An Eksigent 425 system was coupled to an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer.  The liquid chromatography system uses a trap column (ChromXP 5 μm ChromXP C18CL 120 Å 10x0.3mm) and an analytical column (Eksigent 3 μm ChromXP C18CL 120 Å 150x0.3mm). The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35 °C.  LCMS grade solvents were purchased from Honeywell and composed of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)). Peptides were reconstituted in 10μl 2% solvent B and 8μl was loaded at 10 μl/min for 3 minutes onto the trap column. Analytical separation was established by maintaining 3% B during loading.  After a valve switch event, peptides were resolved using the analytical column at a flow rate of 5 μl /min with a linear gradient of 3–25% HPLC buffer B for 38 minutes, followed by a 5 min linear gradient to 32% B.  Following the peptide elution window, in 2 min the gradient was increased to 80% B for 3 min. Initial chromatographic conditions were restored in 1 min and maintained for 8 min.    Mass spectrometry   Peptides were ionized using the SCIEX turbo source with a 50 μm ESI electrode. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage floating of 5.5 kV, curtain gas of 35 PSI, GS1 of 19 PSI, GS2 of 15 PSI and an interface heater temperature of 75 °C. The Independent Data Acquisition (IDA) mode was used to scan ions with charge states +2-+5 with intensity greater than 150 units. Exclusion time was 15 second and tolerance was set to 100 ppm. Survey scans (MS1) were acquired in 250 ms over a mass range 400-1250 m/z. Following the survey scan, twenty MS/MS spectra were acquired over a mass range 100-1500 m/z using a collision energy setting of 35 spreading 5 eV.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using MaxQuant and Galaxy for proteomics

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Β-glucuronidase, Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Proteolytic activity, Gastrointestinal infections

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Subina  Mehta 

### Lab Head
Dr Madhusudhan Grover
Mayo Clinic


