### Accession
PXD044447

### Title
The Isotopic Depletion Increases the Spatial Resolution of FPOP Top-Down Analysis.

### Description
Protein radical labeling offers an alternative analytical method for probing protein structure or protein interaction with other bio-molecules. Since the Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Proteins has already shown its essential role in studying biomolecular as-semblies and it was successfully adopted to characterize the interaction of transcription factor and its DNA response element, we initiated an experiment to investigate the benefits of isotopic depletion on analyzing the singly oxidized protein by Top-Down mass spectrometry. The complex of FOXO4 DNA-binding domain (FOXO4-DBD) and Insulin Response Element (IRE) was se-lected a model biological system. To overcome limitations of top-down technology which encounters predominantly with its spec-tra complexity, we prepared an isotopically depleted (ID) version of FOXO4-DBD alongside to the isotopically natural one (IN) to study the interaction. For the first time, depleted protein was used to quantify the extent of modification of covalently labelled protein. Comparing tandem mass spectra of natural and depleted proteins, increased signal-to-noise ratio gives arise to more frag-ment ions suitable for quantification and subsequently enhances the sequence coverage of 19 %. Such improvement in the frag-ment ions detection enables to detect additional 21 oxidized residues compered to non-depleted sample. Moreover, less common modifications are detected including formation of keto forms and lysine carbonylation. Moreover, the comparison of Top-Down depleted data and bottom-up results displays high consistency and complementarity of both techniques, shedding a light on tran-scription factor and DNA-response element complex formation. Thus, we believe that our study emphasizes the potential of iso-topic depletion for quantitative top-down proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Top-down approach Protein-DNA samples were denatured by adding 4M urea and and 1 µM MgCl2; the mixture was incubated at a bench for 15 minutes. DNA was digested by adding 1 µl of Benzo-nase Endonuclease (Merck), incubated at 30 °C for more 15 min. The mixture was further loaded onto a reverse-phase microtrap column (Optimize technologies, USA), desalted using 0.1% FA and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Desalt-ed protein was further diluted 5 times using 30% ACN, 0.1% FA solution and sprayed using nESI source in positive mode; desolvatation temperature was 120 °C. An MS and MS/MS analyses were performed on a SolariX XR mass spectrometer equipped with 15T magnet (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA), which was calibrated using the sodium trifluoroacetate to achieve 1 ppm mass accuracy. Time of flight was set to 1.1 ms, collision energy was -3.0 V − -5.0 V and data were ac-quired with 2M data point transient starting at 200 amu. In-source activation (FS-CID, 40.0 V) was applied to achieve optimal S/N ratio. At first, MS intact spectra were acquired in a broadband mode (m/z 200 − 2500) by accumulating ions for 0.1 s – 0.2 s and collecting 128 scans. For MS/MS, a singly oxidized protein ions of three charge states (+14, +13, +12) were isolated using a multiCASI (multi-continuous accumula-tion of selected ions) in a quadrupole and then transferred to ICR cell for electron-capture dissociation (ECD). The single oxidized ions of IN-FOXO4 were isolated at 844.50 amu, 909.30 amu, 984.90 amu, isolation window was ±1.0 amu. An ID-FOXO4-DBD singly oxidized ions were isolated at nomi-nal values 843.93 amu, 908.77 amu, 984.42 amu, isolation window was ± 0.6 amu. An ion-accumulation 3.0 s – 5.0 s was set to tune the signal intensity of ~108 ions in ICR cell before ECD. The ECD was done by setting the parameters to obtain an optimal fragmentation as follows: ECD pulse length 0.065 s – 0.075 s, bias 0.90 V – 1.0 V, lens 14.0 V – 15.0 V. The hollow cathode current was 1.5 A. Control spectra of unmodified ions were acquired using the same condition as the oxidized ones. Data were acquired by collecting 128 scans in a technical triplicate for both apo and holo forms. Bottom-up approach Samples for bottom-up analysis were digested using Tryp-sin/LysC (Promega, USA) and LysC (Promega, USA). Re-spective protease was added at a protein:protease ratio 1:40 (m:m) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Additional protease (m/m 1:20) was added after overnight incubation for more 6 hours. An IRE was digested by addition of Bensonase endo-nuclease (250 U, Merck) for 30 min at 37 °C. Digestion was terminated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 0.1 %). LC separation of peptides was performed as described pre-viously11 with one minor modification. An LC run consisted of a 35-minute linear gradient of 2-35 % solvent B. An LC was directly hyphenated to a trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Dal-tonics) for MS/MS analyses. MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously11.

### Data Protocol
Deconvolution of isotopically natural unmodified MS/MS spectra were done using SNAP algorithm method (Sophistical Numerical Annotation Procedure, Bruker Daltonics, USA). The quality factor threshold was set to 0.3 and S/N was set to 0. Maximum charge state was set as +14. Spectra were re-calibrated using a monoisotopic masses of a high-intensity fragments obtained by in-silico MS/MS fragmentation in GPMAW12.20 software2, a 0.5ppm mass accuracy was achieved. This served to create a library of all possible c, z and y ions obtained from FOXO4-DBD sequence in MS2Links software3. Singly-oxidized MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted using FTMS algorithm, recalibrated as described above and exported as x/y coordinates (mass and corresponding intensity). The library of c/z/y ions and raw files were uploaded in our home-built software. Only singly-oxidized ions were searched in spectra with the ion-search mass accuracy under 3 ppm. Dataset were analyzed in a technical triplicate and quantified as already described4,5. Data are presented in a form ±SD and statistically analyzed by t-test in GraphPad Prism 8.0 software. Data analysis of isotopically depleted (ID) FOXO4-DBD. An MS/MS spectra were re-calibrated in the same fashion as IN-version and exported using an FTMS algorithm. However, an in-silico library of all possible fragment ions and containing monoisotopic masses was created using an MS2Links software3. An MS/MS data of oxidized ID-version were then searched against the library of all possible fragment ions with the 3 ppm mass accuracy. Data were manually validated for each matched fragment ion. Dataset were analyzed in a technical triplicate and quantified as already described4,5. Data are presented in a form ±SD and statistically analyzed by t-test in GraphPad Prism 8.0 software. botom-up processing: Data were processed using a PeaksX+ Software (Bioinfor-matic Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) against FOXO4-DBD sequence as described previously11,45. Peptide intensities were extracted from LC-MS trace using Data Analysis 5.3 (Bruker Daltonics, USA) for all observed charge states, quan-tified and statistically analyzed as described prebiously46.

### Publication Abstract
Protein radical labeling, like fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP), coupled to a top-down mass spectrometry (MS) analysis offers an alternative analytical method for probing protein structure or protein interaction with other biomolecules, for instance, proteins and DNA. However, with the increasing mass of studied analytes, the MS/MS spectra become complex and exhibit a low signal-to-noise ratio. Nevertheless, these difficulties may be overcome by protein isotope depletion. Thus, we aimed to use protein isotope depletion to analyze FPOP-oxidized samples by top-down MS analysis. For this purpose, we prepared isotopically natural (IN) and depleted (ID) forms of the FOXO4 DNA binding domain (FOXO4-DBD) and studied the protein-DNA interaction interface with double-stranded DNA, the insulin response element (IRE), after exposing the complex to hydroxyl radicals. As shown by comparing tandem mass spectra of natural and depleted proteins, the ID form increased the signal-to-noise ratio of useful fragment ions, thereby enhancing the sequence coverage by more than 19%. This improvement in the detection of fragment ions enabled us to detect 22 more oxidized residues in the ID samples than in the IN sample. Moreover, less common modifications were detected in the ID sample, including the formation of ketones and lysine carbonylation. Given the higher quality of ID top-down MSMS data set, these results provide more detailed information on the complex formation between transcription factors and DNA-response elements. Therefore, our study highlights the benefits of isotopic depletion for quantitative top-down proteomics. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD044447.

### Keywords
Top-down, Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins, Protein isotope depletion, Electron-capture dissociation, Foxo4, Multicasi., Ire, Mass spectrometry, Insulin response element

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science, Charles University, 12800 Prague, Czech Republic
Biocev - Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Science, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Marek Polak

### Lab Head
Dr Marek Polak
Faculty of Science, Charles University, 12800 Prague, Czech Republic


