### Accession
PXD032186

### Title
Proteomic profiling of capsaicin-induced relapse of chronic colitis

### Description
It has now been established that consumption of spicy food containing capsaicin is strongly associated with recurrence and worsening of symptoms in IBD.To uncover the potential signaling pathway involved in the capsaicin-induced relapse.To uncover the potential signaling pathway involved in the capsaicin-induced relapse,we performed proteomics of chronic colitis mice following capsaicin administration.Differential expression proteins which were tightly associated with inflammatory pathways have to be revealed.Differential expression proteins which were tightly associated with inflammatory pathways have to be revealed.The proteomic profile can help to identify the crucial pro-inflammatory factor implicated in the procedure of capsaicin-induced disease relapse.

### Sample Protocol
The colonic tissues were isolated from the chronic colitis mice after the capsaicin oval gavage for 5 days, and were frozen in liquid nitrogen frequently. The colonic tissue weighing 10mg in 1 ml of T-PER Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher, 7851) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche, 4693132001). Then used the tissue homogenizer for homogenization (60HZ, 1min). The samples were incubated at 4℃ for 10 minutes and homogenization again (60HZ, 30s) stepped with a period of 30min incubation. Spun at 16,000 g for 20 minutes and take the supernatant. Then the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay kit (thermofisher, 23235) following the manufacture’s protocol. Subsequently, the quantified 300 ug protein sample was diluted with 50mM NH4HCO3 (sigma) to 100 ul and 500ul precooled acetone (thermofisher) was added to deposit overnight at minus twenty degrees. Then spun at 15,000 g for 20 minutes at 4℃. The sediment was washed with 500ul precooled acetone and spun at 15,000 g for 5 minutes at 4℃. Abandon supernatant and dissolved sediment with 50ul 8M urea for 2 hours and add 1ul 1M DTT (sigma) at 30℃ for 2 hours. After that, 2.5ul 1M IAM was added and placed in the dark for 30 minutes. Next, the samples were diluted to 200 ul with 8M urea, then added to the PALL10K Millipore and spun at 10,000 g for 15 minutes. 8M urea and 50mM NH4HCO3 were used to wash the protein sample. Resuspend the protein with 100ul 50mM NH4HCO3 and 6ug Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma) was added and enzymolysis at 37℃ for 16 hours and spun 10,000g for 15min. Using 50ul 50mM NH4HCO3 washed twice and merge effluent. 10%TFA was diluted to a final concentration of 0.4% to end the reaction. The peptide concentration was testified by Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (theromofisher). Finally, the peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 Tips (theromofisher), and the tips were washed twice with 10 ul of 50% ACN/H2O and 0.1%TFA/H2O. Subsequently, 0.1% TFA (theromofisher) and 50% ACN (theromofisher) were used to elute the peptide, and then freeze-dried and resuspended in 10 ul of 0.1% formic acid (theromofisher) for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw data files were performed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software for peptide and protein identification and label-free identification with standard setting as describes previously(26). The parameters are as follows: (i) Species, Mus musculus; (ii) Protein database, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot; (iii) Quantification Method, label-free quantification; (iv) Digestion, Trypsin/P, allowing up to two missed cleavages; (v) C alkylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications;(vi) Precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance = 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identifications were set to 0.01. The finally included identified protein were used for subsequent analyses. The data processed in differential expression analysis was performed as follows: (i) missing value filtration and imputation; (ii) logarithmic transformation; (iii) data normalization. Then, Limma R package was used to identify the differential expression proteins by calculating adjust P value and fold change value. Firstly, the group list was built, and a linear model fit is performed. Finally, empirical Bayes test was used to calculate the P value of the protein. The P-values were adjusted by the Bonferroni Holm method to control for the probability of false rejection. The proteins with a fold change greater than 1 and an adjusted P value < 0.05 were set as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Capsaicin, Ibd, Mice, Colon

### Affiliations
west china hospital
Lab of Inflammatory bowel disease, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-Related Molecular Network, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Kexin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhang
Lab of Inflammatory bowel disease, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-Related Molecular Network, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


