### Accession
PXD041825

### Title
C2C12 myoblast WT vs ETFDH-ko TMT

### Description
ETFDH (electron transfer flavoprotein ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is a 64 kDa protein monomer located in the inner mitochondrial membrane, in charge of transferring the electrons received from the electron transfer flavoprotein ETF to the Coenzyme Q (Q). Pathological mutations in ETFDH lead to Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency (MADD; OMIM #231680). C2C12 cells lacking ETFDH were analysed by TMT analysis and compared to wt cells.

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel Digestion (Stacking gel). Protein extracts were fractionated in a SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10mM CaCl2 with 60 ng/µL trypsin at 5:1 protein:enzyme (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) until the mass spectrometric analysis. TMT labeling and high pH fractionation. TMT. The resultant peptide mixture from desalted proteins tryptic digest (60 µg) was labelled using chemicals from the TMT sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) as described by manufacturer. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 50 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), adjusted to pH 8. For labelling, each TMT reagent was dissolved in 41 μL of ACN and added to the respective peptide mixture and then incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Labelling was stopped by the addition of 8 μL 5% hidroxilamine. Whole supernatants were dried down and the four samples were mixed to obtain the “4plex-labeled mixture”. The mixture was analysed by RP-LC-MS/MS to check the efficiency of the labelling.  Fractionation. The sample was then fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with minor modifications. Sample were re-swollen in 0.1%TFA and then, loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column. A step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations (5-80%) in a volatile high-pH (Triethylamine (0.1%)) is then applied to the columns to elute bound peptides into nine different fractions collected by centrifugation. The fractions obtained from high-pH, reversed-phase 6plex-labeled mixture were dried and stored until analysis by mass spectrometry for quantification. Quantitative analysis by reverse phase-liquid chromatography rp-lc-ms/ms. The fractions were resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid and analysed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient. The gradient profile was set as follows: 5−25% solvent B for 68 min, 25−40% solvent B for 22 min, 40−100% solvent B for 2 min and 100% solvent B for 18 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% ACN in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface at 2.1 kV spray voltage with S-Lens of 60%. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Orbitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000 followed by twenty high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass-analyzed in the Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) resolution. MS2 experiments were performed using HCD to generate high resolution and high mass accuracy MS2 spectra. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120025) were used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 1.3 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion applied for 60 seconds periods. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged protonated ions.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data analysis. Peptide identification from raw data (a single search was performed with all nine rows from the fractionation) was carried out using PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). Database search was performed against uniprot-mus-musculus.fasta (55466 entries; UniProt release 08/2020) (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys (semispecific), up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation and fixed TMT 6plex reagent labelling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches  (PSM) was  limited  to  0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides and at least one unique peptide being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified and sent to be quantified. Quantitation of TMT labelled peptides was performed with PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine, selected “Reporter Ion Quantification iTRAQ/TMT” under the “Quantifications” options. We use Auto normalization mode that calculate a global ratio from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides. The -10LgP, Quality and Reporter Ion Intensity (1e4) were used for Spectrum filter and Significance (PEAKSQ method) was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. For the Protein quantification we consider protein groups for peptide uniqueness and use only unique peptides for protein quantification.  After normalization and filtering steps, proteomic data were analysed by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA v4.1.0, http://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp) and visualized by Cytoscape v3.6.1 free software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Myoblast, Etfdh, Tmt, C2c12

### Affiliations
1- Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CBMSO), c/Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 2- Instituto Universitario de Biología Molecular, IUBM, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 3- Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. 4- Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, i+12, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

### Submitter
Beñat Salegi

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formenini
1- Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CBMSO), c/Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 2- Instituto Universitario de Biología Molecular, IUBM, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 3- Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. 4- Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, i+12, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.


