### Accession
PXD024198

### Title
Phenotypic manifestation of-synuclein strains amplified from Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy in human dopaminergic neurons

### Description
Although-synuclein is implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease and related disorders, it remains unclear whether specific conformations or levels of-synuclein assemblies are toxic and how they cause progressive loss of human dopaminergic neurons. To address this issue, we used iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons with -synuclein triplication or controls where endogenous -synuclein was imprinted into synthetic or disease-relevant conformations. We used -synuclein fibrils generated de novo or amplified from homogenates of brains affected with Parkinson’s disease (n=3) or multiple system atrophy (n=5). We found that a 2.5-fold increase in -synuclein levels in -synuclein gene triplication neurons promoted seeded aggregation in a dose and time-dependent fashion, which was associated with a further increase in -synuclein gene expression. Progressive neuronal loss was observed only in -synuclein triplication neurons seeded with brain-amplified fibrils. Transcriptomic analysis and isogenic correction of -synuclein triplication revealed that intraneuronal-synuclein levels solely and sufficiently explained vulnerability to neuronal death. Proximity-dependent biotinylation in living cells identified 56 differentially interacting proteins with endogenously assembled -synuclein including evasion of Parkinson’s disease-associated deglycase DJ-1 by aggregates triggered with brain amplified fibrils. Knockout of DJ-1 and related glyoxalase-1 in cell lines increased -synuclein aggregation. Similarly, methylglyoxal treatment or CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of DJ-1 in iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons enhanced fibril-induced aggregation and cell death.  Thus, toxicity of -synuclein strains depends on aggregate burden, which is determined by monomer levels and conformation which dictates differential interactomes. Our results define parameters for iPSC-based modellingof -synuclein pathology using brain amplified fibrils and demonstrate how Parkinson’s disease-associated genes influence the phenotypic manifestation of strains in human neurons.

### Sample Protocol
BioID beads were spun down and resuspended in 150 μl trypsin buffer (Promega). Samples were reduced using 10 μl of DTT reducing agent (final concentration 10mM) and incubated for 45 min at RT. Samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 40 mM) and incubated for 45 min at RT. SMART Digest Trypsin (Thermo Fisher) was added in a 1:50 ratio with respect to total protein content and samples were digested at 70oC for 1hour.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Maxquant45 using SILAC settings (R0K0, R6K4 and R10K8). Peptide precursor ion abundance was used to compare the volume under the chromatographic signal of each peptide detected for a protein. Peptide signals were then summarized into ratios for each protein across the different conditions, yielding a fold change value. Specifically, the ratio of MSA- or PD- amplified to de novo fibrils was first calculated and then converted to log2 followed by statistical analysis within the biological replicates to yield fold changes and multiple testing corrected p-values. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was a fixed modification and Oxidation (Met), Phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) and protein N-terminal Acetylation were set a variable. Searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragments. Swissprot/Trembl FASTA file was used as database. Protein and peptide FDR were set to 1% with Match between Runs option enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, -synuclein, Silac, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
University of Oxford, Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute


