### Accession
PXD019252

### Title
The proteome of MSI-H CRC tumors

### Description
To better understand the CRC proteomic changes in time after INFg induction

### Sample Protocol
As in the western experiments, 0.5x106 DLD1 cells were seeded in 6-well plate for a week. Then, INTERFERON-γ was immediately added for 1 week group, or after 6 days it was added for the last day in the 1 day group. Control cells cultured without INTERFERON-γ. The experiment was done in quadruplicates. At the end of experiment, cells were washed with cold 0.9% NaCl and lysed with 100mM Tris pH7.5, 4% SDS. The protein extracts were kept at -70°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP)(Wisniewski et al., 2009). All chemicals were sourced from Sigma Aldrich unless stated otherwise. Sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer (SDT) included: 4%(w/v) SDS, 100 mMTris/HCl pH 8, 0.1 M DTT. Urea buffer (UB): 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0. 15 μL of the sample, in SDT buffer, were mixed with 200 μl UB, loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters and centrifuged. 200 μl of UB were added to the filter unit and centrifuged again. Proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide for 5 min. Filters were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by trypsin digestion. Trypsin was added and samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. At the next day, trypsin was added again for 4 hours. Digested proteins were then spun down, acidified, desalted and then stored in -80°C until analysis. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography (Waters). The mobile phase was: a) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and b) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a HSS T3 nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters). Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 35% B in 150 min, 35% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 95% for 5 min and then returned to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nano spray apparatus (Thermo Scientific).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400 m/z), automatic gain control (AGC) to 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 20 msec. MS1 isolation window was set to 1.6 mass units. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, AGC to 1e6 and maximum injection time of 60 ms. Local raw data was processed using MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann) and the embedded Andromeda search engine (Cox et al.). Data was searched against the human sequences in UniProt version 2017_09. Search criteria were default, but with minimum unique peptides of 1. Protein quantification was achieved based on label free quantification (LFQ) value reported by MQ. All MQ output tables have been uploaded to PRIDE. The bioinformatic was done on perseus suite (version 1.6.2.3). The data was filtered for reverse, contaminants and identified by site. Then the data was filtered such that a protein had to have none-zero LFQ intensity in all 19 samples, unless stated otherwise. Gene Ontology annotation performed using STRING site version 10.5.

### Publication Abstract
Using a simple, environment friendly proteome extraction (TOP), we were able to optimize the analysis of clinical samples. Using our TOP method we analyzed a clinical cohort of microsatellite stable (MSS) and unstable (MSI-H) colorectal carcinoma (CRC). We identified a tumor cell specific, STAT1-centered, immune signature expressed by the MSI-H tumor cells. We then showed that long, but not short, exposure to Interferon-&#x3b3; induces a similar signature <i>in vitro</i> We identified 10 different temporal protein expression patterns, classifying the Interferon-&#x3b3; protein temporal regulation in CRC. Our data sheds light on the changes that tumor cells undergo under long-term immunological pressure <i>in vivo</i>, the importance of STAT proteins in specific biological scenarios. The data generated could help find novel clinical biomarkers and therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Human, Inf-g, Colorectal carcinoma

### Affiliations
Hadassah Hebrew-University Medical Center

### Submitter
Gilad Vainer

### Lab Head
Dr Gilad W. Vainer
Hadassah Hebrew-University Medical Center


