### Accession
PXD028919

### Title
Basolateral Protein Scribble Provides Phosphatase PP1 to a Signaling Network Maintaining Apicobasal Polarity

### Description
Scribble, a member of the LAP protein family, contributes to the apicobasal polarity (ABP) of epithelial cells. The LAP unique region (LUR) of these proteins is essential for ABP function, and includes a highly conserved Leucine Reach Repeat (LRR) domain. Here we study how the LRR domain of Scribble maintains ABP. We show that its concave surface participates in three types of mutually exclusive interactions 1. homodimerization serving as an auto-inhibitory mechanism, 2. interactions with a diverse set of polarity proteins, such as Llgl1, Llgl2, EPB41L2 and EPB41L5, which produce distinct multiprotein complexes, and 3. a direct interaction with the protein phosphatase, PP1, which forms a dimeric LRR domain-PP1 complex. Our results suggest that the latter complex maintains PP1 in the basolateral cell cortex in close proximity to PP1 targets. Such organization generates a dynamic network where PP1 could be immediately dispatched from the Scribble-PP1 complex to particular protein ligands. This mechanism for controlling dephosphorylation kinetics of phosphorylated proteins could be universal for all members of the LAP protein family, which includes Erbin, Lano, and the neuron-specific protein, Densin-180.

### Sample Protocol
The confluent cultures of indicated cells grown on 10 cm plates were cross-linked using BMPEO3 cross-linker (1 mg/ml in ice-cold PBS), then lysed with the Lysis Buffer (LB, 20 mM TrisHCl, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% Triton X-100) and cleared by centrifugation and incubated for 1 h with 30 µl of GFP-trap beads (Chromotek). After incubation, the beats were washed 4 times in LB, boiled in 30 µl of SDS-sample buffer and loaded on SDS-PAGE. The samples were run through 4-12% SDS-PAGE and the samples were submitted to the Proteomics facility  19 of Northwestern University where they were subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, tryptic digestion and subsequent quantitative MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Raw quantitative MS/MS data was obtained via Scaffold Viewer's (Version: Scaffold_4.9.0) complete export function. Total spectra counts were automatically normalized through Scaffold's algorithm, where UniProt database (the uniprot-SPhuman_20180326_20190417 database (unknown version, 20303 entries)) was applied for the purpose of identification. Protein identification threshold was set to 1% false discovery rate. A total of eight samples independently obtained from sLUR-517GFPexpressing cells were quantified. Using R Studio (Version: 3.6.0 [2019-04-26]), each sample column was joined by their respective unique ID (gene name) to reproduce a merged data frame. Proteins with less than or equal to five identifications across all eight samples were excluded from further data processing. Mean spectra counts were then calculated for the remaining proteins. The proteins with mean spectra counts below five were also discarded. Similar technique described above was applied to obtain maximum spectra count values for the samples obtained from DLD1 cells (five samples) and mean spectra counts for the samples obtained from sLUR-P305L517GFP-expressing cells (four samples). These values were then applied against mean values of sLUR-517GFP to identify contaminants. In both combinations, proteins with spectra counts greater than 20% of sLUR-517GFP mean were subject to removal, with the exception of Scrib. The same procedure was used for analyses from three to five samples of sLUR-420GFP- and sLUR402GFP-expressing cells.

### Publication Abstract
Scribble, a member of the LAP protein family, contributes to the apicobasal polarity (ABP) of epithelial cells. The LAP-unique region of these proteins, which is essential and sufficient for ABP, includes a conserved Leucine-Rich Repeat (LRR) domain. The major binding partners of this region that could regulate ABP remain unknown. Here, using proteomics, native gel electrophoresis, and site-directed mutagenesis, we show that the concave surface of LRR domain in Scribble participates in three types of mutually exclusive interactions-(i) homodimerization, serving as an auto-inhibitory mechanism; (ii) interactions with a diverse set of polarity proteins, such as Llgl1, Llgl2, EPB41L2, and EPB41L5, which produce distinct multiprotein complexes; and (iii) a direct interaction with the protein phosphatase, PP1. Analogy with the complex between PP1 and LRR domain of SDS22, a well-studied PP1 regulator, suggests that the Scibble-PP1 complex stores a latent form of PP1 in the basolateral cell cortex. Such organization may generate a dynamic signaling network wherein PP1 could be dispatched from the complex with Scribble to particular protein ligands, achieving fast dephosphorylation kinetics.

### Keywords
Apicobasal polarity, Phosphatase pp1, Scribble

### Affiliations
Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, USA
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Indrajyoti Indra

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Troyanovsky
Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, USA


