### Accession
PXD011846

### Title
Clinically Relevant Proteomic Signature in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Patients with Macrovascular Invasion

### Description
Vascular invasion is considered as the critical risk factors for tumor recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying macrovascular invasion (MaVI) and metastasis in HCC, we performed an iTRAQ based proteomic study to identify notably dysregulated proteins in 53 HCC patients with differential vascular invasion. In patients with MaVI, 47 proteins were significantly down-regulated in HCC tumor tissue. More importantly, 30 of them were not changed in HCC without MaVI. Gene ontology analysis of these 47 proteins shows the top 3 enriched pathways are urea cycle, gluconeogenesis and arginine biosynthetic process. We validated 9 remarkably dysregulated candidates in HCC patients with MaVI by Western blot, including 8 down-regulated proteins (CPS1, ASS1, ASL, ARG1, BHMT, DMGDH, Annexin A6 and CES1) and 1 up-regulated protein (CKAP4). Furthermore, dysregulation of CPS1, ASL and ARG1, key enzymes involved in urea cycle, together with Annexin A6 and CES1, major proteins in regulating cholesterol homeostasis and fatty acid ester metabolism were verified using immunohistochemical staining. The significant down-regulation of urea cycle generates clinically relevant proteomic signature in HCC patients with macrovascular invasion, which may provide possible insights into the molecular mechanisms of metastasis and new therapeutic targets of HCC.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples preparation of HCC patients  This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School. All tissues of HCC patients were obtained from Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School. The general and clinical information of all participated patients were well documented and recorded. All the patients acknowledged and consent the use of their tissue samples for this study. The liver tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. For iTRAQ experiments, HCC patients with MaVI (Patients A, B, C, D), MiVI(+) (2 Patients E, F) and MiVI(-) (Patients G, H) were selected based on their general and clinical classification. Both pathologically confirmed liver tumor tissues and adjacent para-tumor liver tissues from the same patient were collected.  Protein isolation, digestion and labeling with iTRAQ reagents 100mg tissue of tumor and adjacent para-tumor from HCC patients was used for protein isolation. Briefly, the tissues were first homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III and V, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, pH7.4), incubated for 30 min on ice, then followed by non-contact ultrasonic decomposition at 4 °C using Bioruptor Plus sonication device (Diagenode, Belgium). The supernatant was collected and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 30 min. The protein concentration was determined with the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) and further confirmed by Coomassie brilliant blue staining. For on-filter protein digestion, an aliquot of total protein (100 μg) was diluted to 100 μl with 0.5 M TEAB, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1 h at 55 °C, and then alkylated with 6.25 mM MMTS for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. The obtained protein was then transferred to 10K filter (Vivacon, USA) followed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 30 min to remove solvent and washed 3 times with 100 μl 0.5 M TEAB by repeating centrifugation. Finally, trypsin (Promega, USA) was added onto the filter at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight, and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion at 37 °C.  The resultant peptides were collected and labeled with iTRAQ Reagent-8 plex Multiplex Kit (AB Sciex U.K. Limited) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were labeled as shown in table 1: In iTRAQ experiment 1, four HCC para-tumor (P) samples from patient A-D were labeled with iTRAQ tag 113, 115, 117 or 119, and four HCC tumor (T) samples from patient A-D were labeled with iTRAQ tag 114, 116, 118 or 121. In iTRAQ experiment 2, four HCC para-tumor (P) samples from patient E-H were labeled with iTRAQ tag 113, 115, 117 or 119, and four HCC tumor (T) samples from patient E-H were labeled with iTRAQ tag 114, 116, 118 or 121. For each iTRAQ experiment, all 8 labeled peptides were mixed together, speedvac dried, and fractionated into 48 fractions using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (SHIMADZU) with a Durashell C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 4.6 × 250 mm). Finally, 16 samples were obtained by pooling every 16 fractions, e.g. pool fraction 1, 17, 33 as sample 1, fraction 2, 18, 34, as sample 2, until fraction 16, 32, 48 as sample 16. After desalting and speedvac drying, 16 samples were resuspended in 3% (v/v), formic acid 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis MS data acquisition was performed with a NanoLC.2D (Eksigent Technologies) coupled with a TripleTOF® 5600+ System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Samples were chromatographed using a 90 min gradient from 2–80% (mobile phase A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile; mobile phase B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 98% (v/v) acetonitrile) after direct injection onto a nanoLC Column, 3C18-CL, 75 μm*15 cm (Eksigent Technologies). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 2% to 22% solvent B over 60 min, 22% to 35% B in 18 min and climbing to 80% B in 6 min then holding at 80% B for the last 6 min, all at a constant flow-rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 350–1,500 m/z for 250 ms. The 50 most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 100–2,000 m/z for 100 ms; precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s. Database searching  The original MS data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software (version 4.5, AB Sciex) for data analysis. MS/MS data were searched against Homo sapiens in UniProt database (April 9, 2016, containing 160,566 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). The following search parameters were used: the instrument was TripleTOF 5600, iTRAQ quantification, cysteine modified with MMTS; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, quantitate, trypsin digestion, bias correction and background correction was checked for protein quantification and normalization. For false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was used to estimate FDR using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software) algorithm. Only proteins with a valid p value were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular invasion is considered as the critical risk factor of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying macrovascular invasion (MaVI) in HCC, we performed an iTRAQ based proteomic study to identify notably dysregulated proteins from eight HCC patients with differential vascular invasion and further confirmed them in the other 53 HCC patients. Forty-seven proteins were found significantly down-regulated in HCC with MaVI. More importantly, 30 of them were not changed in HCC without MaVI. Gene ontology analysis of these 47 proteins shows the top three enriched biological processes are urea cycle, gluconeogenesis, and arginine biosynthetic process. We validated nine remarkably dysregulated candidates in HCC patients with MaVI by Western blot including eight down-regulated proteins (CPS1, ASS1, ASL, ARG1, BHMT, DMGDH, Annexin A6, and CES1) and one up-regulated protein (CKAP4). Furthermore, dysregulation of CPS1, ASL, and ARG1, key enzymes involved in urea cycle, together with Annexin A6 and CES1, major proteins in regulating cholesterol homeostasis and fatty acid ester metabolism, was verified using immunohistochemical staining. The significant down-regulation of urea cycle generates clinically relevant proteomic signature in HCC patients with macrovascular invasion, which may provide possible insights into the molecular mechanisms of metastasis and new therapeutic targets of HCC.

### Keywords
Hcc; macorvascular invasion; itraq; urea cycle; proteomic signature; molecular mechanisms.

### Affiliations
Nanjing University Medical School

### Submitter
Lei Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Fang
Nanjing University Medical School


