### Accession
PXD041343

### Title
Targeted Profiling of Epitranscriptomic Reader, Writer and Eraser Proteins Regulated by H3K36me3

### Description
Trimethylation of lysine 36 on histone H3 (H3K36me3), an epigenetic mark associated with actively transcribed genes, plays an important role in multiple cellular processes, including transcription elongation, DNA methylation, DNA repair, and RNA m6A methylation, etc. Aberrant expression and mutations of the main methyltransferase for H3K36me3, i.e., SET domain-containing 2 (SETD2), were shown to be associated with various cancers. Here, we performed targeted profiling of 154 epitranscriptomic RWE proteins using a scheduled liquid chromatography-parallel-reaction monitoring (LC-PRM) method coupled with the use of stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides as internal standards to investigate how H3K36me3 modulates the chromatin occupancies of epitranscriptomic reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins. Our results showed consistent changes in chromatin occupancies of RWE proteins upon losses of H3K36me3 and H4K16ac, and a role of H3K36me3 in recruiting METTL3 to chromatin upon DNA double strand break induction. In addition, protein-protein interaction network and Kaplan-Meier survival analyses revealed the importance of METTL14 and TRMT11 in kidney cancer. Taken together, our work revealed cross-talks between H3K36me3 and epitranscriptomic RWE proteins and uncovered potential roles of these RWE proteins in H3K36me3-mediated biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture HEK293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. HEK293T cells with SETD2 and KAT5 genes being individually ablated with CRISPR/Cas9 were maintained at 37°C in a humidified chamber supplemented with 5% CO2. Cell lysate preparation HEK293T cells and the isogenic SETD2–/– and KAT5–/– cells were harvested and subsequently processed according to previously described procedures. Briefly, the cells were lysed on ice for 30 min with occasional vortexing using CelLytic M cell lysis reagent (Sigma) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations in the supernatants were quantified using the Bradford assay. Isolation of chromatin fraction The chromatin fractions of parental HEK293T cells and the isogenic SETD2–/– and KAT5–/– cells were prepared following the previously reported protocol. The cells were lysed using cytoplasmic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.34 M sucrose, 3 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and 1% protease inhibitor mixture) for 30 min on ice, and the intact nuclei were subsequently pelleted by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 2 min. Nuclei were lysed with nuclear lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM KCl, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and 1% protease inhibitor mixture) by homogenization and incubated on ice for 5 min. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 min, the chromatin-enriched pellet fraction was incubated in a chromatin isolation buffer, which contained 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1% protease inhibitor mixture, and 0.15 unit/µL benzonase (Sigma), on a thermomixer at 4°C with interval vortexing (on: 20 s & off: 9 min 40 s) at 1200 rpm for 2 h. Debris was then removed by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 2 min and the supernatant collected as the chromatin fraction. Protein concentrations in chromatin fractions were determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad).  Sample preparation for LC-PRM analysis  Following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, 40 μg of protein samples were denatured twice with 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 using the polyethersulfone (PES) membrane (molecular weight cutoff at 30 kDa) centrifugal filter unit (VWR), and the sample tubes were centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 min at room temperature. The denatured samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 hr, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min, followed by washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for three times. The samples were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) at 1:40 ratio (trypsin: protein, by mass) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C for 18 hr. The tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation, dried in a Speed-vac, desalted using Pierce C18 pipette tips (Thermo Scientific), reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and spiked in a mixture of SIL peptides at a final concentration of 2 fmol/µL.  LC-PRM analysis LC-PRM analyses were conducted on a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system. A trapping column (150 μm ID, 40 mm) packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) and an analytical column (75 μm ID, 200 mm) packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) were utilized to trap and resolve peptides, respectively. Formic acid (0.1%, v/v) in water and formic acid (0.1%, v/v) in acetonitrile/H2O (80:20, v/v) were used as mobile phases A and B, respectively. A linear gradient of 6–43% B in 125 min was employed, and the flow rate was 300 nL/min. The voltage for electrospray was 1.8 kV and the capillary temperature was 320°C. The precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole at an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, fragmented in the HCD collision cell at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS/MS resolution was 17,500, automated gain control target was 1 × 105, and the maximum accumulation time was 50 ms. After the calibration of the precursor ions’ retention times using the tryptic peptides of bovine serum albumin (BSA) as references, MS/MS for the precursor ions on the inclusion lists were acquired in the scheduled PRM mode with a 10-min retention time window.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-PRM data were imported to Skyline v21.2 for processing. The acquired MS/MS of each precursor ion was compared with that in the spectral library, where similarity was measured by dot product (dotp) value5. A dotp value of > 0.7 and 4-6 fragment ions eluting at the same retention time were considered a positive identification. Additional data processing was conducted in Excel, shown in Table S1a-g. In brief, the ratio of each peptide representing a specific RWE protein was calculated based on a two-step normalization: (1) the peak area of an endogenous peptide is normalized to that of its corresponding SIL peptide or a surrogate standard with a similar retention time; (2) the ratio was further normalized against the ratio of the sum of peak areas for all light peptides over the sum of peak areas for all heavy peptides in each LC-PRM run. The relative ratios of the peptides in SETD2–/– and KAT5–/– samples were then normalized to that in parental HEK293T samples. The relative ratios of the epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in one biological replicate were calculated by the mean of the relative ratios of the peptides derived from the same protein. The final ratios of the RWE proteins were averaged from the quantification results of three independent biological samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, H3k36me3, Rna modification, Cultured human cells

### Affiliations
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Jiekai Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Yinsheng Wang
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States


