### Accession
PXD015392

### Title
Degron flexibility enforces auxin sensing

### Description
Cullin RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase SCFTIR1/AFB1-5 and their ubiquitylation targets, AUX/IAAs, sense auxin concentrations in the nucleus. TIR1 binds a surface- exposed degron in AUX/IAAs promoting their ubiquitylation and rapid auxin-regulated proteasomal degradation. Here, we resolved TIR1·auxin·IAA7 and TIR1·auxin·IAA12 complex topology, and show that flexible intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) cooperatively position AUX/IAAs on TIR1. The AUX/IAA PB1 interaction domain also assists in non-native contacts, affecting AUX/IAA dynamic interaction states. Our results establish a role for IDRs in modulating auxin receptor assemblies. By securing AUX/IAAs on two opposite surfaces of TIR1, IDR diversity supports locally tailored positioning for targeted ubiquitylation, and might provide conformational flexibility for adopting a multiplicity of functional states. We postulate IDRs in distinct members of the AUX/IAA family to be an adaptive signature for protein interaction and initiation region for proteasome recruitment.

### Sample Protocol
Two mixtures (mix A and mix B) were prepared in parallel. Mix A contained 7.5 to 10 fold molar excess of Ub (either 6xHis-HsUb or AtUb), 6xHis-AtUBC8 (1x [AUX/IAA]) and 6xHis-Uba1 (0.1–0.2x [AUX/IAA]) in reaction buffer (30mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl, 2mM DTT, 5mM MgCl2, 1 mM ZnCl2, 2mM ATP. Mix B was prepared by mixing 0.1x [AUX/IAA] of Cul1-RBX1, 0.1x [AUX/IAA] of ASK1-TIR1 with AUX/IAA in reaction buffer. Mix B was aliquoted and supplemented with indicated amounts of IAA. Mixtures A and B were separately incubated for 5 min at 25 C with shaking at 500 rpm. Equal volumes of mix A and B were combined to initiate the ubiquitylation reaction (0 min). After 30 min, 20 ml IVUs were stopped by denaturing with 1 volume 16M urea. Proteins were further reduced by adding 0.5 ml of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and alkylated by adding 2 ml of 200mM iodoacetamide. The reactions were quenched with 2 ml of 200mM DTT, and subsequently 320 ml of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 were added. Alternatively, samples were also processed without reduction and alkylation. Proteins in the IVU reactions were digested with trypsin (enzyme to substrate 1:50 (w/w)) at 37 C with gentle agitation overnight. Reactions were quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.1%, and the peptides were desalted as previously described73. Dried peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoric acid, and 0.5 mg were injected into the LC-MS system. Peptides were separated using liquid chromatography C18 reverse phase chemistry employing a 120 min gradient increasing from 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA, and a flow rate of 250 nl min1. Eluted peptides were electrosprayed online into a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature 275 C and the Z-Lens voltage 240 V. A full MS survey scan was carried out with chromatographic peak width set to 15 s, resolution 70,000, automatic gain control (AGC) 3Eþ06 and a max injection time (IT) of 200 ms. MS/MS peptide sequencing was performed using a Top10 DDA scan strategy with HCD fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired with resolution 17,500, AGC 5Eþ04, IT 150 ms, isolation width 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 28, under fill ratio 3%, dynamic exclusion duration 40 s, and an intensity threshold of 1Eþ04.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and ubiquitylated residues on identified peptides were mapped using both the Mascot software v2.5.0 (Matrix Science) linked to Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the MaxQuant software v1.5.0.0. A precursor ion mass error of 5 and ,7 p.p..m respectively and a fragment ion mass error of 0.02 Da and 20m.m.u. ,respectively were tolerated in searches of a custom made database containing the IVU proteins. GG and LRGG on lysine (K) and on serine, threonine and cysteine (S,T,C), as well as oxidation of methionine (M) were tolerated as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification in searches of reduced and alkylated samples. A PSM, and peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 was applied for peptide identification employing the target-decoy database model. All ubiquitylated peptides that were also identified in IVUs lacking Ub (negative control) were discarded. Only in three cases, ubiquitylated peptides were identified in which K ubiquitylation produced the same scores as S,T,C ubiquitylation, in all other cases K ubiquitylation scored higher. Therefore in those cases when the ubiquitylation site(s) was alternatively mapped to a K or a S,T or C residue on the same peptide, S,T,C ubiquitylation was deprecated.

### Publication Abstract
Cullin RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases SCF<sup>TIR1/AFB1-5</sup> and their AUX/IAA targets perceive the phytohormone auxin. The F-box protein TIR1 binds a surface-exposed degron in AUX/IAAs promoting their ubiquitylation and rapid auxin-regulated proteasomal degradation. Here, by adopting biochemical, structural proteomics and in vivo approaches we unveil how flexibility in AUX/IAAs and regions in TIR1 affect their conformational ensemble allowing surface accessibility of degrons. We resolve TIR1&#xb7;auxin&#xb7;IAA7 and TIR1&#xb7;auxin&#xb7;IAA12 complex topology, and show that flexible intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) in the degron's vicinity, cooperatively position AUX/IAAs on TIR1. We identify essential residues at the TIR1 N- and C-termini, which provide non-native interaction interfaces with IDRs and the folded PB1 domain of AUX/IAAs. We thereby establish a role for IDRs in modulating auxin receptor assemblies. By securing AUX/IAAs on two opposite surfaces of TIR1, IDR diversity supports locally tailored positioning for targeted ubiquitylation, and might provide conformational flexibility for a multiplicity of functional states.

### Keywords
Aux/iaa, Intrinsic disorder, Degron, Scftir1, Auxin, Phytohormones, Allostery

### Affiliations
Proteome Analytics, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Proteome Analytics, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


