### Accession
PXD011371

### Title
binding specificity of Native Odorant-Binding Protein isoforms is driven by phosphorylation and O-N-acetylglucosamiylation in the pig (sus scrofa)

### Description
In pig, phosphorylation drives binding specificity of recombinant OBP (stricto sensu, referred as OBP in this text) isoforms (Brimau et al., 2010) that are not O-GlcNAcylated, contrary to native OBP, purified from nasal tissue (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2014). In order to precise the role of both PTM in OBP binding abilities to pheromone components in pig, we purified OBP isoforms by HPLC and performed structure-function relationship study. We have identified phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation on 4 OBP isoforms by immunodetection with specific antibodies, with careful controls. The binding properties of the 4 isoforms were monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy in exactly the same conditions previously used for recombinant OBP isoforms (Brimau et al., 2010). The PTM sites were mapped by CID-nano-LC-MS/MS and BEMAD (for phosphorylation) to link the binding affinities to phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation patterns of native OBP isoforms. Comparison of binding affinities between recombinant (only phosphorylated) and native (also O-GlcNAcylated) isoforms indicates that O-GlcNAcylation increases the binding specificity to pheromone components. This is the first time that such PTM sites are localized in OBP by high-resolution mass spectrometry, and that a demonstration of their involvement in odorant molecules discrimination by OBP isoforms is given

### Sample Protocol
1 Protein purification and characterization Proteins were gently extracted from RM of pre-pubertal males of S. scrofa as described previously (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2009a), avoiding extraction of intracellular proteins. Purification of OBP isoforms was achieved by high-resolution anion exchange chromatography on a ÄKTA purifier HPLC device (GE Healthcare). Proteins were separated on a PROPAC SAX10 column (Dionex, 4 mm x 250 mm), in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 (buffer A), by using an optimized gradient of 0-1 M NaCl (buffer B: 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl): after 5 min in 100% buffer A, 50% of buffer B was reached in 30 min and maintained for 5 min, then 100% of buffer A was reached in 5 min, and maintained 10 min. Samples of 100 l in buffer A were injected, and resulting fractions were collected, desalted with PD-10 desalting columns (GE Healthcare), and dried in a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf). Each fraction was re-purified on the same column but with a different NaCl gradient. Dried fractions were re-suspended into 100 l buffer A, injected and purified with the following gradient: 7 min in 100% buffer A, 25% buffer B in 2 min, 35% buffer B in 10 min, 100% buffer B in 3 min, maintained 7 min, then 100% A in 5 min. Resulting fractions were desalted with PD-10 desalting columns. Identical fractions coming from several injections were pooled to obtain homogenous aliquots (5 g), dried in Speed-Vac and stored at -20 °C until subsequent analyses. OBP isoforms were identified in HPLC fractions by western-blot with anti-OBP antibodies (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2009a). Their identity was confirmed by mass fingerprinting, followed by MALDI-TOF MS as already described (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2009a). Protein concentration was determined by using the Bradford method with recombinant porcine OBP (Nagnan-Le Meillour et al., 2009b) as standard (Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit, Pierce). 2 Enrichment of GlcNAcylated peptides using Wheat Germ Agglutinin columns Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by using WGA enrichment of GlcNAc-peptides. The WGA beads (Vector Laboratories, in Spin column-Screw caps, Pierce) were washed three times with wash buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.7) by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, MiniSpin Eppendorf), 5 min at 4 °C. Entire proteins (200 g of total RM extract) were resuspended in 300 L of wash buffer and incubated 2 h at 4 °C at 450 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). GlcNAc-enriched proteins were eluted in Laemmli buffer and separated by 1-D electrophoresis as above. Bands were cut and treated for trypsin digestion as described in Guiraudie et al. (2009). Resulting peptides were desalted in reverse-phase C18 Spin columns (Thermofisher) and dried in Speed-Vac until use.  3 LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analysed by a mass spectrometer coupled to a liquid chromatography (HPLC-MS). Chromatographic separation was conducted on an Ultimate 3000-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts) using a RSLC Polar Advantage II Acclaim column (2.2 μm, 120 Å, 2.1 Å~ 100 mm, Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts) at a flow rate of 300 μL/min using a mobile phase gradient with A: H2O + formic acid (FA) 0.1 % and B: acetonitrile (ACN) + FA 0.08 %. One μL of sample was injected and the separated peptides were analysed by a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (quadrupole-time of flight instrument, Maxis II ETD, Bruker Daltonics, France) interfaced with an ESI (electrospray ionization) source. The Q-TOF MS was operated in positive mode with m/z range between 200-2200 using an accelerating tension of 3 500 V. Spectra were acquired in data dependent aut-MS/MS mode with a cycle time of 3 s and MS acquisition frequency of 2 Hz. The collision induced dissociation (CID) spectra were recorded under two conditions: first using lower acquisition frequencies to boost MS/MS spectra quality (0.5 Hz for low-abundance ions, 2 Hz for intense ions) and second using higher acquisition frequencies (4 Hz, 16 Hz) to maximize the number of MS/MS spectra. Precursor ions between m/z 300 and 2200 with charge states between 1 to 5 were selected for fragmentation. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with sodium formate clusters at the beginning of each analysis (between 0 and 0.5 min) and data were automatically calibrated.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during CID- or ETD-nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf files using Data Analysis software (version 4.3.110, Brüker Daltonics). Database search was carried out using in-house Mascot software (version 2.4.0, MatrixScience.com, London, UK) with following parameters: MS tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.05 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation (methionine), pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (Q), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), HexNAcylation (S, T) and Q/N deamidation as variable modiﬁcations. Up to two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed. A custom database containing S. scrofa OBP isoforms and splicing variants was used. In addition, PEAKS DB Studio software (7.5 version, BioInformatics Solutions, Canada) was also used, which relies on the de novo sequencing of the MS/MS spectra to search the database and following parameters were used: precursor mass and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. The different PTM defined for Mascot search were used here. All the ions in the peak list generated using Data Analysis software were checked manually to construct fragment ion tables and perform annotation of the spectra with the aid of Protein Prospector (v 5.22.1 at prospector.ucsf.edu/).

### Publication Abstract
Odorant-binding proteins (OBP) are secreted in the nasal mucus at the vicinity of olfactory receptors (ORs). They act, at least, as an interface between hydrophobic and volatile odorant molecules and the hydrophilic medium bathing the ORs. They have also been hypothesized to be part of the molecular coding of odors and pheromones, by forming specific complexes with odorant molecules that could ultimately stimulate ORs to trigger the olfactory transduction cascade. In a previous study, we have evidenced that pig olfactory secretome was composed of numerous olfactory binding protein isoforms, generated by <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation. In addition, we have shown that recombinant OBP (<i>stricto sensu</i>) produced in yeast is made up of a mixture of isoforms that differ in their phosphorylation pattern, which in turn determines binding specificity. Taking advantage of the high amount of OBP secreted by a single animal, we performed a similar study, under exactly the same experimental conditions, on native isoforms isolated from pig, <i>Sus scrofa</i>, nasal tissue. Four fractions were obtained by using strong anion exchange HPLC. Mapping of phosphorylation and <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation sites by CID-nanoLC-MS/MS allowed unambiguous localization of phosphosites at S13 and T122 and HexNAc sites at S13 and S19. T112 or T115 could also be phosphorylated. BEMAD analysis suggested extra phosphosites located at S23, S24, S41, S49, S57, S67, and T71. Due to the very low stoichiometry of GlcNAc-peptides and phosphopeptides, these sites were identified on total mixture of OBP isoforms instead of HPLC-purified OBP isoforms. Nevertheless, binding properties of native OBP isoforms to specific ligands in <i>S. scrofa</i> were monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy. Recombinant phosphorylated OBP-Pichia isoforms bind steroids and fatty acids with slight differences. Native isoforms, that are phosphorylated but also <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated show radically different binding affinities for the same compounds, which strongly suggests that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation increases the binding specificity of OBP isoforms. These findings extend the role of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc in regulating the function of proteins involved in many mechanisms of metabolic homeostasis, including extracellular signaling in olfaction. Data is available via ProteomeXChange with identifier PXD011371.

### Keywords
Fluorescence spectroscopy, Cid-nano-lc-ms/ms, Phosphorylation, O-glcnac, Pheromone, Odorant-binding protein

### Affiliations
Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, UMR8576 CNRS-Université de Lille, USC-UGSF INRA 1409, Lille, Fr
CNRS

### Submitter
Alexandre Joly

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Nagnan-Le Meillour
Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, UMR8576 CNRS-Université de Lille, USC-UGSF INRA 1409, Lille, Fr


