### Accession
PXD030595

### Title
Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify candidate blood-based markers of cardiomyopathy in the southern sea otter (Enhydra lutris nereis)

### Description
Cardiomyopathy is a heart muscle disease and diagnosis relies on radiography and echocardiography, while blood-based markers are lacking. Development of a non-invasive test would be useful when imaging is not possible (e.g., prenatal diagnosis). In southern sea otters (Enhydra lutris nereis), cardiomyopathy is a prevalent cause of mortality and antemortem diagnosis is challenging. Sea otters requiring clinical care are at significant anesthetic risk if cardiomyopathy is present. A blood-based assay would improve triage decisions, case management, and treatment protocols to safeguard against co-morbidities. With support from the Oiled Wildlife Care Network, we analyzed undepleted sea otter serum using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Though the larger sample set included 63 sera (that included a validation set of 22 sera with class labels blinded to the data collector), we a priori compared only samples from wild otters. Additionally, we generated proteomic data for four heat tissues with paired sera. These results demonstrate the utility of proteomic analysis, offer a glimpse into the sea otter proteome, and serve as a reference data set for relative protein abundance in sera and cardiac tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Initially the goal was to sperate the serum sample set into a training (n = 41; 18 cases and 23 controls) and validation set (n = 22; 5 cases and 15 controls), with the latter being blinded to the analyst to avoid bias. Following data acquisition, a subset was defined by removal of captive animals (leaving only wild animals) and ambiguous cardiomyopathy cases. This subset of 30 sera (18 cases and 12 controls) was comprised of training (n = 22; 14 cases and 8 controls) and validation (n = 8; 4 cases and 4 controls) sets. The training set was randomized and digested in three sets, while the validation set was randomized and digested in two sets. This randomized order was used to minimize batch effects and was used for determining the LC-MS/MS injection order (which was training set followed by validation set). Unlike other studies in our lab, we did not employ a pool or control human sample in each batch. The class labels (case or control), wild or captive, digestion set (1 through 5) and LC-MS/MS injection order are given in supplemental table S1 (Table S1; also available on PRIDE). For processing the sera, first sera were thawed and centrifuged at 13 000 x gn for 8 min at 4 °C. Based on prior work with California sea lion and other mammalian plasma, we assumed a protein concentration of approximately 50 μg/μL (this value can vary but assuming at least 50 μg/μLwas used for estimating enzyme for the digest). Therefore, 2 μL (approximately 100 μg protein) of each sample was added to 78 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate buffer in Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). Proteins were reduced with 10 μL of 90 mmol/L DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT; final concentration of 8.2 mmol/L) at 60 °C for 30 min, then cooled and alkylated with 10 μL of 200 mmol/L 2-chloroacetamide (CAA; final concentration of 16.7 mmol/L) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. An additional 100 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate was added prior to enzymatic digestion. Trypsin (Pierce) was added at a 1:20 mass ratio (trypsin:total protein) using 5 μL of 1 μg/μL. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, after which the reaction was halted by adding 5 μL of 4 % formic acid (volume fraction). Peptide samples were purified for LC-MS/MS by using Pierce C18 spin columns (8 mg C18 resin) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) in 5 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) was used for wash steps, while 60 μL 70 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) was used for elution. The samples were reduced to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge at low heat and stored at -20 °C. Samples were reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1 % formic acid (volume fraction) and vortexed for 10 min, and the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay was used to determine sample peptide concentrations with a BioTek Synergy HT plate reader Cardiac proteins were extracted using cryopreservation with a Multi-Well BioPulverizer (BioSpec Products, Inc.) followed with bead beating using a MagNA Lyser (Roche Applied Sciences) in prechilled extraction buffer [5 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; volume fraction), 50 mmol/L triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1x cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Diagnostics), 1x Protease PhosSTOP™ (Roche Diagnostics)]. Extracts were centrifuged at 16 000 x gn for 10 min at 10 °C. Total protein concentrations of the resulting lysates were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Next, aliquots equivalent to 100 μg of protein was digested using S-Trap mini spin columns from ProtiFi according to manufactures protocol with minor modifications described here. First, all sample volumes were normalized with extra SDS and TEAB to maintain a 5 % SDS (volume fraction) and 50 mmol/L TEAB concentration prior to reduction and alkylation. Next, samples were reduced with 20 mmol/L DTT (final concentration) for 10 min at 50 °C and alkylated with 40 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Next, trypsin [L-1-tosylamido-2-phenylethyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated methylated trypsin generated at the University of California Davis Proteomics Core Facility] in 50 mmol/L TEAB was added atop the S-Trap filter and spun through the S-Trap before digestion. The flow through was added back to the top of the S-Trap and samples were digested for 2 h at 37 °C after which an additional aliquot of trypsin digest buffer was added, and samples were digested overnight with a final trypsin:total protein mass ratio of 1:12.5. Digested samples were eluted according to the manufacturer’s protocol, vacuum centrifuged to dryness, and frozen at -80 °C. Samples were reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1 % formic acid (volume fraction), briefly vortexed, then centrifuged 10 000 x gn for 10 min at 4 °C. The Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay was used to determine sample peptide concentrations with a BioTek Synergy HT plate reader.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures in 0.1% formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order and injection volumes were determined for 0.5 μg loading (average of 1.7 μL, between 0.5 and 8.6 μL) for serum digests and 1 μg loading (average  of0.6 μL, between 0.5 and 0.7 μL)  for cardiac tissue digests. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C.  Two different LC-MS/MS methods were used: a shorter method for sera and longer for cardiac tissue. The shorter serum method (‘85min_Fast_OT_OT_HCD_v2-2.meth’ on PRIDE) is as follows. Peptides were separated along a 65 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly to 95% mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with 30 % RF lens, data-dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 60 000, the mass range was m/z 375 to 1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 was used for precursor selection, including charge states 2 to 6. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 1.3 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 15 000, m/z 100 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 30 ms maximum injection time. The MS1 data was collected as profile data, the MS2 data was collected as centroid data and inject all ions for parallelizable time was not used.  The longer method used for the cardiac tissue (‘160min_OT_OT_HCDv1.meth’ on PRIDE) is as follows. Peptides were separated along a 130 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 27.5 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 105 min followed by a ramp to 40 % mobile phase B over 15 min and lastly to 95 % mobile phase B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity and data dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 120 000 and the mass range was set to m/z 375 to 1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 1.0e4 was used for precursor selection. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 0.7 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 30 000, m/z 110 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 60 ms maximum injection time. The MS1 data was collected as profile data, the MS2 data was collected as centroid data and inject all ions for parallelizable time was not used. Data was searched with FragPipe (v15.0), a software package that includes the MSFragger search algorithm. The parameter file used is available on PRIDE as ‘fragger.params’. And since a longer LC method was used to analyze the cardiac digests, these were analyzed separate from the sera to avoid issues with any match between run calculations. The UniProtKB release 2021_02 taxon identifier 34882 for Enhydra lutris, using both the SwissProt and Trembl release (33 024 sequences) was used. Though we used the UniProtKB fasta to take advantage of operability with FragPipe, the RefSeq annotation (E. l. kenyoni) is preferred (e.g., proteasome subunits are numbered in the RefSeq release). This UniProtKB fasta was processed in FragPipe to add in common contaminants and decoy sequences (66 280 sequences). There were 355 UniProtKB sea otter identifiers with MS1-based total intensity quantities across the sera experiment and 1713 in the cardiac tissue experiment (Table S3). The serum protein identifications were converted to human orthologs (as described in PMID: 33840197) to aid in downstream analysis and for comparison to other studies (Table S2 and S4). In this specific case of sea otter proteins where many UniProtKB entries were missing additional information, this ortholog mapping step was essential.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Sea otter

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Adam Neely
National Institute of Standards and Technology


