### Accession
PXD016283

### Title
Identification of flg22-responsive BSU1 phosphorylation sites

### Description
To investigate flg22-induced posttranslational modification of BSU1 family proteins, we performed metabolic Stable Isotope Labeling In Arabidopsis followed by Immuno-Precipitation and Mass Spectrometry (SILIA IP-MS) analysis, with the isotopes switched in replicate experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Transgenic 35S::BSU1-YFP seedlings were grown on 14N (1/2 MS without nitrogen media (PhytoTechnology Laboratories), NH4NO3 [0.5 g/L, Sigma], KNO3 [0.5 g/L, Sigma], pH 5.7) or 15N media (1/2 MS without nitrogen media (PhytoTechnology Laboratories), NH415NO3 [0.5 g/L, Cambridge Isotope Laboratory], K15NO3 [0.5 g/L, Cambridge Isotope Laboratory], pH 5.7) for 10 days. 14N- and 15N-labeled samples were treated with 1 µM flg22 or mock solution for 10 min in reciprocal experiments. Equal amount of tissues ground in liquid nitrogen were mixed. Proteins were then extracted in IP buffer with a phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, PhosSTOP), centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 5 min and filtered through miracloth, and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and the same volume of IP buffer without detergent was added to dilute the detergent to 0.5%, then was incubated with anti-GFP antibody with UNOsphere SUPrA bead (Biorad) at 4 °C for 1 hr, followed by 5 times washing with wash buffer.Samples were eluted with 2× SDS sample buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by Colloidal Blue staining (Invitrogen). BSU1-YFP protein bands were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Data were acquired in the Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on a Nanoacquity ultraperformance liquid chromatography system (Waters) connected to Linear Trap Quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated using analytical column Easy-Spray C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm) (Thermo, ES800). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, peptides were eluted by a gradient from 2 to 30% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid) over 57 min, followed by a short wash at 50% solvent B. After a precursor scan was measured in the Orbitrap by scanning from mass-to-charge ratio 350 to 1400 at a resolution of 60000, the six most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
MSMS data was converted to peaklist using an in-house script PAVA, and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the TAIR database Arabidopsis thaliana from December 2010 (https://www.arabidopsis.org/), concatenated with sequence randomized versions of each protein (a total of 35386 entries). A precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS2 tolerance was set to 0.6 Da.  Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a constant modification. Variable modifications include protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal Gln conversion to pyroglutamate, and Met oxidation. Subsequent searches were performed to find those peptides modified by phosphorylation. The search parameters were as above, but this time allowing for phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. For Quantification, 15N labeling efficiency was manually checked. “15N labeling” was chosen as a quantitative method using Protein Prospector with automatic adjustment of L:H intensity ratios with labeling efficiency.

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) have evolved to control diverse processes of growth, development and immunity in plants, but the mechanisms that link LRR-RKs to distinct cellular responses are not understood. Here we show that two LRR-RKs, the brassinosteroid hormone receptor BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 (BRI1) and the flagellin receptor FLAGELLIN SENSING 2 (FLS2), regulate downstream glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, respectively, through phosphocoding of the BRI1-SUPPRESSOR1 (BSU1) phosphatase. BSU1 was previously identified as a component that inactivates GSK3s in the BRI1 pathway. We surprisingly found that the loss of the BSU1 family phosphatases activates effector-triggered immunity and impairs flagellin-triggered MAP kinase activation and immunity. The flagellin-activated BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE 1 (BIK1) phosphorylates BSU1 at serine 251. Mutation of serine 251 reduces BSU1's ability to mediate flagellin-induced MAP kinase activation and immunity, but not its abilities to suppress effector-triggered immunity and interact with GSK3, which is enhanced through the phosphorylation of BSU1 at serine 764 upon brassinosteroid signalling. These results demonstrate that BSU1 plays an essential role in immunity and transduces brassinosteroid-BRI1 and flagellin-FLS2 signals using different phosphorylation sites. Our study illustrates that phosphocoding in shared downstream components provides signalling specificities for diverse plant receptor kinases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Bsu1 phosphatase, Phosphorylation, Flagellin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility


