### Accession
PXD000226

### Title
Human Uterine Smooth Muscle S-nitrosoproteome

### Description
S-nitrosoproteome of human unterine smooth muscle in different states of pregnancy (Labor, non labor, and preterm labor).  Samples were isolated by the biotin switch  and streptavidin pulldown before being analyzed by MS/MS on an Orbitrap instrument. Database Searching and bioinformatics: Tandem mass spectra were extracted; charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, version v.27, rev. 11). Sequest was initiated to search the database containing ipi.HUMAN.v3.87, the Global Proteome Machine cRAP v.2012.01.01, and random decoy sequences (183158 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Oxidation of methionine, iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine, and n-ethylmaleimide on cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Criteria for Protein Identification-PROTEOIQ (V2.6, www.nusep.com) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptides were parsed before analysis with a minimum Xcorr value of 1.5 and a minimum length of 6 amino acids. There were no matches to the concatenated decoy database and therefore a false discovery value is not applicable or "0". Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides with 5 spectra per peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Molecular mechanisms involved in uterine quiescence during gestation and those responsible for induction of labor at term are incompletely known. More than 10% of babies born worldwide are premature and 1,000,000 die annually. Preterm labor results in preterm delivery in 50% of cases in the United States explaining 75% of fetal morbidity and mortality. There is no Food and Drug Administration-approved treatment to prevent preterm delivery. Nitric oxide-mediated relaxation of human uterine smooth muscle is independent of global elevation of cGMP following activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase. S-nitrosation is a likely mechanism to explain cGMP-independent relaxation to nitric oxide and may reveal S-nitrosated proteins as new therapeutic targets for the treatment of preterm labor. Employing S-nitrosoglutathione as an nitric oxide donor, we identified 110 proteins that are S-nitrosated in 1 or more states of human pregnancy. Using area under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms as well as normalized spectral counts to quantify relative expression levels for 62 of these proteins, we show that 26 proteins demonstrate statistically significant S-nitrosation differences in myometrium from spontaneously laboring preterm patients compared with nonlaboring patients. We identified proteins that were up-S-nitrosated as well as proteins that were down-S-nitrosated in preterm laboring tissues. Identification and relative quantification of the S-nitrosoproteome provide a fingerprint of proteins that can form the basis of hypothesis-directed efforts to understand the regulation of uterine contraction-relaxation and the development of new treatment for preterm labor.

### Keywords
Human, Pregnancy, S-nitrosation, Myometrium, Preterm labor

### Affiliations
Pharmacology

### Submitter
Craig Ulrich

### Lab Head


