### Accession
PXD030293

### Title
Fasciola hepatica cathepsin L zymogens: immuno-proteomic evidence for highly immunogenic zymogen-specific conformational epitopes to support diagnostics development

### Description
We conducted immuno-proteomic investigations of recombinant and native procathepsins ((r)FhpCL1) and counterpart polyclonal antibodies to a recombinant mutant procathepsin L (anti-rFhΔpCL1). Proteomics including gel electrophoresis and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry were used for formal identification and in the determination of sample compositions. We have confirmed recombinant and native cathepsin L zymogens contain conserved, highly antigenic epitopes that are conformationally dependent.

### Sample Protocol
Gel-based proteomics used 1-D (1-DE) and 2-D (2-DE) sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE). Protein samples were prepared and electrophoresed as previously described (Davis et al. 2019, doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0007191). Resultant gels were fixed (10% (v/v) acetic acid; 40% (v/v) ethanol), washed (H2O, 18 M Ω) then stained with Coomassie blue (PhastGel Blue R, Amersham Biosciences, UK) as per the manufacturer’s instructions and destained in acetic acid (1% (v/v)) as required. For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) submissions blank gel pieces were used as negative controls and technical replicate (duplicate) gel pieces were excised and prepared. Gel pieces were prepared as previously described (Davis et al. 2019; Collett et al. 2020, doi:10.3390/molecules25153477) except for the use of a HPLC Prot-ID Chip (Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF, Agilent Technologies, UK). Where necessary for complex protein mixtures, samples were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, UK) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatography tower (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, UK) and Zorbax Eclipse Plus reverse phase C18 column at 30°C (Agilent Technologies, UK), operated as follows. Mobile phases for gradient elution were maintained at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min, using ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ) with 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, UK) (eluent 1), and 95:5 acetonitrile (Optima, Fisher Scientific, UK): ultrapure water with 0.1% formic acid (eluent 2). The initial condition was 3% eluent 2 with a linear increase to 40% over 9 minutes, increasing to 100% eluent 2 in a further 2 minutes then held for 1 minute at 100% eluent 1 before equilibration at initial conditions for a further 1.5 minutes. Ions were generated using a heated ESI source with at 3500 V in positive mode, sheath gas at 25°C, aux gas at 5°C, a vaporiser temperature of 75°C and an ion transfer temperature of 275°C. Standard peptide analysis parameters were used comprising a data dependent MS2 experiment, whereby parent ions were detected in profile mode in the 375–1500 m/z range in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and maximum injection duration of 50 milliseconds in positive mode. MS2 data were then collected in data-dependent mode including charge states of 2–7, and dynamic exclusion of masses for 20 seconds after initial selection for MS2. Ions were formed by fragmentation by collision induced dissociation with a collision energy of 35%, and resulting ions were detected in the ion trap in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data files were assessed using the MASCOT MS2 ions search (Matrix Science) against the GenBank database (v204), with the search parameters set as previously described (Davis et al. 2019; Collett et al. 2020), except for the exclusion of a decoy search tool and inclusion of error tolerance and 2+, 3+ or 4+ charged peptide residues.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Fasciola hepatica</i>, the common liver fluke and causative agent of zoonotic fasciolosis, impacts on food security with global economic losses of over $3.2 BN per annum through deterioration of animal health, productivity losses, and livestock death and is also re-emerging as a foodborne human disease. Cathepsin proteases present a major vaccine and diagnostic target of the <i>F. hepatica</i> excretory/secretory (ES) proteome, but utilization in diagnostics of the highly antigenic zymogen stage of these proteins is surprisingly yet to be fully exploited. Following an immuno-proteomic investigation of recombinant and native procathepsins ((r)FhpCL1), including mass spectrometric analyses (DOI: 10.6019/PXD030293), and using counterpart polyclonal antibodies to a recombinant mutant procathepsin L (anti-rFh&#x394;pCL1), we have confirmed recombinant and native cathepsin L zymogens contain conserved, highly antigenic epitopes that are conformationally dependent. Furthermore, using diagnostic platforms, including pilot serum and fecal antigen capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests, the diagnostic capacities of cathepsin L zymogens were assessed and validated, offering promising efficacy as markers of infection and for monitoring treatment efficacy.

### Keywords
Cathepsin, Fasciolosis, Diagnostics, Triclabendazole., Recombinant

### Affiliations
Aberystwyth University
Veterinary Parasitology Group, Institute of Biological Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), Aberystwyth University, Penglais, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion, SY23 3FL

### Submitter
Clare Collett

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Peter Brophy
Veterinary Parasitology Group, Institute of Biological Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), Aberystwyth University, Penglais, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion, SY23 3FL


