### Accession
PXD015378

### Title
UFMylation maintains translational homeostasis to ensure cell cycle progression

### Description
Cellular homeostasis is tightly linked to proliferation ensuring that only healthy cells divide. Homeostasis-sensing pathways including mTOR and integrated stress response (ISR) employ phosphorylation to regulate translation initiation and consequently cell cycle progression. Whether ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like molecules impact on translation and proliferation as part of existing or novel pathways is unknown. Here, we combine cell cycle screening, mass spectrometry and ribosome profiling to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which UFMylation, the modification of proteins with ubiquitin-fold modifier 1 molecules, controls translational homeostasis and cell cycle progression. Perturbation of UFMylation prevents eIF4F translation initiation complex assembly and recruitment of the ribosome. The ensuing global translational shutdown is sensed by cyclin D1 and halts the cell cycle independently of canonical ISR and mTOR signaling. Our findings establish UFMylation as a key regulator of translation that employs the principle of conserved cellular sensing mechanisms to couple translational homeostasis to cell cycle progression.

### Sample Protocol
The digested peptides were labelled with TMT10plex, mixed, and fractionated on a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) using an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm id × 15cm, 130Å, 3.5μm, Waters) at pH=10, and a flow rate at 200μl/min in 30min linear gradient from 5–35% acetonitrile/NH4OH. The fractions were collected at every 30 sec into a 96-well plate by columns, concatenated by rows to 12 pooled fractions and dried in the SpeedVac.   LC-MS/MS analysis were performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. Both instrument and columns used below were from Thermo Fisher. The 50% of the sample were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 μm i.d. × 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 μm) for 5 min at 10 μl/min with 0.1% FA/ H2O, then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 μm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 8–30.4% ACN/0.1%FA in 150 min/cycle at 180 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used the SPS7-MS3 method with Top Speed at 3 s per cycle time. The full MS scans (m/z 380–1500) were acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200, and the AGC was set at 4e5 with 50 ms maximum injection time. Then the most abundant multiplycharge ions (z = 2–6, above 5000 counts) were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by CID (35% CE) and detected in ion trap for peptide identification. The isolation window by quadrupole was set m/z 0.7, and AGC at 1e4 with 50 ms maximum injection time. The dynamic exclusion window was set ± 7 ppm with a duration at 45 s, and only single charge status per precursor was fragmented. Following each MS2, the 7-notch MS3 was performed on the top 7 most abundant fragments isolated by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). The precursors were fragmented by HCD at 65% CE then detected in Orbitrap at m/z 100–500 with 50 K resolution to for peptide quantification data. The AGC was set 1e5 with maximum injection time at 105 ms.  The left 50%of each fraction was analysed again with similar MS method but with a shorter gradient: 8-33.6% ACN/0.1%FA in 120 min/cycle at 150 min, and the intensity threshold for MS2 fragmentation was set to 10,000.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine to search against the reviewed Uniprot protein database of Homo sapiens (20,238 entries, Version  June 2018), plus the in-house contaminate database. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and Carbamidomethyl(C) were set as static modifications, and the dynamic modifications included Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), TMT6plex (K) and VGTMT6plex (K) (+385.253 Da). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q- value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search. The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptides with average reported S/N > 3 were used for protein quantification. Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitylation, Msms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London & Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London & Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


