### Accession
PXD032978

### Title
Analysis of HUVEC secretome and histone N-terminal acetylation after Notch activation

### Description
Vasculature permeate our entire body and involved in homeostasis and progression of various disease. Endothelium is a backbone of cardiovascular system and endothelial disfunction is associated with most forms of cardiovascular disease from atherosclerosis to chronic heart failure. Decrease in shear stress, particularly due to disturbance of the blood flow by bends or vascular obstruction, lead to atherosclerosis and endothelial disfunction. Notch signaling may act as mechanosensor and assumed to be one of the central signal pathways associated with endothelial disfunction. Association of shear stress, Notch and endothelial dysfunction is well known, molecular mechanisms connected these factors still poorly understood. One might assume that long-term shear stress and dysregulation of Notch in endothelium cause changes in epigenomic profile. While epigenomic changes in shear stressed environment  are known to be involved in endothelial disfunction, possible connection of Notch and epigenetic changes in endothelium has not yet been tested. Therefore, here we analyzed how activation of Notch signaling influence on histone code and secretome of endothelial cells in vitro. We found that activation of Notch increase level of N-acetylated forms of Histone 1: H1-0, H1-3, H1-4, H1-5, H1-10. These changes were also associated with changes in secretome profile of endothelium and might have broad biomedical significance in case of endothelial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
HUVEC were seeded on 6-well plates (Eppendorf, Germany) gelatinized by 0.2% gelatin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Rusmedbio, St. Petersburg, Russia) in the 20х105 density and cultured with endothelial cell culture medium with endothelial cell growth supplement (ScienCell, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with addition of 1% of L-glutamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The incubation was performed at 37°C in humid air containing 5% CO2. For activation of Notch pathway, we used lentiviral transduction with construction for Notch intracellular domain (NICD) overexpression or with empty constructions (control). This method of Notch activation was in details described by us previously. Notch pathway activation was verified by qPCR quantification of HEY1 expression (one of the main Notch targets). We found 20-fold increase in HEY1 level which correlate with our previous data in these experimental conditions and confirms activation of Notch. For secretome collection, in 48 h. of incubation after lentiviral transduction conditioned medium was collected (n = 6), centrifuged on 500g and then on 1500g for 15 min to remove cell contaminations. Then protein was precipitated by 4 volume of iced cold acetone (LC-MS Grade; LiChrosolv) and washed with methanol (LC-MS Grade; LiChrosolv). Protein pellet was air-dried and resuspended in 8M Urea (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Histone isolation was performed in the same cells with n = 2 by Histone Extraction Kit (ab113476; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) according to manufacturer recommendations. Protein concentrations were measured by Qubit fluorimeter (Thermo Fisher Sci, Waltham, MA, USA) with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit (Lumiprobe, Moscow, Russia). We used 20 ug of each secretome and 2,5 ug of each histone enriched fraction were used for sample preparation. Samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 5 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), followed by quenching with 5 mM DTT. Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37°C with Trypsin Gold in ratio 1:50 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA).  Tryptic peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using stage tips. Stage-tips were prepared by filling of polypropylene Vertex pipette tips (200 µL; SSIbio, USA) with six layers of C18 reversed-phase excised from Empore 3M C18 extraction disks (3M-Corporation, Maplewood, MN, USA). The desalted peptides were evaporated in a Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator (Labconco, USA) and dissolved in water/0.1% formic acid (LC-MS Grade; LiChrosolv) to approximate final concentration of 250 ng/ul for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) with nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). UHPLC was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Bruker Ten separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 100 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate with column temperature at 50°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (LC-MS Grade; LiChrosolv). The gradient was from 2% to 35% phase B for 35 min, then to 95% of phase B with subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 10 min. The column was equilibrated with 4 column volumes before each sample. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in automatic DDA PASEF mode with 1.1 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.60 to 1.60 1/K0. Analysis of samples of histone enriched fraction was performed in analytical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) with parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with at least two unique peptides were included for further analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. For histone data analysis we used human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; accessed on 28 March 2021; uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) while for secretome analysis we mixed human and bovine databases to exclude proteins from bovine serum. CRAP contaminants database was used for both searches (version of 4 March 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Notch pathway, Lc-msms, N-terminal acetylation, Huvec, Histone, Timstof, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Laboratory of regenerative biomedicine, Institute of cytology of the Russian Academy of Science
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna B. Malashicheva
Laboratory of regenerative biomedicine, Institute of cytology of the Russian Academy of Science


