### Accession
PXD040825

### Title
Generation of zero-valent sulfur from dissimilatory sulfate reduction in sulfate-reducing microorganisms

### Description
Dissimilatory sulfate reduction (DSR) mediated by sulfate-reducing microorganisms (SRMs) plays a pivotal role in global sulfur, carbon, oxygen, and iron cycles since ~3.5 billion years ago. The canonical DSR pathway is believed to be sulfate reduction to sulfide. Herein, we report a new DSR pathway in phylogenetically diverse SRMs through which zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) is directly generated. We identified that approximately 8.9% of sulfate reduction was directed toward ZVS with S8 as a predominant product, and the ratio of sulfate-to-ZVS could be changed with SRMs’ growth conditions, particularly the medium salinity. Further coculturing experiments and metadata analyses revealed that DSR-derived ZVS supported the growth of various ZVS-metabolizing microorganisms, highlighting this new pathway as an essential component of the sulfur biogeochemical cycle

### Sample Protocol
Samples for proteome analysis were resuspended in 10 mM phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4) and centrifuged again prior to their storage at -80°C. Further protein extraction, digestion and quantification services were provided by Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI; Shenzhen, China) as described

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra data were processed with Proteome Discover 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) and searched with MASCOT software 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) against the UniProt database. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as fixed modifications and Oxidation (M) was specified as variable modifications. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification and quantification. The false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% was set in both PSM (peptide spectrum match)-level and protein-level using a Mascot Percolator algorithm (Brosch et al., 2009) by IQuant software (Wen et al., 2014) with the picked protein FDR strategy (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Dissimilatory sulfate reduction (DSR) mediated by sulfate-reducing microorganisms (SRMs) plays a pivotal role in global sulfur, carbon, oxygen, and iron cycles since at least 3.5 billion y ago. The canonical DSR pathway is believed to be sulfate reduction to sulfide. Herein, we report a DSR pathway in phylogenetically diverse SRMs through which zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) is directly generated. We identified that approximately 9% of sulfate reduction was directed toward ZVS with S<sub>8</sub> as a predominant product, and the ratio of sulfate-to-ZVS could be changed with SRMs' growth conditions, particularly the medium salinity. Further coculturing experiments and metadata analyses revealed that DSR-derived ZVS supported the growth of various ZVS-metabolizing microorganisms, highlighting this pathway as an essential component of the sulfur biogeochemical cycle.

### Keywords
Sulfate-reducing microorganisms desulfovibrio vulgaris hildenborough

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-sen University
Sun yat-sen university

### Submitter
ZW Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiwei Liang
Sun Yat-sen University


