### Accession
PXD017421

### Title
Lactonase Specificity is Key to Quorum Quenching in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
The human opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa orchestrates the expression of many genes in a cell density-dependent manner by using a molecular communication system referred to as quorum sensing (QS). This bacterium uses an intricate network of regulators and QS molecules known as autoinducers. Among these autoinducers are two acyl-homoserine lactones (AHL) involved in QS circuits which modulate virulence factors production, biofilm formation, and antimicrobial sensitivity. Disrupting QS, a strategy referred to as quorum quenching (QQ), is a promising approach to modulate virulence while not directly challenging bacterial survival. For P. aeruginosa, QQ can be achieved using exogenous AHL-degrading lactonases. However, the importance of enzyme specificity on quenching efficacy has never been investigated. Here, we used two lactonases both targeting the signal molecules N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-Homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C12 HSL) and butyryl-homoserine lactone (C4 HSL) albeit with different efficacy on C4 HSL. Interestingly, both lactonases similarly decreased the concentrations of AHL and comparably impacted the expression of AHL-based circuits. Conversely, strong variations were observed in Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal (PQS) regulation. Both lactonases were then found to decrease virulence factors production and biofilm formation in vitro, albeit with different efficiencies. Unexpectedly, only the lactonase with substrate preference for 3-oxo-C12 HSL was able to inhibit P. aeruginosa pathogenicity in vivo in an amoeba infection model. Similarly, large variations between lactonases were observed in proteins involved in antibiotic resistance, biofilm formation, virulence and diverse cellular mechanisms. This global analysis provides the first evidence that QQ enzyme specificity is crucial to modulate QS-associated behavior in P. aeruginosa PA14.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation (10,000 g, 5 min) and washed with 2 mL of PBS and centrifuged again. Pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of UTSTS buffer and sonicated on until it became clear. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation (16,000 g, 20 min) and the supernatant was transferred into a dialysis cassette (first incubation for 4 h in 2 L with Urea/Ambic and a second overnight). Protein quantity was estimated with Braford assay (BioRad) and 50 µg of proteins were mixed to Urea/Ambic buffer to a final volume of 50 µL. 1 µL of 0.5 M dithiothreitol was added and the reaction was conducted over 1 h at 37°C. For alkylation, 2 µL of 0.5 M iodoacetamide in Urea/Ambic buffer were added and let to react over 1 h protected from light. Protein digestion was performed by adding 2 µL of 1 µg.mL-1 trypsin (Agilent) and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Finally, a detergent removal spin column (PierceTM 624 , Thermo Fisher) and a C18 spin column (PierceTM , Thermo Fisher) were used to clean the samples. In a first step, protein digests were separated by Ultra Performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) using the NanoAcquity UPLC System (Waters) connected to a Synapt G2Si Q-TOF ion mobility hybrid mass spectrometer (Waters). The chromatographic system was used in 1D configuration with an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column Reversed-Phase, CSH, Waters) after a trapping column (ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column Reversed-Phase 5µm spherical silica, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters). Eluted peptides were separated using a 100 min gradient (300 nL.min-1 ; 0.5 to 40% acetonitrile–0.1% formic acid). Data-independent MS/MS analysis was performed with the ion mobility feature (HDMSe method). The ion source parameters were: capillary voltage 3 kV, sampling cone voltage 40 V, ion source temperature 90°C, cone gas flow 50 L.h-1 . Transfer collision low energy was set to 5 V, trap collision low energy was set to 4 V. The high energy ramp was applied from 4 V to 5 V for the In review Lactonase specificity drives quorum quenching 18 This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article trap collision and from 19 V to 45 V for the transfer collision enabling fragmentation of the ions after 640 the ion mobility cell and before the time-of-flight (TOF) MS. On-column sample load was 800 ng 641 (2µL injected). Each sample was injected in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The acquired files were imported into Progenesis QI software Version 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) for label-free quantification analysis. The data were aligned automatically and normalized. Processing parameters were 150 counts for the low energy threshold, 30 counts for the elevated energy threshold. The database used to identify peptides contains the protein sequences of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 (TrembL, 25/04/2017, 5,886 sequences). Search tolerance parameters were: peptide and fragment tolerance, 15 ppm, FDR < 1%; Minimum Ion matching requirements were three fragments per peptide, seven fragments per protein and two peptides per protein. The enzyme specificity was trypsin allowing 1 missed cleavage, the accepted modifications were carbamidomethyl of cysteine (fixed), oxidation of methionine (variable), carbamyl of lysine and N-terminal (variable), deamidation (variable) of asparagine and glutamine. The protein normalization was performed according to the relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides. To determine the significance of changes between samples, a significant ANOVA (pvalue<0.05) and a fold change superior to 2 were used as the thresholds to define differently expressed protein. The principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on normalized data using SIMCA 14. The data were Pareto scaled, autofitted for principal components and the Hotelling’s T2 was used to assess the possible presence of outlier. For the heat map, the logarithm with base 10 (log10) of the fold change was calculated. According to the reference condition, either log10 (higher expressed) or – log10 (lower expressed) was used in the representation. Non-significant fold changes (pvalue≥0.05 and/or fold change <2) were considered to have a value equal to 1 and were represented by a zero on the heat map.

### Publication Abstract
The human opportunistic pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> orchestrates the expression of many genes in a cell density-dependent manner by using quorum sensing (QS). Two acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) are involved in QS circuits and contribute to the regulation of virulence factors production, biofilm formation, and antimicrobial sensitivity. Disrupting QS, a strategy referred to as quorum quenching (QQ) can be achieved using exogenous AHL-degrading lactonases. However, the importance of enzyme specificity on quenching efficacy has been poorly investigated. Here, we used two lactonases both targeting the signal molecules <i>N</i>-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C<sub>12</sub> HSL) and butyryl-homoserine lactone (C<sub>4</sub> HSL) albeit with different efficacies on C<sub>4</sub> HSL. Interestingly, both lactonases similarly decreased AHL concentrations and comparably impacted the expression of AHL-based QS genes. However, strong variations were observed in <i>Pseudomonas</i> Quinolone Signal (PQS) regulation depending on the lactonase used. Both lactonases were also found to decrease virulence factors production and biofilm formation <i>in vitro</i>, albeit with different efficiencies. Unexpectedly, only the lactonase with lower efficacy on C<sub>4</sub> HSL was able to inhibit <i>P. aeruginosa</i> pathogenicity <i>in vivo</i> in an amoeba infection model. Similarly, proteomic analysis revealed large variations in protein levels involved in antibiotic resistance, biofilm formation, virulence and diverse cellular mechanisms depending on the chosen lactonase. This global analysis provides evidences that QQ enzyme specificity has a significant impact on the modulation of QS-associated behavior in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PA14.

### Keywords
Ahl (n-acyl-homoserine lactone), Lactonase, Lc-msms, Virulence, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Quorum sensing (qs), Quorum quenching (qq)

### Affiliations
IHU
Responsable plateforme protéomique et analyse fonctionnelle des proteines IHU Mediterranée infection Marseille FRANCE

### Submitter
DECLOQUEMENT Philippe

### Lab Head
Dr Chabrière Eric
Responsable plateforme protéomique et analyse fonctionnelle des proteines IHU Mediterranée infection Marseille FRANCE


