### Accession
PXD018401

### Title
A suite of tools for the study of tryptophan C-mannosylation

### Description
Tryptophan C-mannosylation is a co-translational modification unique to the metazoans and apicomplexan parasites. It is the only example of protein C-glycosylation reported to date and appears to play a role in protein folding, trafficking and/or stability. Our knowledge of the prevalence of this modification and its role in biology is limited, and hampered by a lack of tools for studying the modification. Here, we present a simple microbial system for the production of proteins with and without the modification, to facilitate characterisation of the effects of tryptophan mannosylation on protein stability and function. This system facilitates exploration of the C-mannosyltransferase substrate preference and catalytic machinery. The ability to readily produce proteins with this modification facilitated the generation and rigours characterisation of monoclonal antibodies capable of detecting C-mannosyl tryptophan. With these antibodies, and a robust expression system, we were able to identify the first small molecule capable of inhibiting C-mannosyltransferases: a susbtrate-mimicking peptide that is active in cells. Together, these tools provide a solid foundation for interrogating the role of C-mannosyl tryptophan in myriad biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
in solution and in-gel digests were performed on selected C-mannosylated proteins. Samples were digested overnight with either gluC, trypsin or lysargnase then cleaned up with C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and C-glycosylated peptides was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.1).The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common proteins contaminates prior to further analysis. Glycopeptide identified were manual assessed according to the guidelines of Chen et al 22, annotated manually with the aid of Protein Prospector tool MS-Product (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msproduct)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, C-mannosylation, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Associate Professor Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 1G Royal Parade Parkville, VIC, Australia 3052

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan Goddard-Borger
Associate Professor Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 1G Royal Parade Parkville, VIC, Australia 3052


