### Accession
PXD014638

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa culture supernatant LC-MSMS

### Description
In order to investigate the compositions and properties of these protein which we anticipated was crucial to explore their specific functions related with alkane transport and degration, label-free LC-MS/MS strategy was applied for relative quantification of secreted proteins of a n-tetracosane tolerant Pseudomonas aeruginosa SJTD-1

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria Cultivation and Protein Preparation P.aeruginosa SJTD-1 was harvested by centrifugation after one night incubation in LB at 37˚C and washed three times with 1× PBS buffer. Portions of precultures were inoculated to flasks containing 20 ml glucose or alkanes respectively and be cultured as the described above. In this study, medium exponential phase (OD600 =0.3~0.4) cultures were used. For preparation of extracellular protein, the supernatants were obtained after centrifugation of the bacterial cultures at 8,000 rpm for 6 min at 4°C. The concentration of the proteins in the supernatant was quantified using the BCA method and the samples were store at -80˚C. Protein Digestion The proteins digestion process is similar as the protocol described by Zhou. Briefly, each sample of 50 μg protein was reduced using 6 μl 1M DTT at 60˚C for 1h. Cysteine residues were blocked using 30 μl 1M iodoacetamide (IAA) for 40 min at room temperate in darkness. Proteins were digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, USA) via the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with spin ultrafiltration units of nominal molecular weight cutoff 10,000 . Protein digestions were conducted overnight with trypsin in a 1:25 trypsin-to-protein mass-ratio. After digestion, the peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filtration units were washed with 50 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3, followed being dried by SpeedVac (Thermofisher)  Nano LC-MS/MS Methods of Label Free-Based Comparative Exoproteome Analysis The supernatant obtained from the culture of cells in n-tetracosane and glucose respectively were used for label free-based exoproteome proteomic analysis. The digested peptides were analyzed by nano-LC (Easy nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific®) containing a nanospray source. Each peptide sample was re-dissolved in water with 0.1% formic acid, and separated in a C18 capillary column (50 mm*15cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a solvent system(mobile phase A consisting of 99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisting of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were eluted using a linear 78 min gradient (2−35% B) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with full scan acquisition (m/z 350−1500) in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70 000. The top 20 peptide signals (charge state ≥+2) were selected (1.6 m/z window). These peptides were fragemented by higher energy collision (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) at 28.0 and measured in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 17 500 and an AGC target of 1e5. Maximum ITof full scans and MS-MS scans were respectively set at 50 ms and 45 ms. The dynamic exclusion was activated and set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS raw data were loaded into Thermo Proteome Discover (PD version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and label free quantification was performed for each condition(glucose and C24) after peak identification in PD 2.3. The P. aeruginosa PA01 database (5638 entries) was used. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavage of trypsin was chosen. Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. All peptide and proteinsearch results were filtered by 1% FDR and all highly confident identified peptides were quantified in PD 2.3. Protein Groups quantification was based on unique peptides and the precursor abundance was based on peak intensity. The mode of top 3 average was used for protein abundance calculation and protein ratio calculation was based on protein abundance. Proteins collected in the supernatant of glucose-grown cells were selected as the control group in label-free analysis. Finally, we considered a fold change 2 or 0.5 and abundance ratio p-value≤0.05 in protein expression as a threshold of biological effect.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa sjtd-1, Exoproteome, Alkane

### Affiliations
Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University
instrumental analysis center

### Submitter
Jingli Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Jingli Hou
Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University


