### Accession
PXD042729

### Title
Proteomics-Based Identification of Retinal Protein Networks Impacted by Elevated Intraocular Pressure in the Hypertonic Saline Injection Model of Experimental Glaucoma

### Description
Elevated intraocular pressure is considered a major cause of glaucomatous retinal neurodegeneration. To facilitate a better understanding of the underlying molecular processes and mechanisms, we report a study focusing on alterations of the retina proteome by induced ocular hypertension in a rat model of the disease. Glaucomatous processes were modelled through sclerosing the aqueous outflow routes of the eyes by hypertonic saline injections into an episcleral vein. Mass spectrometry-based quantitative retina proteomics using a label-free shotgun methodology identified over 200 proteins significantly affected by ocular hypertension. Various facets of glaucomatous pathophysiology were revealed through the organization of the findings into protein interaction networks and by pathway analyses. Concentrating on retinal neurodegeneration as a characteristic process of the disease, elevated intraocular pressure-induced alterations in the expression of selected proteins were verified by targeted proteomics based on nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with nanoelectrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry using the parallel reaction monitoring method of data acquisition.   Acquired raw data are shared through deposition to the ProteomeXchange Consortium making a retina proteomics dataset on the selected animal model of glaucoma available for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from the retinae, reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion and sample cleanup were done according to our previously reported procedures . Samples (1 µg/µL protein content) were reconstituted in 5 % v/v aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1 % v/v formic acid. Data-dependent LC-ESI-MS/MS was run on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer connected to EASY nLC-1000 systems and fitted with an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Source voltage of 2.2 kV and ion-transfer tube temperature of 275 °C were used. Nanoflow separations were performed on a 15 cm x 75 μm i.d. EASY-Spray column packed with 3 µm PepMap C18 particles. Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate with a 2 h binary solvent gradient: solvent A and solvent B were water and acetonitrile, respectively, and each contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Five µL of the sample solution was injected while maintaining constant column pressure at 600 bar during 20 min of column equilibration at 5% B. Then, the tryptic peptides in the sample were eluted using the following gradient: (i) 5 min isocratic at 5% B; (ii) linear program to 40% B over 90 min and then (iii) isocratic at 40% B for 5 min; (iv) to 90% B over 5 min; (v) isocratic at 90% B for 5 min; and (vi) resetting to 5% B in 20 min. During elution, full-scan mass spectra (MS) were acquired with a nominal resolution of 60000 (at m/z 400) in the Orbitrap and up to 20 MS-dependent tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were obtained in the ion trap. Each full MS/MS spectrum was acquired using collision-induced dissociation (CID) of only multiply charged ions (z  2). After selection of the ion to be fragmented, dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s. Two technical repeats were analyzed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt protein sequence database (species: Rattus norvegicus, 2022; 36254 entries) using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.6.2; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) with in the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) software. Parent ion tolerance of 25 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da, and one missed cleavage were set as search filters. Fixed and variable modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine, respectively. Search results were validated to meet strong criteria of protein identifications using the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet  algorithms requiring > 95% and > 99% probabilities, respectively, and at least two identified unique peptides for each protein using the Scaffold software (version 5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc.; Portland, OR, USA). Our LFQ relied on spectral counting [48,49,50] built into the Scaffold software, and p<0.05 was considered significantly different using Fisher’s exact tests  upon comparing protein abundances between the OHT and normotensive retinae. Benjamini–Hochberg corrections were applied for multiple testing  and ≥ 2-fold difference in spectral counts between the two study groups was set as a threshold of significant change in protein abundances. Missing values, if any, were handled using Scaffold’s default method and settings.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated intraocular pressure is considered a major cause of glaucomatous retinal neurodegeneration. To facilitate a better understanding of the underlying molecular processes and mechanisms, we report a study focusing on alterations of the retina proteome by induced ocular hypertension in a rat model of the disease. Glaucomatous processes were modeled through sclerosing the aqueous outflow routes of the eyes by hypertonic saline injections into an episcleral vein. Mass spectrometry-based quantitative retina proteomics using a label-free shotgun methodology identified over 200 proteins significantly affected by ocular hypertension. Various facets of glaucomatous pathophysiology were revealed through the organization of the findings into protein interaction networks and by pathway analyses. Concentrating on retinal neurodegeneration as a characteristic process of the disease, elevated intraocular pressure-induced alterations in the expression of selected proteins were verified by targeted proteomics based on nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with nano-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry using the parallel reaction monitoring method of data acquisition. Acquired raw data are shared through deposition to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (PXD042729), making a retina proteomics dataset on the selected animal model of glaucoma available for the first time.

### Keywords
Retina proteomics; glaucoma; ocular hypertension; brown norway rat model; bioinformatics; pathway analysis; protein networks

### Affiliations
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas, Health Science Center
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Prokai
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas, Health Science Center


