### Accession
PXD018690

### Title
Comprehensive nucleosome interactome screen establishes fundamental principles of nucleosome binding

### Description
Nuclear proteins bind chromatin to execute and regulate genome-templated processes. While structural and biochemical studies of individual nucleosome interactions have suggested that an acidic patch on the nucleosome disk surface may be a common site for recruitment to chromatin, the pervasiveness of acidic patch binding and whether other nucleosome surface binding hot-spots exist remains unclear. Here, we use nucleosome affinity proteomics with a library of nucleosomes that collectively disrupts all exposed histone surfaces to establish the universal principles of nucleosome binding. We find that the acidic patch and two adjacent surfaces are the primary hot-spots for nucleosome disk binding and are critical for the majority of nucleosome-protein interactions. In contrast, nearly half of the nucleosome disk surface participates only minimally in protein binding. In addition to establishing the fundamental principles of chromatin binding, our screen defines nucleosome surface requirements of nearly 300 nucleosome interacting proteins implicated in diverse nuclear processes including transcription, DNA damage repair, cell cycle regulation, and nuclear architecture. Building from our screen, we demonstrate that the Anaphase-Promoting Complex/Cyclosome directly binds the acidic patch and elucidate a redundant charge-based mechanism of acidic patch binding by nuclear pore protein ELYS. Overall, our interactome screen illuminates a highly competitive nucleosome binding hub for chromatin-targeted activities and curates a list of nucleosome interacting proteins that will enable mechanistic exploration of many unexpected chromatin-templated nuclear processes.

### Sample Protocol
Dynabeads with nucleosome-bound nuclear proteins were incubated for 5 min in a 100C heat block, centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 1 min at room temperature, and placed on the magnetic rack. Concurrently, 4-20% Bio-Rad precast 12-well gradient gels were pre-run for 2 min at 250V. The entirety of each sample, without beads, was loaded onto a gel and run for 2 min at 250V. Triplicates of one nucleosome variant were loaded next to each other and were separated from other nucleosome triplicates by two empty wells. Nucleosome-bound nuclear proteins were excised from the gel excluding the strong histone band that also contained proteins smaller than ~20kDa and monomeric streptavidin released from the beads. Excised bands were cut into small pieces and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermofisher). The concentration of extracted tryptic peptides was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermofisher). Tryptic peptides were labeled with designated TMT tags (Thermofisher, Cat. no. 90110, Lot: SE239892): 128C, 130C, 131 for wild-type; 126, 127N, 127C for Nuc1; 128N, 129N, 129C for Nuc2; 129N, 126, 127N for Nuc3; 130N, 129, 126 for Nuc4; 127C, 128N, 130N for Nuc5; 127N, 127C, 128N for tailless nucleosomes, as recommended by the manufacturer. Equal weights of wild-type nucleosome pulldown peptides (3 labeled samples) were combined with equal weights of two of the mutant nucleosome pulldown peptides each in triplicate (six labeled samples) for three independent LCMS3 runs, (i) WT, Nuc1, Nuc2, (ii) WT, Nuc3, Nuc5, (iii) WT, Nuc4, tailless. Finally, ~1 ug of each peptide mix was desalted via a C18 spin column and extracted three times with ethyl acetate to remove detergents. Trypsinized peptides (1 µg total) were separated via reverse-phase nano-HPLC using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation). The mobile phase consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid as buffer A and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. Peptides were trapped in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated in a 25 cm EASYspray analytical column (75 μm ID, 2.0 μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size) operated at 35°C using a 180 minute gradient from 2% to 30% buffer B at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 4e5 and max injection time of 50 milliseconds. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap following collision induced dissociation (CID) on the most intense ions using a TopSpeed method with a 3 second cycle time. MS2 settings were AGC = 1e4, max injection time = 50 milliseconds, CID collision energy = 30%, and quadrupole isolation width = 0.7 m/z. Precursors were filtered for monoisotopic peaks and charge states 2 to 7. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS3 scans were collected on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions using synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) and performed in the Orbitrap. MS3 settings were AGC = 1.0e5, max injection time = 105 milliseconds, resolution = 50k, higher-energy collision dissociation collision energy = 65%, and MS2 isolation width = 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) with the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse sequence database including isoforms (downloaded Feb. 2017) appended with mutant histone sequences. The following parameters were used: specific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl fixed modification, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs (alignment time window: 20 minutes; matching time window: 0.7 minutes), and reporter ion MS3 quantification. Separate parameter groups were used for each sample and included only the TMT labels present in the sample. Lot specific impurities were used for the TMT labels. Downstream analysis was achieved with an in-house R script. Proteins annotated as common contaminants, reverses, or identified by site were excluded. Additionally, WT histones were excluded due to the convoluted quantification caused by significant sequence overlap between WT and mutant histones. Mutant histones were quantified by summing TMT reporter intensities for peptides unique to each mutant. All reporter intensities then underwent log2 transformation which results in normally distributed data necessary for statistical analysis. To control for sample loading differences, median normalization was performed within each WT/mutant condition. We did not normalize the median intensity among all experiments because the procedure assumes most protein abundances do not change, which was not the case between different mutants.  Specifically, the TMT intensity for a protein was subtracted by a correction factor equal to the median intensity of the experiment minus the median intensity of all experiments of the same condition. For WT experiments, this was performed separately for each injection. Next, in order to compare between different injections, each protein intensity was further corrected by subtracting the median of the protein’s intensity in WT experiments from the same injection minus the median intensity in WT experiments from all injections. Fold-changes, statistical analyses, and figures were based on these normalized data. ANOVA and t-tests were performed for heatmaps and volcano plots, respectively, and multiple test correction was achieved by controlling the false discovery rate using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Network analysis for significantly changed subsets of proteins was performed using STRING v11 (76) using experimental interactions only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Elys, Acidic patch, Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome, Nuclear pore, Chromatin, Nucleosome, Proteomics, Arginine anchor, Y-complex

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Robert McGinty
Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA


