### Accession
PXD013470

### Title
CryoEM Structures of Arabidopsis DDR Complexes Involved in RNA-directed DNA Methylation

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the A. thaliana DDR complex consisting of DMS3, RMD1 and a peptide from the interaction region of DRD1. Cross-linking was performed using different cross-linking chemistries: disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) and a combination of adipic acid dihydrazide (ADH) and the coupling reagent, DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin and digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography. SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument.  Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance -6 to +1 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription by RNA polymerase V (Pol V) in plants is required for RNA-directed DNA methylation, leading to transcriptional gene silencing. Global chromatin association of Pol V requires components of the DDR complex DRD1, DMS3 and RDM1, but the assembly process of this complex and the underlying mechanism for Pol V recruitment remain unknown. Here we show that all DDR complex components co-localize with Pol V, and we report the cryoEM structures of two complexes associated with Pol V recruitment-DR (DMS3-RDM1) and DDR' (DMS3-RDM1-DRD1 peptide), at 3.6&#x2009;&#xc5; and 3.5&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, respectively. RDM1 dimerization at the center frames the assembly of the entire complex and mediates interactions between DMS3 and DRD1 with a stoichiometry of 1 DRD1:4 DMS3:2 RDM1. DRD1 binding to the DR complex induces a drastic movement of a DMS3 coiled-coil helix bundle. We hypothesize that both complexes are functional intermediates that mediate Pol V recruitment.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; adh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; ddr complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Steve E. Jacobsen
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA


