### Accession
PXD030820

### Title
The Inhibitory Receptor Siglec-8 Interacts with FcεRI and Globally Inhibits Intracellular Signaling in Primary Mast Cells Upon Activation

### Description
Immunomodulation of mast cell (MC) activity is warranted in allergic and inflammatory diseases where MCs have a central role in pathogenesis. Targeting Siglec-8, an inhibitory receptor on MCs and eosinophils, has shown promising activity in preclinical and clinical studies. While the intracellular pathways that regulate Siglec-8 activity in eosinophils have been well studied, the signaling mechanisms that lead to MC inhibition have not been fully elucidated. Here, we evaluate the intracellular signaling pathways of Siglec‐8‐mediated inhibition in primary MCs using an anti‐Siglec‐8 monoclonal antibody (mAb). Phospho‐proteomic profiling of FcεRI‐activated MCs revealed Siglec-8 mAb-treatment globally inhibited proximal and downstream kinases, leading to attenuated MC activation and degranulation. In fact, Siglec‐8 was found to directly interact with FcεRI signaling molecules. Siglec‐8 inhibition was dependent on both cytoplasmic immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) that interact with the SH2 containing protein phosphatase Shp-2 upon Siglec-8 phosphorylation. Taken together, these data support a model in which Siglec-8 regulates proximal FcεRI‐induced phosphorylation events through phosphatase recruitment and interaction with FcεRI, resulting in global inhibition of MCs upon Siglec-8 mAb engagement.

### Sample Protocol
Human MC were generated from CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells isolated from whole blood as described (1). Cell were plated in 96-well round bottom tissue culture plates at 1.5x104 per well and centrifuged for 2 min at 400g prior to resuspending in biotinylated anti-FcεRI (clone CRA-1, Biolegend) plus biotinylated isotype antibody (MOPC21, Allakos) or Siglec-8 mAb (2E2, Allakos) at 5g/mL at 4 ⁰C for 2 min. Cells were washed in PBS and then incubated in PBS with 5g/mL secondary antibody (Goat anti-mouse IgG light chain specific, Jackson Immunoresearch) for 2 min. After an additional PBS wash, cells were resuspended in warm complete medium and incubated for 20 min at 37 ⁰C. For flow cytometry, each well was resuspended in 100l cold FACS buffer (PBS/1%BSA) containing 5ml anti-CD63-PE/Cy7 antibody (clone H5C6, Biolegend), 5ml anti-CD107a-PE (clone H4A3, Becton Dickinson), 3l 7-AAD (Becton Dickinson) as viability marker and 0.2l mouse Fc block (BD). The percent of CD63 expressing cells was determined by flow cytometry on a Novocyte Quanteon (Agilent). Histamine levels were determined using an enzyme immunoassay kit (Beckman Coulter).  For phosphoproteomics, 1x106 BMMC per condition were subjected to FcεRI crosslinking for 2 minutes as described above, centrifuged at 4 ⁰C, and pellets were frozen at -80 ⁰C until analysis at IQ Proteomics (Cambridge, MA).  Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea + 100mM EPPS pH 8.0 + 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (1% w/v) + HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo). Lysates were bead beat at 4oC using a Precellys Evolution homogenizer. Protein concentration in the lysates was quantified using the Pierce micro BCA assay (Thermo). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. All protein from each sample was precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Following methanol/chloroform precipitation the protein pellet was washed three times with 100% methanol.  The dried protein pellets were resuspended in 2 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM EPPS, pH 8.0. Approximately 0.5 mg protein per sample was digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at a 1:25; protease:protein ratio and the proteins were digested at 25°C for 12 h. Following the LysC digestion, the guanidine-HCl concentration was diluted to 0.5 M with 100 mM EPPS, pH 8.0 and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at 1:50; protease:protein ratio. Trypsin digestion was carried out at 37°C for 8 h. Peptide concentrations were quantified using the Pierce peptide fluorescence assay (Thermo). 0.5 mg of peptide per sample was labelled with TMT 11-plex reagent (Thermo) at a 3:1 ratio (TMT reagent:peptide), incubating at 25°C for 3h. TMT reactions were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine and samples were acidified with TFA and combined into a “final mix”. The final mix peptides were desalted on 200 mg Waters tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and dried by centrifugal evaporation. pY phosphopeptides were enriched using the Cell Signaling Technologies pY-1000 antibody kit as per the manufacturers protocol. pY enriched peptides were desalted on Empore-C18 (3M) in-house packed StageTips prior to analysis by mass spectrometry. pY peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid + 5% acetonitrile for LC-MS3 analysis. The flow through from the pY enrichment was desalted on 200 mg Waters tC18 SepPak cartridges and dried by centrifugal evaporation. pST phosphopeptides were enriched using the Pierce Fe-NTA phospho-enrichment kit (Thermo). In brief, the dried peptides from the pY flow through were resuspended in binding buffer provided with the kit. The peptides were bound and washed as per manufacturers protocol. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the Fe-NTA resin with 50mM HK2PO4 pH 10.5. Labelled Phosphopeptides were fractionated using the high pH reverse-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce) into 3 fractions (10%, 13%, 15%, 18%, 25%, and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine) and desalted with Empore-C18 (3M) in-house packed StageTips prior to analysis by mass spectrometry. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA desalted on StageTips and vacuum dried. pST peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid + 5% acetonitrile for LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated 2018 human Uniprot protein database containing common contaminants (forward + reverse sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm (2). Database search criteria are as follows: fully tryptic with two missed cleavages; a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 1 Da for peptide and phosphoserine and phosphothreonine (phosphotyrosine fragment ion tolerances were set to 0.02 Da); oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) or pSTY (79.9663304) was set as differential modifications. Static modifications were carboxyamidomethylation on cysteines (57.02146374) and TMT on lysines and N-termini of peptides (229.162932). Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered using linear discriminant analysis (3) and adjusted to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) (4) and collapsed further to a final 1.0% protein-level FDR. Posttranslational modifications were localized using a probability-based algorithm similar to Ascore (5). Proteins were quantified by summing the total reporter intensities across all matching PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Siglec-8, Mast cell

### Affiliations
Allakos Inc.
Independent researcher

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Brad Youngblood
Allakos Inc.


