### Accession
PXD027260

### Title
Screening of host proteins interacting with African swine fever virus MGF360-9L

### Description
To identify the potential host protein binding to African swine fever virus MGF360-9L, the 3 × FLAG tag MGF360-9L plasmid and empty FLAG were transfected into PK-15 cells for co-immunoprecipitation and LC-MS analysis. The cell lysates were immunoprecipitated using anti-FLAG antibody. Immunoprecipitation samples of cells transfected with empty FLAG were used as negative controls to eliminate non-specific interactions. LC-MS identified the interaction between MGF360-9L and PK-15 cell proteome. The final MGF360-9L binding protein data eliminated the nonspecific interaction through empty FLAG control. The interactions that remained were analyzed by significance analysis of interactome. Finally, 268 cellular proteins interacting with MGF360-9L were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Ip-sample processing：Empty FLAG vector (8 ug) or FLAG-MGF360-9L (8 ug) was transfected into PK-15 cells. 24 h after transfection, FLAG monoclonal antibody was used for pull down. MGF360-9L-interacting host proteins were eluted with protein A/G sepharose and analyzed on SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. After the bands consistent with the molecular weight of Flag-MGF360-9L and the bands enriching the interaction partners of MGF360-9L were observed in the silver-stained samples, the samples were analyzed by LC-MC. β-actin was used as a loading control.。 Co-immunoprecipitation：The related plasmids were transfected into HEK-293T cells using liposome 2000. Then, 24 hours after transfection, the cells were lysed using NP40 buffer containing PMSF for 1 h at 4°C, and then subhected to ultrasound for 1.5 min with an interval of 5 sec. The power rating of the sonicator was 125W, frequency was 20 kHz, and the output intensity was set to 30%. The cell lysate was then incubated overnight with the indicated antibody or control IgG at 4°C. Consequently, samples were mixed with protein A/G agarose beads (Roche) for 3 h, washed with NP40 buffer thrice, and boiled in a sodium dodecyl sulfate loading buffer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.2) against UniProt Galagidae protein database (including 20638 sequences, downloaded at 20200511). For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da, enzyme = trypsin, missed cleavage = 2, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = oxidation (M), ion score > 20, and FDR < 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. The experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was loaded onto the C18 reversed-phase column (15 cm long and 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5 μm resin in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 60 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. To determine if the target value is based on predictive automatic gain control (pAGC), dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 27 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value is likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with its peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
African swine fever virus (ASFV) is prevalent in many countries and is a contagious and lethal virus that infects pigs, posing a threat to the global pig industry and public health. The interaction between the virus and the host is key to unlocking the mystery behind viral pathogenesis. A comprehensive understanding of the viral and host protein interaction may provide clues for developing new antiviral strategies. Here, we show a network of ASFV MGF360-9L protein interactions in porcine kidney (PK-15) cells. Overall, 268 proteins that interact with MGF360-9L are identified using immunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Accordingly, gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were conducted, and the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was created. It was speculated that the cellular proteins interacting with MGF360-9L are involved in protein binding, metabolism, and the innate immune response. Proteasome subunit alpha type (PSMA3), 26S protease regulatory subunit 4 (PSMC1), autophagy and beclin 1 regulator 1 (AMBRA1), and DEAD-box helicase 20 (DDX20) could interact with MGF360-9L in vitro. PSMA3 and PSMC1 overexpression significantly promoted ASFV replication, and MGF360-9L maintained the transcriptional level of PSMA3 and PSMC1. Here, we show the interaction between ASFV MGF360-9L and cellular proteins and elucidate the virus-host interaction network, which effectively provides useful protein-related information that can enable further study of the potential mechanism and pathogenesis of ASFV infection.

### Keywords
African swine fever virus; mgf360-9l; protein interaction; liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
shanghai
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Xujiaping No.1, Lanzhou, Gansu, 730046

### Submitter
yanzhen Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Yang
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Xujiaping No.1, Lanzhou, Gansu, 730046


