### Accession
PXD012291

### Title
Shigella flexneri effectors IpaJ and VirA globally impair host conventional secretion

### Description
Intracellular trafficking pathways in eukaryotic cells are essential to maintain organelle identity and structure, and to regulate cell communication with its environment. Shigella flexneri invades and subverts the human colonic epithelium by the injection of virulence factors through a type 3 secretion system (T3SS). In this work we report the multiple effects of two S. flexneri effectors, IpaJ and VirA, which target small GTPases of the Arf and Rab families, consequently inhibiting several intracellular trafficking pathways. IpaJ and VirA induce large-scale impairment of host protein secretion and block the recycling of surface receptors. Moreover, these two effectors decrease clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis. Therefore, S. flexneri infection induces a global blockage of host cell intracellular transport, affecting the exchange between cells and their external environment. The combined action of these effectors disorganizes the epithelial cell polarity, disturbs epithelial barrier integrity, promotes multiple invasion events and enhances the pathogen capacity to penetrate into the colonic tissue in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Human Caco-2/TC7 cells were cultured for 6 passages in SILAC DMEM flex media deficient for L-arginine and L-lysine with 20% heat inactivated dialyzed FBS (dFBS), 1 g/L glucose, GlutaMAX 1X, non essential amino acids, 10 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin supplemented with either 13C6,15N4 L-Arginine-HCl and 13C6,15N2 L-Lysine-2HCl (Heavy media) or with 13C6 L-Arginine-HCl and 4,4,5,5-D4 L-Lysine-2HCl (Medium media) (arginine at 84mg/mL and lysine at 146 mg/mL). Labeled cells were seeded on 6-well Transwell inserts and cultured for 21 days in Heavy or Medium SILAC medium changing the medium 3 times per week. For secretome collection, 24 hours before infections cells were washed with DMEM for SILAC with 20 mM Hepes and medium was replaced with either Medium or Heavy SILAC media but containing 2% dFBS. Cells were uninfected or infected with AfaE-expressing WT strain or the mutant virAipaJ. To that end, apical and basal chambers of Transwell inserts were washed 3 times with DMEM for SILAC/Hepes, Medium SILAC medium was added to uninfected cells, and bacteria were added in the apical chamber at a MOI 75 in Heavy SILAC medium without FBS or antibiotics. After 15 min at RT and 30 min at 37º C, cells were washed 3 times with DMEM for SILAC/Hepes, 1.5 mL of FBS-free Medium or Heavy SILAC media with 50 µg/mL gentamicin were added at either apical or basal Transwell chambers, and cells were further incubated at 37º C for 4 ½ hours. Apical and basal secretomes were collected (total volume: 3.6 mL/condition), UI and infected samples mixed in a 1:1 ratio, centrifuged (200 x g, 5 min), filtered with 0.22 µm syringe filters (Minisart, Sartorius Stedim Biotech S.A.) and snap-frozen in liquid N2. Samples were kept at -80º C until use. Before trypsin digestion, secretomes were concentrated to 500 𝜇L on Amicon Ultra-15, 10000 molecular weight cutoff centrifugation filter units (Millipore). For the filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP), a total of 60 mg of urea and 16 μL of M dithiothreitol were added to 500 μL of concentrated secretome, the solution was mixed on a Nanosep (10 KDa, Pall) device, and was incubated at 57 °C for 15 min. The mixture was spun down and was washed two times with 500 μL of 2 M urea in 0.1 Tris/HCl pH 8.5. A total of 100 μL of 0.05 M iodoacetamide was added and was incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. Two washes with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate were performed and the secretome was digested with 5 μg of trypsin / LysC (Promega) for 4 hours at 37 °C. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filtrate was dried in a vacuum concentrator at room temperature and was re-dissolved in solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were then subjected to LC/MS analysis by loading the peptides on a C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) at 20 µl/min in solvent A. After a desalting step for 3 min, the precolumn was switched on the C18 column (Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A and peptide were eluted with a 215 minute two step linear gradient of solvent B (from 5 to 20% (v/v) in 147 min and 20 to 40% in 65 min). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution set to a value of 120,000, with a mass range of m/z 400–1500 and a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 28, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1 × 104 and only those precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 were sampled for MS2 acquisition. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v 3.0) and the resulting spectra were interrogated by Sequest HT through Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1) with the SwissProt human database (012016). The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. We set carbamidomethyl cysteine,oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 13C615N2-Lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg10), medium 2H4-Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6-Arginine (Arg6) as variable modifications. We set specificity of Trypsin digestion and allowed 2 missed cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular trafficking pathways in eukaryotic cells are essential to maintain organelle identity and structure, and to regulate cell communication with its environment. <i>Shigella flexneri</i> invades and subverts the human colonic epithelium by the injection of virulence factors through a type 3 secretion system (T3SS). In this work, we report the multiple effects of two <i>S. flexneri</i> effectors, IpaJ and VirA, which target small GTPases of the Arf and Rab families, consequently inhibiting several intracellular trafficking pathways. IpaJ and VirA induce large-scale impairment of host protein secretion and block the recycling of surface receptors. Moreover, these two effectors decrease clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis. Therefore, <i>S. flexneri</i> infection induces a global blockage of host cell intracellular transport, affecting the exchange between cells and their external environment. The combined action of these effectors disorganizes the epithelial cell polarity, disturbs epithelial barrier integrity, promotes multiple invasion events, and enhances the pathogen capacity to penetrate into the colonic tissue in vivo.

### Keywords
Ipaj, Secretion, Bacteria, Polarity, Silac, Vira, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


