### Accession
PXD010998

### Title
larval integument of silkworm LC-MSMS

### Description
The  Dominant  obese  translucent  (Obs)  mutant  of  the  silkworm  results  in  a  short  and  stout larval body, translucent phenotype, and abnormal pigmentation in the integument.  The Obs mutant also displays difficulties in ecdysis and metamorphosis. In the present  study,  to  gain  an  understanding  of  multiple  Obs  phenotypes,  we  investigated  the  phenotypes  of  Obs  and  performed  a  comparative  analysis  of  the  larval  integument  proteomes of Obs and normal silkworms. The phenotypic analysis revealed that the Obs  larvae  are  indeed  short  and  fat,  and  that  chitin  and  uric  acid  content  were  lower  but  melanin  content  was  higher  in  the  Obs  mutant.  Proteomic  analysis  revealed  that  244  proteins were significantly differentially expressed between Obs and normal silkworms,  some  of  which  are  involved  in  uric  acid  metabolism  and  melanin  pigmentation.  Twenty-six  proteins  were  annotated  as  cuticular  proteins,  including  RR  motif-rich  cuticular  proteins  (CPR),  glycine-rich  cuticular  protein  (CPG),  hypothetical  cuticular  protein  (CPH),  cuticular  protein  analogous  to  peritrophins  (CPAP),  and  the  chitin_bind_3 motif proteins, and accounted for over 84% of the abundance of the total  significantly differentially-expressed proteins identified. Moreover, 22 of the 26 cuticular  proteins  were  down-regulated  in  the  Obs  mutant.  Comparative  proteomic  analysis  suggested that the multiple phenotypes of the Obs mutant are related to changes in the  expression of proteins that participate in cuticular formation, uric acid metabolism, and  melanin  pigmentation.  These  results  also  provide  a  reference  for  studying  the  gene  responsible for the Obs mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation  Samples prepared as described in 2.1 were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a  pestle  to  produce  a  powder,  to  which  an  appropriate  amount  of  SDT  lysis  buffer  (containing  4%  sodium  dodecyl  sulfate  (SDS),  100  mM  Tris/HCl  pH  7.6,  and  1  mM  dithiothreitol (DTT)) was added. The resulting homogenate was incubated at 100°C for  15 min, followed by sonication, centrifugation (12,100 × g, 30 min, 4°C), and collection  of  the  supernatant.  This  SDT  extraction  processes  was  repeated  two  times,  and  all  resulting supernatants were mixed. To this supernatant preparation, 14 mL trichloroacetic  acid (TAC)/acetone (1:9) was added and the mixture was maintained at -20°C overnight.  The following day, the mixture was centrifuged at 7,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C and the  supernatant  was  discarded.  To  the  pellet,  13  mL  of  pre-cooled  acetone  was  added  followed by centrifugation at 7,000 × g for 30 min. This acetone wash procedure was  repeated three times and the final pellet was air-dried. An appropriate amount of SDT  lysis buffer was added to the dried pellet, followed by mixing and boiling for 15 min.  The  preparation  was  centrifuged  at  14,000  ×  g  for  40  min  and  the  supernatant  was  collected.  Proteins  in  the  supernatant  were  quantified  using  a  BCA  Protein  Assay  Kit  (Bio-Rad, USA). Remaining sample was stored at -80°C for further experiments.  Protein digestion    Proteins purified in 2.6 were digested according to the FASP procedure (Wisniewski et al.  2009). For each sample, 200 µg of protein solution was reduced by incubation with 100  mM DTT in a boiling water bath for 15 min, and cooled to room temperature. To this  solution, 200 µL UA buffer (8M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) was added, followed by  thorough mixing. The mixture was then transferred to 30 kDa ultrafiltration centrifuge  tubes (Wisniewski et al. 2009) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min. After discardingthe flow-through, 200 µL UA buffer was added, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g  for  15  min,  and  again  discarding  the  flow-through.  Thereafter,  100  µL  iodoacetamide  (IAA)  (50  mM  IAA  in  UA)  was  added  to  alkylate  the  preparation,  followed  by  oscillation at 600 rpm for 1 min. The preparation was then stored in the dark for 30 min  at room temperature, and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. The ultrafiltration tube  was washed twice with 100 µL UA buffer and then twice with 100 µL 25mM NH 4 HCO 3 .  Proteins were digested with trypsin (2 µg trypsin in 40 µL NH 4 HCO 3  buffer) overnight at  37°C. Since the digested peptides were smaller than the bore diameter of the super filter,  tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min, after which  the  tryptic  peptides  were  desalted  on  a  C18-SD  Extraction  Disk  Cartridge  (66872-U  Sigma, USA). The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis  Equal  amounts  of  tryptic  peptides  for  each  example  were  separated  using  a  Thermo  Finnigan EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptide mixture  was  loaded  into  a  Thermo  EASY  column  SC001  trap  (150  µm  ×  20  mm;  RP-C 18 )  connected  to  a  Thermo  EASY  column  SC200  150  µm  ×  100  mm  (RP-C 18 )  in  mobile  phase A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile), and separated with a linear gradient of  0%–100% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) over 120 min at a flow  rate of 400 nL/min. LC–MS/MS analysis was performed for 120 min using a Q-Exactive  mass  spectrometer  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  USA).  MS  data  were  acquired  using  a  data-dependent top10 method, dynamically selecting the most abundant precursor ions  from  the  survey  scan  (300–1800  m/z)  with  a  charge  state  of  +2  to  +5  for  higher  collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The duration dynamic exclusion was 60 s.  Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and the resolution for  HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and with an isolation width of 2 m/z. The  normalized collision energy was 30 eV.

### Data Protocol
Six  raw  LC–MS/MS  files  obtained  from  the  above  process  were  analyzed  using  MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany)  (Cox and Mann 2008). The MaxQuant searches were performed against the Silkworm  Genome  Database  (SilkDB)  (http://silkworm.swu.edu.cn/silkdb/),  National  Center  for  Biotechnology  Information  (NCBI)  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)  and  KAIKObase  (http://sgp.dna.affrc.go.jp/KAIKObase/) databases. Peptide searches were executed using  Andromeda  search  algorithms  (Cox  et  al.  2011).  Main  search  and  MS/MS  tolerance  precursors were set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were used as the variable modifications,  and  carbamidomethylation  of  cysteines  was  considered  a  fixed  modification.  For  all  searches, the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identifications was 1%.  The  minimum  number  of  quantified  peptides  per  protein  was  one  unique  peptide.  Proteins  that  were  detected  in  two  or  more  biological  replicates  were  considered  as  representing reliable results. The identified peptides and proteins are listed in Table S1  and  S2,  respectively.  For  the  following  analyses,  all  common  contaminants  were  removed. For comparison of protein abundances across different samples, the label-free  quantification  (LFQ)  algorithm  was  used,  which  compares  the  intensities  of  the  same  peptides detected in different samples (Luber et al. 2010). In contrast, for comparison of  abundances  of  different  proteins  within  a  sample,  the  intensity-based  absolute  quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was used (Schwanhausser et al. 2011). The ratio of LFQ  intensity of the Obs type compared with that of the normal type was set at more or less  than  two  times  as  the  criteria  for  screening  significantly  differential  proteins  with  a  statistically significant difference (P value < 0.05). Statistical differences were evaluated  using a t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The dominant obese translucent (Obs) mutant of the silkworm (Bombyx mori) results in a short and stout larval body, translucent phenotype, and abnormal pigmentation in the integument. The Obs mutant also displays deficiency in ecdysis and metamorphosis. In the present study, to gain an understanding of multiple Obs phenotypes, we investigated the phenotypes of Obs and performed a comparative analysis of the larval integument proteomes of Obs and normal silkworms. The phenotypic analysis revealed that the Obs larvae were indeed short and fat, and that chitin and uric acid content were lower but melanin content was higher in the Obs mutant. Proteomic analysis revealed that 244 proteins were significantly differentially expressed between Obs and normal silkworms, some of which were involved in uric acid metabolism and melanin pigmentation. Twenty-six proteins were annotated as cuticular proteins, including RR motif-rich cuticular proteins (CPR), glycine-rich cuticular protein (CPG), hypothetical cuticular protein (CPH), cuticular protein analogous to peritrophins (CPAPs), and the chitin_bind_3 motif proteins, and accounted for over 84% of the abundance of the total significantly differentially expressed proteins. Moreover, 22 of the 26 cuticular proteins were downregulated in the Obs mutant. Comparative proteomic analysis suggested that the multiple phenotypes of the Obs mutant might be related to changes in the expression of proteins that participate in cuticular formation, uric acid metabolism, and melanin pigmentation. These results could lay a basis for further identification of the gene responsible for the Obs mutant. The data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010998.

### Keywords
Larval integument, Lc-msms, Silkworm

### Affiliations
13032305499
State  Key  Laboratory  of  Silkworm  Genome  Biology,  College  of  Biotechnology, Southwest University,  Chongqing , China.

### Submitter
kun wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qingyou Xia
State  Key  Laboratory  of  Silkworm  Genome  Biology,  College  of  Biotechnology, Southwest University,  Chongqing , China.


