### Accession
PXD017468

### Title
High Resolution mRNA and Secretome Atlas of Human Enteroendocrine Cells

### Description
Enteroendocrine cells (EECs) sense intestinal content and release hormones to regulate gastrointestinal activity and systemic metabolism and food intake. Little is known about the molecular make-up of human EEC subtypes and the regulated secretion of individual hormones. Here we describe an organoid-based platform for functional studies of human EECs. EEC formation is induced in vitro by transient expression of NEUROG3. A set of gut organoids was engineered in which the major hormones are fluorescently tagged.  A single-cell mRNA atlas was generated for the different EEC subtypes, and their secreted products were recorded by mass-spectrometry. We note key differences with murine EECs, including in hormones, sensory receptors and transcription factors. Notably, several novel hormone-like molecules were identified. Inter-EEC communication is exemplified by Secretin-induced GLP-1 secretion. Indeed, individual EEC subtypes carry receptors for various EEC hormones. This study provides a rich resource to study human EEC development and function.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of secreted peptides and proteins for LC-MS: Organoids differentiated for 5 days to EECs were washed extensively in PBS and stimulated with 10µM Forskolin (Tocris). Conditioned media was collected for 24 hours and supplemented with 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail on harvest (Roche). Potential cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 x g, for 5 min at 4oC. Conditioned media supernatant was denatured in final 4M Urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and fractionated by molecular weight with a 10 kDa Vivaspin centrifugal device (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany), at 12,000 x g, for 10 min at 4oC. (i) Endogenously processed peptides recovered from the filtrate were acidified to 5% formic acid, desalted by reversed phase C18 1cc columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA), further purified by home-made strong cation exchange STAGE tip, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. (ii) Longer secreted proteins in the 10 kDa retentate were recovered and diluted to final 2 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, for reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37oC. Digested peptides were similarly acidified to 5% formic acid, desalted by reversed phase C18 1cc columns (Waters), and dried by vacuum centrifugation.    Preparation of FACS-sorted EECs for proteome analyses: FACS sorted enteroendocrine cells were lysed in 8M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 0.5 % Sodium deoxycholate, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor, 50 μg/mL DNAse I, and sonicated with the Biorupter (3 cycles, 20 s on, 20 s off at 4°C) (Diagenode, Liege, Belgium). Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 1 hour at 15oC, and supernatant containing extracted proteins were reduced, alkylated, diluted 4 times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested sequentially with  Lys-C (Wako) and trypsin (Promega). Peptide digests were quenched to 5% formic acid, and sodium deoxycholate was precipitated and removed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g, 4°C for 10 minutes. Peptides in the supernatant were diluted to final 20% acetonitrile and purified by SCX STAGE tips. Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.    LC-MS: Peptides were reconstituted in 2% FA for LC-MS injection. Data was acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent, California, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Massachussets, USA). Peptides were first trapped in a 2 cm × 100 μM Reprosil C18 trap column (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) of 3 μM pore size for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). After trapping, samples separated in an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm) using a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (solvent B). Depending on total peptide input, species complexity, and elution profiles, different LC gradient lengths were used for FACS-sorted whole proteomes (35min, 13-40% solvent B), secreted proteins (65min, 13-40% solvent B) and endogenously processed peptides (95min, 13-44% solvent B). MS acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode.   Full scans (MS1) were acquired from 375 to 1600 m/z at resolution 60,000, with 20 ms injection time and 3x106 AGC target value. The TOP 15 most intense precursor ions where selected for fragmentation using 1.4 m/z isolation window. Isolated precursors were fragmented using high energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%. MS2 scans were acquired at resolution 30,000, with 50 ms injection time and an AGC target value of 1x105. Exclusion times were set to 8, 12 or 16 seconds for proteomics, digested retentates and endogenously processed peptides respectively.

### Data Protocol
Collected spectral data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific, Massachussets, USA), and searched using Sequest HT search engine, against UniProt Homo sapiens database (173235 entries, downloaded in August 2019, including common contaminants). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Protein N-terminal Acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. For the endogenously processed peptides, peptides of length 6 - 50 amino acids were generated from the database upon unspecific cleavage.  For digested retentates and analyses of the FACS-sorted EECs proteomes, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Identified peptides were filtered to 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm.  In proteome analyses, intensities of proteins detected in 2 out of 3 replicates in at least one group were log(2) transformed and missing values were imputed from the normal distribution independently for each sample using Perseus software (v_1.6.2.2) . Processed data was assessed for statistical significance among the groups using One-way ANOVA or Student’s T-test, and resulting p-values were corrected for type I error using Benjamini-Hochberg approach (q-value). Tukey Honest Significant Difference test was performed to assess difference between the groups when required. Hormone processing plots were generated from peptides identified at high confidence (1 % FDR) in at least 2 out of 3 replicates. For novel secreted products, peptides identified in 3 out of 3 replicates and not observed in the secretome of control organoids were used. Peptide sequences identified based on retention time alignment (not supported by spectral evidence) were not used in hormone processing plots. Statistical analysis and plots were generated using in-house built R scripts (R version 3.6.0).

### Publication Abstract
Enteroendocrine cells (EECs) sense intestinal content and release hormones to regulate gastrointestinal activity, systemic metabolism, and food intake. Little is known about the molecular make-up of human EEC subtypes and the regulated secretion of individual hormones. Here, we describe an organoid-based platform for functional studies of human EECs. EEC formation is induced in&#xa0;vitro by transient expression of NEUROG3. A set of gut organoids was engineered in which the major hormones are fluorescently tagged. A single-cell mRNA atlas was generated for the different EEC subtypes, and their secreted products were recorded by mass-spectrometry. We note key differences to murine EECs, including hormones, sensory receptors, and transcription factors. Notably, several hormone-like molecules were identified. Inter-EEC communication is exemplified by secretin-induced GLP-1 secretion. Indeed, individual EEC subtypes carry receptors for various EEC hormones. This study provides a rich resource to study human EEC development and function.

### Keywords
Eec, Organoids, Secretome, Peptide hormones

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The  Netherlands.  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The  Netherlands.  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


