### Accession
PXD001830

### Title
Phosphorylation of Cohesin's Deposition Factor, Scc2 Regulates its Deposition Activity

### Description
Phosphorylated residues of the budding yeast Scc2 protein were identified using phosphopeptide enrichment and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were cryogenically lysed and Scc2-Flag was immunopurified on FLAG bound magnetic Protein A beads.  The IP sample was electrophoresed on an (4-12%) SDS gradient gel (Novex) and stained with coomassie.  The band corresponding to Scc2 was isolated and subjected to an in-gel tryptic digestion.  Peptides were extracted from the gel and samples for phosphopeptide enrichment were prepared using Fe-NTA beads (Pierce).  Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis with HCD- and CID-type fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was performed using the instrument supplied Xcalibur (version 2.0.6) software.  MS/MS spectra were extracted from the raw data files and converted into mgf files using a PAVA script (UCSF, MSF, San Fransisco, CA).  These mgf files were then independently searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae subset of the SwissProt database using an in-house Mascot(TM) server (version 2.2.06, Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
The cohesion of replicated sister chromatids promotes chromosome biorientation, gene regulation, DNA repair, and chromosome condensation. Cohesion is mediated by cohesin, which is deposited on chromosomes by a separate conserved loading complex composed of Scc2 and Scc4 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Although it is known to be required, the role of Scc2/Scc4 in cohesin deposition remains enigmatic. Scc2 is a phosphoprotein, although the functions of phosphorylation in deposition are unknown. We identified 11 phosphorylated residues in Scc2 by mass spectrometry. Mutants of SCC2 with substitutions that mimic constitutive phosphorylation retain normal Scc2-Scc4 interactions and chromatin association but exhibit decreased viability, sensitivity to genotoxic agents, and decreased stability of the Mcd1 cohesin subunit in mitotic cells. Cohesin association on chromosome arms, but not pericentromeric regions, is reduced in the phosphomimetic mutants but remains above a key threshold, as cohesion is only modestly perturbed. However, these scc2 phosphomimetic mutants exhibit dramatic chromosome condensation defects that are likely responsible for their high inviability. From these data, we conclude that normal Scc2 function requires modulation of its phosphorylation state and suggest that scc2 phosphomimetic mutants cause an increased incidence of abortive cohesin deposition events that result in compromised cohesin complex integrity and Mcd1 turnover.

### Keywords
Nipbl, Scc2, Sister chromatid cohesion, Cohesin, Delangin

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver: Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO
University of Colorado Denver

### Submitter
Matthew Wither

### Lab Head
Dr Paul C. Megee
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver: Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO


