### Accession
PXD006213

### Title
Systematic genetic and proteomic screens identify yeast H2BK37 and mammalian H2BK34 methylation as an evolutionary conserved meiotic mark

### Description
Gametes are highly differentiated cells specialized to carry and protect the parental genetic information. Their chromatin organization is highly compacted and the establishment of this nuclear structure involves many chromatin processes. Technical difficulties exclude the analysis of precise histone mutations during mouse spermatogenesis. The model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses a differentiation pathway named sporulation with striking similarities with mammalian spermatogenesis. This study took advantage of this yeast pathway and performed a systematic mutational screen on the histone H2A and H2B, revealing the residues which are essential for the formation of spores. Many of them are localized on the lateral side of the nucleosome, highlighting the importance of this surface for meiotic divisions and the formation of spores. Second, histones have been purified at different stages of sporulation and their post-translational modifications analyzed by mass spectrometry. Fifteen new sites of acetylation, methylation or phosphorylation have been identified on the core histones in yeast. Methylation of H2BK37 appears to be a new meiotic mark and is important for Rad51 action. Thus, this modification is conserved during mammalian spermatogenesis when it is found enriched during meiosis. Altogether, our results demonstrate that a combination of genetic and proteomic approaches applied to yeast sporulation can reveal new aspects of chromatin signaling pathways during mammalian spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast histones were affinity-purified using a strain in which histone H3 had been FLAG-tagged. Histones were then separated by SDS-PAGE, in gel-digested using trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a capillary LC column coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW files produced by LC-MS/MS analysis of histone tryptic peptides were submitted to the Mascot program (version 2.5.1) via Mascot Daemon. MS/MS data acquired on yeast histones were matched to a database made up of yeast proteins from Swiss-Prot and their decoy version (13458 protein sequences), plus a list of about 500 contaminants commonly observed in MS analyses (keratins, trypsin, etc). The following modifications were considered as variable ones: N-terminal protein acetylation; Lys acetylation; Lys and Arg mono- and di-methylation, Lys trimethylation and Ser and Thr phosphorylation. For all Mascot searches, the tolerance on mass measurement was set to 5 ppm for peptides and to 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Up to five tryptic missed cleavages were allowed for histones H2A, H2B and H4, whereas allowing up to 3 missed cleavages was sufficient for H3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sporulation, Spermatogenesis, Meiosis, Methylation, Histone

### Affiliations
CNRS
EDyP, BGE, BIGT (Biosciences and Biotechnology Institute of Grenoble)

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP, BGE, BIGT (Biosciences and Biotechnology Institute of Grenoble)


