### Accession
PXD022954

### Title
Dietary restriction transforms the mammalian protein sulfhydrome in a tissue-specific and cystathionine γ-lyase-dependent manner

### Description
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a cytoprotective redox-active metabolite that signals through protein persulfidation (R-SSnH). Despite the known importance of persulfidation on relatively few identified proteins, tissue-specific sulfhydrome profiles and their associated functions are not well characterized, specifically under conditions known to modulate H2S production. We hypothesized that dietary restriction (DR), which increases lifespan and can boost H2S production, expands tissue-specific sulfhydromes. Here, we found protein persulfidation was enriched in liver, kidney, muscle, and brain but decreased in heart of young and aged male mice under two forms of DR, with DR promoting persulfidation in numerous metabolic and aging-related pathways. Mice lacking H2S producing enzyme cystathionine γ-lyase (CGL) had overall decreased tissue protein persulfidation and failed to functionally augment sulfhydromes in response to DR. Overall, we defined tissue- and CGL-dependent sulfhydromes and how diet transforms their makeup, underscoring the breadth for DR and H2S to impact biological processes and organismal health.

### Sample Protocol
7 mg of proteins were extracted and alkylated with 343 µM Maleimide-PEG2- biotin as described above in the BTA assay. Alkylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5). After denaturation for 10 minutes at 90°C proteins were diluted with 7 volumes of dilution buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5), followed by incubating with trypsin (Promega, #V5111) (ratio of 1:50 W/W) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion, trypsin was heat inactivated at 95°C for 10min. Prior to adding the digested peptide to the streptavidin-agarose resin containing spin columns, the columns (Pierce, Catalog No. 69705) were first washed with PBS two times, followed by adding 0.400 mL streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, #20347) to the column and washing the resin 1x with PBS. The resin was then equilibrated with a 1:7 denaturation buffer: dilution buffer wash four times prior to plugging the outlet of the column and incubated at 4°C with continuous rotation to mix for 18 hours. After the overnight incubation, the protein resin mix in the columns was washed six times in 0.85 mL of wash buffer 1 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) followed by another six washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 2 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 600 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) and finally another three washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 3 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). All washes were done using the Vac-Man Laboratory Vacuum Manifold (Promega A7231). Resin with bound peptide eluted with or without DTT as described above in the BTA assay except no trypsin added during the gel processing steps.7 mg of proteins were extracted and alkylated with 343 µM Maleimide-PEG2- biotin as described above in the BTA assay. Alkylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5). After denaturation for 10 minutes at 90°C proteins were diluted with 7 volumes of dilution buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5), followed by incubating with trypsin (Promega, #V5111) (ratio of 1:50 W/W) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion, trypsin was heat inactivated at 95°C for 10min. Prior to adding the digested peptide to the streptavidin-agarose resin containing spin columns, the columns (Pierce, Catalog No. 69705) were first washed with PBS two times, followed by adding 0.400 mL streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, #20347) to the column and washing the resin 1x with PBS. The resin was then equilibrated with a 1:7 denaturation buffer: dilution buffer wash four times prior to plugging the outlet of the column and incubated at 4°C with continuous rotation for better mixing for 18 hours. After the overnight incubation, the protein resin mix in the columns was washed six times in 0.85 mL of wash buffer 1 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) followed by another six washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 2 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 600 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) and finally another three washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 3 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). All washes were done using the Vac-Man Laboratory Vacuum Manifold (Promega A7231). Resin with bound peptide was first incubated with freshly prepared 500 µL elution buffer (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 10mM TEAB, pH 7.5) for 30 min at 25˚C followed by centrifugation of the spin tube inside of a 2 mL collection tube at 2000 g for 2 minutes to collect the eluate. A C18 column (Thermo #89870) was used to remove the TCEP followed by eluting peptide with 70% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried and suspended with 100 µl of 50 mM TEAB buffer. Thiol groups were alkylated and labeled with 2.95 mM iodoTMT (Thermo Scientific #90101) for 1h in the dark. Reactions were then quenched by vortexing and incubating for 15 minutes at 37oC in 20 mM DTT in the dark. Each of the 6 samples labeled with a unique IodoTMT tag were then mixed into a single tube and dried.  Finally, the combined labeled peptides were reconstituted with 1% Acetic Acid for further analyses via LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mascot, SEQUEST and Scaffold software packages were used for label-free quantitative and qualitative proteomics analysis. These software were used for protein identification by converting raw spectrometric data into protein IDs and for relative quantification of protein abundance via label-free spectral counting. For protein identification, three search engines were used including Mascot, Sequest which is bundled into Proteome Discoverer 1.4, and X!Tandem which is bundled into Scaffold 4.8.7. For the Mascot searches, primary raw MS/MS data were converted into its MGF (Mascot Generic File) format files by using Discoverer Daemon 1.4 software (Licensed under Cleveland Clinic Proteomics Core). The parameters selected for these searches include the following: Database: SwissProt, Taxonomy: Mus Musculus, Enzyme: Trypsin, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl(C), Variable modification: Oxidation of Methionine, Precursor Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.8 Da, Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+, with the monoisotopic and decoy database present. Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) 84 was used to validate peptide and protein identifications and create comprehensive lists of target proteins. Protein and peptide identifications were validated using a decoy database strategy (reverse sequence of each protein for use as a decoy) and the decoy rate was set to zero, which may limit the total number of proteins identified but enables a higher confidence in protein identity for those that do meet all stringent criteria. Other settings for Scaffold included only allowing positive IDs if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides by the Peptide Prophet algorithm 85,86 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Additionally, to remove any false positive hits, we individually analyzed all of the proteins identified to ensure each one contained at least one cysteine residue by using the mouse protein amino acid sequences from UniProt Knowledgebase protein database (Proteome_ID/Tax_ID: UP000000589/10090). Those that did not contain at least one cysteine residue, and thus could not theoretically be sulfhydrated (approx. ~ 2-4% of our initial findings), were removed from our database and from further analysis. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds, including Mascot identifications required at least 40 ion score, Sequest identifications required at least XCorr (+1) is 1.5, XCorr (+2) is 2, XCorr (+3) is 2.25, and XCorr(+4) is 2.5, and X!Tandem identifications required at least 2. 28 Label-free spectral counting was used to determine relative differences in sulfhydrated protein abundance between AL versus DR fed groups within a specific tissue 87. The spectral counts, defined as the total number of spectra identified for a specific protein, have integer values ranging from 0 for proteins below the level of detection up to 753. Theoretically, higher spectral counts for a given protein equates to higher abundance of that protein in a given tissue sample, where the number of spectra matched to peptides from a specific protein are used as a surrogate measure of protein abundance. The average spectral counts for each protein in each tissue were calculated, and the ratio of average spectral counts amongst the control group (e.g. AL, WT) compared to experimental group (e.g. DR, EOD, KO) were used to determine fold-change between the two groups. Spectral count values below the level of detection were originally automatically assigned a value of 0, however, these were changed to 0.1 for purposes of statistical analysis and plotting in log scale in volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide (H<sub>2</sub>S) is a cytoprotective redox-active metabolite that signals through protein persulfidation (R-SS<sub>n</sub>H). Despite the known importance of persulfidation, tissue-specific persulfidome profiles and their associated functions are not well characterized, specifically under conditions and interventions known to modulate H<sub>2</sub>S production. We hypothesize that dietary restriction (DR), which increases lifespan and can boost H<sub>2</sub>S production, expands tissue-specific persulfidomes. Here, we find protein persulfidation enriched in liver, kidney, muscle, and brain but decreased in heart of young and aged male mice under two forms of DR, with DR promoting persulfidation in numerous metabolic and aging-related pathways. Mice lacking cystathionine &#x3b3;-lyase (CGL) have overall decreased tissue protein persulfidation numbers and fail to functionally augment persulfidomes in response to DR, predominantly in kidney, muscle, and brain. Here, we define tissue- and CGL-dependent persulfidomes and how diet transforms their makeup, underscoring the breadth for DR and H<sub>2</sub>S to impact biological processes and organismal health.

### Keywords
Persulfidation, Cysteine, Redox metabolism, Cystathionine γ-lyase (cgl, Sulfhydrome, Longevity, Sulfhydration, Cth), Cse, Every other day (eod) fasting, Hydrogen sulfide (h2s), Dietary restriction (dr), Biotin thiol assay (bta)

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute 

### Submitter
Nazmin Bithi

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Hine
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences


