### Accession
PXD021582

### Title
TMT-coupled phosphoproteomics support novel role of TWEAK/Fn14 signaling in synaptic function

### Description
The study aims at illustrate novel role of TWEAK/Fn14 signaling in synapse function by combining electrophysiological and phosphoproteomic approaches. The results show that TWEAK acutely dampens basal synaptic transmission and plasticity through neuronal Fn14 and impacts the phosphorylation state of pre- and post-synaptic proteins in adult mouse hippocampal slices. Two models featuring synaptic deficits were used in the study. Blocking TWEAK/Fn14 signaling augments synaptic function in hippocampal slices from amyloid beta-overexpressing mice. After stroke, genetic or pharmacological inhibition of TWEAK/Fn14 signaling augments basal synaptic transmission and normalizes plasticity.  Our data support a glial/neuronal axis that critically modifies synaptic physiology and pathophysiology in different contexts in the mature brain and may be a therapeutic target for improving neurophysiological outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Brain slice samples from male WT and Fn14KO 6-8 weeks-old mice, treated with Fc-TWEAK or CNQX or control for 30 minutes and six replicates each, were homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer (8M Urea in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) with protease and phosphatase Inhibitor cocktails (Sigma) by 2 cycles of dry ice freeze – room temperature (RT) thaw, followed by grinding and sonication in ice-water bath (15 min) and then sitting on ice (15 min), and clarification by centrifuge. The protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay, and the extracts were then DTT reduced, IAM alkylated, tryptic-digested, and desalted.  Subsequently, peptide concentrations were measured on nanodrop 2000, labeled by TMT-6 according vendor’s instruction. The labeled peptides were combined into 6 peptide mixtures, each of which contains one replicate from each of the six groups (WT_Fc-TWEAK, WT_CNQX, WT_control, KO_Fc-TWEAK, KO_CNQX, and KO_control) with differentiated mass tag. The resulting six peptide mixtures were each step-fractionated by high-pH fractionation and concatenated into four fractions of similar complexities, resulting in 24 sub-samples. Phosphopeptides were next IMAC enriched. The phosphopeptide-enriched eluents were desalted using C18 StageTips, speed-vac dried and stored in -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to analysis, the phosphopeptide-enriched sub-samples were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.2% formic acid (FA) and analyzed on a nanoLC-MS/MS platform (EASY nLC 1200, QExactive HF, Thermo) at DDA mode with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, and resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z for both MS1 and MS2. Peptides were separated on a Thermo, EASY-Spray C18 column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) over 120-min effective gradient at flow rate of 275 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectral data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) against Swiss-Prot mouse database (UniProtKB Release 2016_04) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications.  Mass error of 20 ppm and up to two mis-cleavages were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide levels were both set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stroke, Phosphoproteomics, Synaptic transmission, Neurodegeneration, Synaptic plasticity, Fn14, Tweak

### Affiliations
Biogen
Chemical Biology & Proteomics, Biogen

### Submitter
Ru Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Doug Johnson
Chemical Biology & Proteomics, Biogen


