### Accession
PXD045228

### Title
Proteome profiling of MOLM-13 cells treated with proposed CK1α degraders

### Description
Targeted Protein Degradation (TPD) encompasses two approaches that generate small molecules with similar proteasome-dependent mechanisms of action: Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs) and Molecular Glues (MGs). Our goal is to develop novel MG approaches that exploit the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cereblon (CRBN) to degrade key oncogenic drivers in the leading causes of childhood cancer death: acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This project will identify new vulnerabilities and compounds that degrade hitherto undruggable transcription factors in high-risk acute leukemia (AL) and medulloblastoma (MB). Based on our preliminary data, we hypothesize that each of these compounds (SJ001010039, SJ001010040, SJ001010041, SJ001010047, SJ001010050) degrades CK1α in this cell line and may degrade other proteins. Our aims are to confirm that CK1α is degraded by treatment with each of these compounds and to identify any additional proteins that are targeted for degradation by these compounds.

### Sample Protocol
MOLM-13 cells were seeded in 6-well plates (2 million cells in 3ml media per sample). Cells were treated and incubated for 4h. Samples were collected, washed with cold PBS twice, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and transferred to -80⁰C. To profile the whole proteome, cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) and the protein lysates (approximately 100 µg of protein per sample) were proteolyzed with LysC (Wako) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 2 h at 21 oC. Following this the samples were diluted to a final 2 M Urea concentration, and further digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for at least 3 h. The peptides were reduced by adding 1 mM DTT for 30 min at 21oC followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. The unreacted IAA was quenched with 30 mM DTT for 30 min. Finally, the digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1%, desalted using C18 cartridges (Harvard Apparatus) and dried by speedvac. The purified peptides were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific). The differentially labeled samples were pooled equally, desalted and dried for the subsequent peptide fractionation.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw data were processed by a tag-based hybrid search engine JUMP (Wang et al., 2014, PMID: 25202125). The data was searched against the UniProt human database (104,374 protein entries; downloaded in 2020/04/22) concatenated with a reversed decoy database for evaluating FDR. Searches were performed using a 15 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, fully tryptic restriction with two maximal missed cleavages, three maximal modification sites, and the assignment of b, and y ions. TMT tags on lysine residues and N-termini (+304.2071453 Da for TMT16 and TMT18) were used for static modifications and Met oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was considered as a dynamic modification. Putative peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered by mass accuracy and then grouped by precursor ion charge state and filtered by JUMP-based matching scores (Jscore and ΔJn) to reduce FDR below 1% for proteins during whole proteome analysis. TMT intensities were extracted, filtered, normalized, and summarized into peptide and protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted protein degradation, Molecular glues, Acute leukemia, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Department of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
Yingxue Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
Department of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA


