### Accession
PXD037443

### Title
Exploring Alternative Cysteine-reactive Chemistry for MS-cleavable Cross-linking Mass Spectrometry

### Description
To enable global PPI mapping, we have explored an alternative cysteine labeling chemistry, and thus designed and synthesized a sulfoxide-containing MS-cleavable haloacetamide-based cross-linker, DiBromoAcetamide SulfOxide (DBrASO). In combination with a newly developed SEC-HpHt fractionation method, we have successfully applied DBrASO for cross-linking of HEK293 cell lysates and demonstrated its capability to complement lysine-reactive reagents in order to expand PPI coverage at systems-level.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro cross-linked cell lysates were digested and fractionated by SEC-HpHt fractionation method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mgf files by MSConvert . Extracted MS3 spectra was subjected to Protein Prospector (v.6.3.3) for database searching (using Batch-Tag against SwissProt.2019. 04. 08 random concatenated database). The mass tolerances were set as ±20 ppm for parent ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with three maximum missed cleavages allowed. A maximum of four variable modifications were also allowed, including cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid. Three defined DBrASO cross-linked modification on cysteine were also added as variable modifications. MSn data were integrated via in-house software xl-Tools to identify cross-linked peptide pairs

### Publication Abstract
The development of MS-cleavable cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has enabled the effective capture and identification of endogenous protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and their residue contacts at the global scale without cell engineering. So far, only lysine-reactive cross-linkers have been successfully applied for proteome-wide PPI profiling. However, lysine cross-linkers alone cannot uncover the complete PPI map in cells. Previously, we have developed a maleimide-based cysteine-reactive MS-cleavable cross-linker (bismaleimide sulfoxide (BMSO)) that is effective for mapping PPIs of protein complexes to yield interaction contacts complementary to lysine-reactive reagents. While successful, the hydrolysis and limited selectivity of maleimides at physiological pH make their applications in proteome-wide XL-MS challenging. To enable global PPI mapping, we have explored an alternative cysteine-labeling chemistry and thus designed and synthesized a sulfoxide-containing MS-cleavable haloacetamide-based cross-linker, Dibromoacetamide sulfoxide (DBrASO). Our results have demonstrated that DBrASO cross-linked peptides display the same fragmentation characteristics as other sulfoxide-containing MS-cleavable cross-linkers, permitting their unambiguous identification by MS<i><sup>n</sup></i>. In combination with a newly developed two-dimensional peptide fractionation method, we have successfully performed DBrASO-based XL-MS analysis of HEK293 cell lysates and demonstrated its capability to complement lysine-reactive reagents and expand PPI coverage at the systems-level.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Fenglong Jiao

### Lab Head
Dr Lan Huang
University of California, Irvine


