### Accession
PXD017337

### Title
Identification of PRDM9 partners

### Description
PRDM9 specifies the sites of meiotic DNA double strand break that initiate meiotic recombination in mice and humans. PRDM9 is known to bind to specific DNA sequences with its DNA binding domain, to induce H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 to adjacent nucleosomes through its methyltransferase activity, and to recruit or activate the meiotic DSB machinery. To understand how PRDM9 executes these various steps, we set up to identify its partners. This was performed by a proteomic approach where protein extracts from mouse testis were immunoprecipitated with anti-PRDM9 antibody for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein nuclear extracts were prepared according to Dignam protocol Immunoprecipitation was with homemade anti-PRDM9 rabbit polyclonal antibody  Mock controls were with rabbit serum SDS-PAGE separation, excision in 5 bands, in gel digestion with trypsin. Data acquisition using an LTQ orbitrap Elite coupled with an U3000 HPLC. MS analysis were done in the orbitrap and MSMS (top20) in the linear trap

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software v1.5.0.0 and Mouse reference proteome from UniProtKB (2015) using standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Meiotic recombination starts with the formation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) at specific genomic locations that correspond to PRDM9-binding sites. The molecular steps occurring from PRDM9 binding to DSB formation are unknown. Using proteomic approaches to find PRDM9 partners, we identified HELLS, a member of the SNF2-like family of chromatin remodelers. Upon functional analyses during mouse male meiosis, we demonstrated that HELLS is required for PRDM9 binding and DSB activity at PRDM9 sites. However, HELLS is not required for DSB activity at PRDM9-independent sites. HELLS is also essential for 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) enrichment at PRDM9 sites. Analyses of 5hmC in mice deficient for SPO11, which catalyzes DSB formation, and in PRDM9 methyltransferase deficient mice reveal that 5hmC is triggered at DSB-prone sites upon PRDM9 binding and histone modification, but independent of DSB activity. These findings highlight the complex regulation of the chromatin and epigenetic environments at PRDM9-specified hotspots.

### Keywords
Recombination, Chromatin, Meiosis, Dna breaks

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Genetics, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard de Massy
Institute of Human Genetics, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France


