### Accession
PXD046553

### Title
ABX464 – structure-activity relationship in a model parasitic nematode and target deconvolution

### Description
Within the context of our anthelmintic discovery program, we recently identified and evaluated a quinoline derivative, called ABX464 or obefazimod, as a nematocidal candidate; synthesised a series of analogues which were assessed for activity against the free-living model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans; and predicted compound-target relationships by thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and in silico docking. Here, we logically extend(ed) this work and critically evaluate(d) the anthelmintic activity of ABX464 analogues on Haemonchus contortus (barber’s pole worm) – a highly pathogenic nematode of ruminant livestock. First, we tested a series of 44 analogues on H. contortus (larvae and adults) to investigate ABX464’s nematocidal pharmacophore, and identified one compound with greater potency than the parent compound, and also showed moderate activity against a select number of other parasitic nematodes (including Ancylostoma, Heligmosomoides and Strongyloides species). Using TPP and in silico modelling studies, we predicted protein HCON_00074590 (a predicted aldo-keto reductase) as a target candidate for ABX464 in H. contortus. Future work aims to optimise this compound as a nematocidal candidate and investigate its pharmacokinetic properties. Overall, this study presents the first steps towards the development of a new anthelmintic with a novel, distinct mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
H. contortus (2,000,000 L3s) were exsheathed as per section 5.1, collected by centrifugation (2,000  g for 5 min) and frozen at -80 °C, following the removal of the supernatant. Subsequently, the frozen pellet was ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, transferred to a 10 mL tube, suspended in 3 mL ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.0) containing 0.5% (v/v) nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol (NP-40) and lysed by gentle aspiration/expulsion using a 5 mL sterile syringe with a 22-gauge needle. Subsequently, the supernatant was collected from this suspension following centrifugation at 20,000  g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), adjusted to 2 mg/mL and divided into four 250 μL aliquots/replicates (each containing 500 μg protein). Proteins in aliquots (45 μL) of individual samples (n = 40) were denatured in 8 M urea for 30 min at 37 °C and diluted to < 2 M urea using lysis buffer prior to processing for in-solution digestion (Ang et al., 2011). Samples were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, followed by digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 16 h. The trypsin-treated samples were acidified with 1.0% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters; wash solvent, 0.1% FA; elution solvent, 80 % acetonitrile (CH3CN) in 0.1% FA). Then, proteins were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMTs) (Zecha et al., 2019). In brief, desalted peptides were resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) and mixed with a TMT10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) that was dissolved in 41 μL of anhydrous CH3CN. The TMT-peptide mixture was incubated for 1 h at 25 °C with gentle shaking. Subsequently, 3.2 μL of 5 % (w/v) hydroxylamine was added to the mixture and incubated for 15 min at 25 °C with gentle shaking to quench the reaction. Labelled peptides were combined accordingly and then desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters; using wash solvent, 0.1 % FA; elution solvent, 80 % CH3CN in 0.1 % FA). Each mixed peptide sample was separated into eight fractions using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce), according to the manufacturer's protocol. All fractions were freeze-dried prior to resuspension in aqueous 2 % (w/v) CH3CN and 0.05% (w/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative protein data produced by MaxQuant was taken for analysis in R (v4.1.2). Decoy proteins, contaminant proteins, proteins only identified by modified peptides, and proteins that were identified by less than 2 razor or unique peptides were removed. Corrected reporter ion intensities were then divided by the intensity of the 37 °C channel. Due to the marked decrease in overall protein abundance with increasing temperature, protein abundance ratios were grouped by treatment temperature and subjected to quantile normalisation using the limma (v3.50.0)82. Proteins were filtered to retain only those with non-zero values for each sample, and these were taken for subsequent analysis.  Thermal profiles of quantified proteins were assessed using the package NPARC (v1.6.0) (Childs et al., 2019), which fits nonparametric models to the temperature profile data under null and alternative hypotheses; p-values were then calculated from F-statistics with empirically estimated degrees of freedom, as described in the NPARC package documentation (Perrin et al., 2020). Melting profiles were plotted and manually inspected for top ranking protein hits that were statistically significant (Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted p-values were < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Within the context of our anthelmintic discovery program, we recently identified and evaluated a quinoline derivative, called ABX464 or obefazimod, as a nematocidal candidate; synthesised a series of analogues which were assessed for activity against the free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans; and predicted compound-target relationships by thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and in silico docking. Here, we logically extended this work and critically evaluated the anthelmintic activity of ABX464 analogues on Haemonchus contortus (barber's pole worm) - a highly pathogenic nematode of ruminant livestock. First, we tested a series of 44 analogues on H. contortus (larvae and adults) to investigate the nematocidal pharmacophore of ABX464, and identified one compound with greater potency than the parent compound and showed moderate activity against a select number of other parasitic nematodes (including Ancylostoma, Heligmosomoides and Strongyloides species). Using TPP and in silico modelling studies, we predicted protein HCON_00074590 (a predicted aldo-keto reductase) as a target candidate for ABX464 in H. contortus. Future work aims to optimise this compound as a nematocidal candidate and investigate its pharmacokinetic properties. Overall, this study presents a first step toward the development of a new nematocide.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Nematode

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


