### Accession
PXD031881

### Title
Analysis of the extracellular proteome from single deleted LPMO9s Aspergillus nidulans mutants growing in Avicel

### Description
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are oxidative enzymes found in viruses, archaea, bacteria as well as eukaryotes, such as fungi, algae and insects, actively contributing to the degradation of different polysaccharides. In Aspergillus nidulans, LPMOs from family AA9 (AnLPMO9s), along with an AA3 cellobiose dehydrogenase (AnCDH1), are co-secreted upon growth on crystalline cellulose and lignocellulosic substrates, indicating their role in the degradation of plant cell wall components. Functional analysis revealed that the three main secreted LPMO9s (AnLPMO9C, AnLPMO9F and AnLPMO9G) correspond to cellulose- active enzymes with distinct regioselectivity. Deletion and overexpression studies confirmed that the abundantly secreted AnLPMO9F is a major component of the extracellular cellulolytic system, while AnLPMO9G, less abundant in the secretome, has an important role by oxidizing  crystalline fractions of cellulose. Single or double deletion of these AnLPMO9s partially impair fungal growth on sugarcane straw but not on crystalline cellulose, demonstrating the importance of LPMO9s for the saprophytic fungal lifestyle in the degradation of complex lignocellulosic  substrates. Although the deletion of AnCDH1 slightly reduced the cellulolytic activity, it did not affect fungal growth indicating the existence of other electron donors to LPMOs. Additionally, double or triple knockouts of these enzymes had no accumulative deleterious effect on the cellulolytic activity nor on fungal growth, regardless of the deleted gene. The extracelllular proteomes of single deleted mutants growing in Avicel was analysed on a Q-TOF mass spectrometer and revealed an overall reduction in cellulase secretion, and some specifically some changes in the secretion of some enzymes, suggesting an adaptive mechanism adopted to compensate LPMO9s absence during cellulose degradation. Overexpression of AnLPMO9s in a cellulose-induced secretome background confirmed the importance and applicability of AnLPMO9G to improve lignocellulose saccharification.

### Sample Protocol
Conidia suspensions (1x10^6 conidia/mL final concentration) of the A. nidulans mutants carrying single deletions of AnLPMO9F, AnLPMO9G and AnCDH1 were pre-cultivated on Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 50 mL liquid MM 1% (w/v) glucose pH 6.5 for 24 h at 37 °C. Mycelia was removed by filtration, washed with distilled water and transferred to Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 50 mL liquid MM pH 6.5 with 1% (w/v) Avicel. After cultivation for 24 h, 180 rpm, 37 °C. Cultivation was performed using three replicates. Mycelia was removed by filtration and the crude filtrates were centrifuged (10.000g, 40 min, 4 °C) and concentrated in 10 kDa cut-off Amicon (Millipore, USA). The concentrated secretomes (20 μg) were partially resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE, excised and then reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, at room temperature), alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), and digested with 20 mg/mL trypsin (Promega). After peptide extraction, the samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator. For protein analysis, an aliquot of 4.5 ul of peptides resulting of protein digestion were separated by C18 (100 um x 100 mm) RP-nanoUPLC (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled with a Q-Tof Premier mass spectrometer (Waters) with nanoelectrospray source at a flow rate of 0.600 ul/min. The gradient was 2–90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 3.5 kV, a cone voltage of 30 V and the source temperature was 80 °C. The instrument was operated in the ‘top three’ mode, in which one MS spectrum is acquired followed by MS/MS of the top three most-intense peaks detected. After MS/MS fragmentation, the ion was placed on exclusion list for 60 s and for the analysis of endogenous cleavage peptides, a real time exclusion was used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were converted to a peak list format (mgf) using the Mascot Distiller v.2.3.2.0 software (Matrix Science Ltd.). These spectra were searched against the A. nidulans genome from AspGD (10.560 entries) using the Mascot v.2.3.01 engine (Matrix Science Ltd.) with oxidation of methionine as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Additional parameters were one trypsin-missed cleavage, a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 1 Da for fragment ions. All datasets processed using the workflow feature in the Mascot software were further analyzed in the software ScaffoldQ + (Proteome Software) to validate the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 % probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Mascot identifications required at least both the associated identity scores and ion scores to be p < 0.05. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99 % probability for protein identification. Protein probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm. Using the number of total spectra output from the ScaffoldQ + software, we identified the differentially expressed proteins using spectral counting. Quantitative value was applied to normalize the spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lpmo, Fungal biology, Carbohydrate metabolism, Aa9, Oxidative enzymes, Avicel

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Enzymology and Molecular Biology (LEBIMO), Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Marcelo Rubio

### Lab Head
Dr André Damásio
Laboratory of Enzymology and Molecular Biology (LEBIMO), Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)


