### Accession
PXD013593

### Title
Identification and characterization of bioactive peptides in relation to different genotypes, production status and geographical region

### Description
Goats are adapted efficiently in different agro-climatic conditions. Goat milk has several unexplored health-promoting properties that need to be investigated scientifically and promoted commercially. Goat milk is mainly consumed in family and plays a pivotal role in fulfilling the nutritional requirement of older people, pregnant women and children. There has been considerable interest in goat milk protein due to availability of different bioactive peptides, which have nutraceutical applications. Secondly, goat milk is being used for treatment of different disease, allergy and heat stress condition. Therefore, the milk proteome analysis appears to be timely and required for future industrial application with respect to human health and nutrition. 2-DGE analysis of identified protein variants was performed and further identification of proteins was carried out through LC-MS/MS. variant samples from 15 breeds were resolved by 2DGE and spots were identified and analysed by LC-MS/MS from 15 different breeds for presence of unique peptides.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion was performed on the silver stained band which was first reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 1µg trypsin for 16 hours at 37°C. C18 silica cartridge (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA)was used for cleanup according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried using speed vac. This dried pellet was resuspended in Buffer A (5 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid). All the experiments were performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1μg of the peptide mixture was loaded on precolumn and resolved using 5 cm Pico-Frit filled with 1.9 μm C18-resin. The peptides were loaded with Buffer A and eluted with a 0-40% gradient of Buffer-B at a flow rate of 500 nl/min for 10 minutes. The QExactive was operated using the Top10 HCD data-dependent acquisition mode with a full scan resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17500 at m/z 400. Lock mass option was enabled for polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) ions (m/z = 445.120025) for internal recalibration during the run. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
All  samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot Capra hircus reference proteome database. For Sequest search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10-50 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) for one search and for another non-specificity was used, along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Goat milk is a source of nutrition in difficult areas and has lesser allerginicity than cow milk. It is leading in the area for nutraceutical formulation and drug development using goat mammary gland as a bioreactor. Post translational modifications of a protein regulate protein function, biological activity, stabilization and interactions. The protein variants of goat milk from 10 breeds were studied for the post translational modifications by combining highly sensitive 2DE and Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS. Here we observed high levels of post translational modifications in 201 peptides of 120 goat milk proteins. The phosphosites observed for CSN2, CSN1S1, CSN1S2, CSN3 were 11P, 13P, 17P and 6P, respectively in 105 casein phosphopeptides. Whey proteins BLG and LALBA showed 19 and 4 phosphosites respectively. Post translational modification was observed in 45 low abundant non-casein milk proteins mainly associated with signal transduction, immune system, developmental biology and metabolism pathways. P<sub>asp</sub> is reported for the first time in 47 sites. The rare conserved peptide sequence of (SSSEE) was observed in &#x3b1;S1 and &#x3b1;S2 casein. The functional roles of identified phosphopeptides included anti-microbial, DPP-IV inhibitory, anti-inflammatory and ACE inhibitory. This is first report from tropics, investigating post translational modifications in casein and non-casein goat milk proteins and studies their interactions.

### Keywords
Capra hircus, Goat milk, Proteome, Bioactive peptides

### Affiliations
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Goats, Makhdoom, Farah, Mathura-281122
ICAR Central Institute for Research on Goats

### Submitter
Pramod Rout

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pramod Kumar Rout
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Goats, Makhdoom, Farah, Mathura-281122


