### Accession
PXD006277

### Title
Developmental profile of core postsynaptic density protein complexes integrates signaling components of brain disorders

### Description
The postsynaptic density (PSD) contains a collection of scaffold proteins used for the assembly of synaptic signaling complexes and disruption of this signaling machinery might be implicated in a variety of brain disorders. However, it is not known how the core-scaffold machinery associates this collection of proteins through development and how proteins coding for genes involved in psychiatric and other brain disorders are distributed through spatio-temporal protein complexes. Here, using immunopurification, proteomics, bioinformatics and mouse genetics, we isolated 2876 proteins across 41 in-vivo protein complexes and determined their protein domain composition, correlation to gene expression levels, and developmental integration to the PSD. We defined major protein clusters for enrichment of schizophrenia (SCZ), autism spectrum disorders (ASD), developmental delay (DD), and intellectual disability (ID) risk factors at embryonic day 14 and the adult PSD. These protein complexes contained a discrete number of protein domains defining molecular functions. Mutations in highly-connected nodes alter protein-protein interactions that modulate the assembly of macromolecular complexes enriched in disease risk candidates. These results were integrated into a software platform: Synaptic Protein/Pathways Resource (SyPPRes), enabling the prioritization of brain disease risk factors and their placement within synaptic protein interaction networks.

### Sample Protocol
PSD-enriched fractions were prepared using a 3-step protocol in which tissue was homogenized in 10mM Hepes buffer, pH 7.4, containing 2mM EDTA, 5mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 30mM NaF, 20mM β-glycerol phosphate and Roche Complete as protease inhibitor cocktail. Homogenates were spun for 4 min at 500g. The supernatant was then collected and centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min. The membrane fraction was then solubilized in Hepes 50mM pH 7.4, containing 2mM EGTA, 2mM EDTA, 30mM NaF, 5mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 20mM β-glycerol phosphate, Roche Complete and 1% Triton X-100. Solubilized membranes were centrifuged at 30,0000 RPM in a Beckman Optima Max rotor MLA-130 for 40 minutes, pellet was collected and solubilized in 50mM Tris pH 9, 30mM NaF, 5mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 20mM β-glycerol phosphate, ZnCl2 20uM, Roche Complete and 1% Sodium Deoxycholate (DOC). The solubalized pellet served as the PSD-enriched fraction while the supernatent is the non-PSD fraction. We determined protein complexes at embryonic day 14 (e14), postnatal days 7 and 14 (p7, p14), and adult (12-16 weeks old). Adult samples were determined at both PSD and non-PSD fractions. 1.5 mg of total protein was used for immune-isolation in all of the fractions tested. Immuno-isolation was carried out as previously described in coba et al., 2012. Following immuno-isolation, Samples were separated by NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels and subsequently fixed and then stained with Instant blue®, for qualitative QC. Lanes were cut and placed into 96-well plates for de-staining, and digested by trypsin at 37°C for 1 hour. Peptides were then extracted with acetonitrile. Peptide desalting and reverse phase separation of peptides was performed using the Nano/Capillary Liquid Chromatography (LC) System Ultimate 3000 (Thermo/Dionex).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD, Thermo Scientific) and searched by both Sequest and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix science) against a modified mouse database which was downloaded from Uniprot and was combined with its decoy database. The mass tolerance used for searching was set as 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. No more than two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Static modification was set as cysteine carboxyamidation and dynamic modification was set as methionine oxidation. False discovery rates (FDR) were automatically calculated by the Percolator node of PD based on decoy database hits. A peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for cut-offs. Peptides with high confidence were considered as true hits and proteins with at least two different peptides present in triplicate assays and absent in controls were considered positive.

### Publication Abstract
The postsynaptic density (PSD) contains a collection of scaffold proteins used for assembling synaptic signaling complexes. However, it is not known how the core-scaffold machinery associates in protein-interaction networks or how proteins encoded by genes involved in complex brain disorders are distributed through spatiotemporal protein complexes. Here using immunopurification, proteomics and bioinformatics, we isolated 2,876 proteins across 41 in vivo interactomes and determined their protein domain composition, correlation to gene expression levels and developmental integration to the PSD. We defined clusters for enrichment of schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, developmental delay and intellectual disability risk factors at embryonic day 14 and adult PSD in mice. Mutations in highly connected nodes alter protein-protein interactions modulating macromolecular complexes enriched in disease risk candidates. These results were integrated into a software platform, Synaptic Protein/Pathways Resource (SyPPRes), enabling the prioritization of disease risk factors and their placement within synaptic protein interaction networks.

### Keywords
Psd, Neuron, Synaptic

### Affiliations
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Brent Wilkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo Coba
University of Southern California


