### Accession
PXD012052

### Title
Proteome of CD4 T cells activated through the TCR in the presence of IL2 and IL12 - Part 1

### Description
To activate primary T cells, lymph nodes  were removed and disaggregated. Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 containing L-glutamine, 10% FBS, 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol and penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were stimulated with 1 μg/ml of the CD3 monoclonal antibody (2C11) and 2 μg/ml anti-CD28 (37.51) in the presence of cytokines IL12 (10 ng/ml) and 20 ng/ml IL2 (20 ng/ml). Cells were stimulated for 24 hours. Live TCR activated CD4+ cells were sorted for CD4+ and CD45.1+ expression and DAP1 exclusion prior to collection for proteomics processing. Mice were “wild-type” (ie non-TCR transgenic) from OT-2 CD45.1 expressing C57bl6 background maintained in-house line.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed and peptides generated using the SP3 method. After elution with DMSO samples were fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography;   samples were loaded onto a 2.1 x 150 mm XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 µm particles (Waters) on a  UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. Peptides were separated into 16 fractions which were consolidated into 8 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides redissolved in 5% formic acid. LC-MS analysis was performed as described previously (Rollings et al. 2018) with slight modifications. Samples were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being electrosprayed into a Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatography buffers used were as follows: HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid), HPLC buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid), and HPLC buffer C (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 m inner diameter, 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in HPLC buffer C with a constant flow of 5 l/min. After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 m, 100 Å column (75 m, 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following buffer gradient: 2% B (0 to 6 min), 2 to 35% B (6 to 130 min), 35 to 98% B (130 to 132 min), 98% B (132 to 152 min), 98 to 2% B (152 to 153 min), and equilibrated in 2% B (153 to 170 min) at a flow rate of 0.3 l/min. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed into the Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source at 50°C and a source voltage of 1.9 kV (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Full-scan MS survey spectra (mass/charge ratio, 335 to 1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Data were collected using data-dependent acquisition: the 15 most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ after the accumulation of 5000 ions. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using MaxQuant software package, version 1.6.0.1. Proteins and peptides were identified using a uniport mouse canonical plus isoforms database (2nd August 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Immune activated T lymphocytes modulate the activity of key metabolic pathways to support the transcriptional reprograming and reshaping of cell proteomes that permits effector T cell differentiation. The present study uses high resolution mass spectrometry and metabolic labelling to explore how murine T cells control the methionine cycle to produce methyl donors for protein and nucleotide methylations. We show that antigen receptor engagement controls flux through the methionine cycle and RNA and histone methylations. We establish that the main rate limiting step for protein synthesis and the methionine cycle is control of methionine transporter expression. Only T cells that respond to antigen to upregulate and sustain methionine transport are supplied with methyl donors that permit the dynamic nucleotide methylations and epigenetic reprogramming that drives T cell differentiation. These data highlight how the regulation of methionine transport licenses use of methionine for multiple fundamental processes that drive T lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation.

### Keywords
Metabolism, Methioine, Transport, T cells

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Doreen Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee


