### Accession
PXD030717

### Title
Proteomic investigation of the effect of DAP5 knock-down on human embryonic stem cells

### Description
We performed a deep mass-spec analysis to determine DAP5 proteomic signature on human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) by evaluating the steady state proteins level on DAP5-KD and NT control cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) knocked down for DAP5 or control hESCs were grown on mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). Lysates were subjected to in solution tryptic digestion using the S-Trap method (by Protifi).   Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry   The resulting peptides were fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase chromatography, followed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480). Samples from each fraction were analyzed on the instrument separately, and within each fraction samples were analyzed in a random order in discovery mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human and mouse proteome databases as downloaded from Uniprot.org, appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications- methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, and only proteins that were detected in at least two replicates of at least one experimental group were kept

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dap5, Mouse, Fibroblasts, Escs

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Adi Kimchi
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel


