### Accession
PXD000277

### Title
Dynamic regulation of the COP9 signalosome:  Insights into the spatial localization and subunit versatility of the complex

### Description
HeLa cells were fracitonated into nuclear soluble, chromatin bound and cytosolic. Extracts were immunoprecipitated with a CSN3 antibody, then eluted with glycine. Proteins were digested, then enriched for phosphopeptides. Samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap. Data was analyzed using the TRansOMics software for time alignment and feature detection. MS/MS spectra searched using Mascot.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa and HEK293T cells were purchased from Cell Lines Service, Germany, and the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), respectively. HEK293 cells were obtained from Eitan Reuveny (Weizmann Institute of Science). Cells were cultivated in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin-streptomycin, sodium pyruvate, nonessential amino acids (Biological Industries), and MycoZap (Lonza) in a humidified incubator at 37°C, in a 5% CO2 controlled environment, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells subjected to subcellular fractionation were harvested by trypsinization into phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and collected at ∼0.5 × 106 cells/tube. Unless otherwise indicated, all biochemical fractionations were performed in HeLa cells. For the generation of stable fluorescent CSN cell lines, HEK293 cells were transfected with expression vectors for Cerulean-CSN3 (Cer-CSN3) and Cerulean-CSN5 (Cer-CSN5) by CaCl2 transfection (26) and selected on hygromycin (0.4 mg/ml). HEK293T cells were transfected with expression vectors for Cerulean-CSN2 (Cer-CSN2), Cerulean-CSN6 (Cer-CSN6), and Cerulean-CSN7a (referred to as CSN7, Cer-CSN7) by lentiviral transfection. Transduced cells were isolated and sorted for low expression levels by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACSAria; BD Biosciences) and expanded in complete DMEM.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were imported into the TransOmics software (Waters) (also known as Progenesis LC-MS) (38, 39). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Sciences). Data were searched against UniprotKB version 05_2012, including 125 common laboratory contaminants. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and variable modification was set to oxidation of methionines and phosphorylation of serines, threonines, or tyrosines. Phosphopeptide site localization probability was calculated using Mascot Delta Score (40). Search results were then imported back to TransOmics to annotate identified peaks. Differential analysis was conducted by direct comparison of peak intensities across all samples. Technical replicates were averaged, and Student's t test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. A P value of less than 0.05 was used as the significance threshold.

### Publication Abstract
The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is an evolutionarily conserved protein complex that participates in the regulation of the ubiquitin/26S proteasome pathway by controlling the function of cullin-RING-ubiquitin ligases. Impressive progress has been made in deciphering its critical role in diverse cellular and developmental processes. However, little is known about the underlying regulatory principles that coordinate its function. Through biochemical and fluorescence microscopy analyses, we determined that the complex is localized in the cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and chromatin-bound fractions, each differing in the composition of posttranslationally modified subunits, depending on its location within the cell. During the cell cycle, the segregation between subcellular localizations remains steady. However, upon UV damage, a dose-dependent temporal shuttling of the CSN complex into the nucleus was seen, accompanied by upregulation of specific phosphorylations within CSN1, CSN3, and CSN8. Taken together, our results suggest that the specific spatiotemporal composition of the CSN is highly controlled, enabling the complex to rapidly adapt and respond to DNA damage.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Csn

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Sharon
Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


