### Accession
PXD011159

### Title
Quantitative analysis of proteome dynamics in a long-term asthma mouse model

### Description
Asthma bronchiale is an inflammatory disease of the respiratory airways and a major factor of increasing health care costs worldwide. The molecular actors leading to asthma are not fully understood and require further investigation. The aim of this study was to monitor the proteome during asthma development from early inflammatory to late fibrotic stages. A time-course-based ovalbumin (OVA) mouse model was applied to establish an asthma phenotype and the lung proteome was analysed at four time points during asthma development (0 weeks = control, 5 weeks, 8 weeks and 12 weeks of OVA treatment).

### Sample Protocol
Female eight-week-old C57/Bl6 mice (Janvier) were sensitized and challenged with chicken OVA grade V (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). At first, the mice were sensitized by an intraperitoneal injection (100 μl) of 20 μg OVA emulsified in 2 mg Imject Alum (Pierce, Rockford, IL) over a three weeks period (on days 0, 14 and 21). Subsequently, mice were challenged with an OVA aerosol every week on two consecutive days over a period of five, eight or twelve weeks, respectively. The OVA aerosol was generated using a PARI-Boy aerosol generator (PARI, Starnberg, Germany) from a 1 % (wt/vol) OVA in saline solution for 30 min. For each experimental condition (5 weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks) analyses were performed with six mice. Untreated mice served as control group (0 weeks, n = 6). After the challenges the mice were sacrificed. Their lungs were removed and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The lungs were cross-sectioned with a cryomicrotome (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to 5 µm sections for histology and 40 µm sections for proteomics analysis. For proteome analysis 40µm lung tissue cryosections were transferred into reaction tubes and lysed in in urea buffer (30 mM Tris HCl, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.1 % NaDOC, pH 8.5) by mashing with a steel pistil. Subsequently, the samples were sonicated on ice for 2 min and centrifuged for 15 min at 4 °C and 16000 x g. The supernatants were collected and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA). 20 µg protein were used for tryptic in-gel digestion (batch 1). The resulting pellet was processed further and divided into two pieces. One piece was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.1 % RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at ambient temperature in the dark. Subsequently, tryptic in-solution digestion was performed overnight in a heated shaker at 37 °C and 400 rpm using 3 µg trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany). The enzyme activity was quenched by acidification with 0.5 % TFA for 30 min at 37 °C and precipitated Rapigest and other insoluble components were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C and 16000 x g. The supernatant was collected for proteome analysis (batch 2) and the peptide concentration was determined by quantitative amino acid analysis (AAA). The second piece of the pellet was solubilized in SDS sample buffer (37.5 mM Tris HCl, 7.5 % glycerol 3 % SDS, 15 mM DTT) and used for in-gel digestion (batch 3). Briefly, the samples were applied to an 18 % acrylamide gel (Anamed Electrophorese, Groß-Bieberau, Germany) and concentrated in a single band (100 V, 10-15 min). The bands were excised from the gels and tryptic digestion was performed overnight using 150 ng trypsin per sample. The resulting peptides were extracted and the peptide concentration was determined by AAA.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric analyses were performed using an Orbitrap Elite instrument coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). 350 ng tryptic peptides were injected and pre-concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) for 7 min at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. Subsequently, the peptides were transferred to an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) and separated by an 98 min gradient from 5 % to 40 % Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1 % FA, Buffer B: 0.1 % FA, 40 % ACN) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The column oven temperature was 60 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode and the 20 most abundant precursor ions (charge states +2, +3, +4) were selected for MS/MS analysis. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with a mass range from 300-2000 m/z. The fragment ion spectra were measured in the linear ion trap after fragmentation by CID. Protein identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 2016_03; 550,740 entries) via Mascot (ver.2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK). The taxonomy was set to Mus musculus and the mass tolerance to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. For batch 1 (OEI17119 until OEI17171) and batch 3 (OEI17444 until OEI17490) (in-gel digestion) dynamic modifications were considered for cystein (propionamide) and methionin (oxidation) and one tryptic missed cleavage was allowed. For batch 2 (OEI17182 until OEI17236) (in-solution digestion) static modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and dynamic modification of methionin (oxidation) were considered as well as a maximum of one enzymatic miss cleavage. The false discovery rate was calculated using the percolater function implemented in Proteome Discoverer and only identifications passing an FDR threshold of 1 % (q-value >0.01) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Time-course model, Asthma bronchiale, Ovalbumin model, Mouse model

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Ruhr Universität-Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics  Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Ruhr Universität-Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics  Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany


