### Accession
PXD029833

### Title
A MULTI-DIMENSIONAL INTERACTOMICS VIEW ON THE PLANT SNRK1 KINASE COMPLEX REVEALS A KEY REGULATORY ROLE FOR THE CLASS II T6P SYNTHASE-LIKE PROTEINS – part1 AP-MS dataset

### Description
The plant SNF1-related kinase (SnRK1) plays a central role in energy and metabolic homeostasis. SnRK1 controls growth upon activation by energy-depleting stress conditions, while also monitoring key developmental transitions and nutrient allocation between source and sink tissues. To obtain deeper insight into the SnRK1 complex and its upstream regulatory mechanisms, we explored its protein interaction landscape in a multi-dimensional setting, combining affinity purification, proximity labeling and crosslinking mass spectrometry. Integration of these analyses not only offers a unique view on the composition, stoichiometry and structure of the core heterotrimeric SnRK1 complex but also reveals a myriad of novel robust SnRK1 interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of protein complexes by GSrhino-based affinity purification Total protein extracts from transgenic cell cultures or from GSrhino SnRK1βγ seedlings were prepared in our standard extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 15 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM p-nitrophenyl phospate, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1% NP 40, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μM E64, EDTA-free Ultra Complete tablet (Roche), 5% ethylene glycol). Standard GSrhino-based affinity purification experiments were performed at least in triplicate, as reported in Van Leene, J. et al., 2019. Briefly, protein complexes were trapped through the Protein G moiety of the GSrhino tag by incubating 25 mg total protein extract for 45 min with 50 µL magnetic IgG bead suspension. Beads were washed three times with 500 µL extraction buffer, once with 500 µL extraction buffer without detergent, and once with 800 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). The wash buffer was removed and beads were incubated in 50 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) for 4h at 37°C. Next, the digest was separated from the beads and overnight incubated with 0.5 µg Trypsin/Lys C at 37°C. Finally, the digest was centrifuged at 20800 rcf for 5 min, and supernatant was dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. For experiments with DSP cross-linking, Tris-HCl in the extraction buffer was replaced by 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) and proteins were cross-linked for 45 min with 3 mM DSP (ThermoFisher Scientific Pierce) during protein solubilization. Prior to centrifugation of protein extracts, non-reacted DSP was neutralized in 1 mL 1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5). For experiments with digitonin, NP40 in the extraction buffer was replaced by 1% (v/v) digitonin during extraction and binding, or by 0.2% (v/v) for washing. For DSP and digitonin experiments, proteins were eluted three times with 150 μL 0.2M Glycine/HCl (pH2.5) at 4°C. The eluate was neutralized with 100 μL (NH4)2CO3. Proteins were reduced for 30 min in 5mM TCEP at 37°C, alkylated for 30 min in 10mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature, and overnight digested with 1 μg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) at 37°C. Peptides were acidified to 1%(v/v) TFA, desalted on C18 Omix tips (Agilent), dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. TAP experiments on SnRK1γ1 GSrhino expressing cell cultures were performed using 100 mg total protein input as by Van Leene, J. et al., 2015.

### Data Protocol
Affinity purification experiments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap VELOS or Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously previously reported in Van Leene, J. et al., 2019. Mascot Generic Files were created with Mascot Distiller. Peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine against the Araport11plus (or TAIR10plus) database. Variable modification was set to Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term), enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum missed cleavages of 2. Charge was set to 2+, 3+ and 4+ , peptide tolerance to 10 ppm and  #13C=1. MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 mmu and Instrument to ESI-QUAD. To identify specific protein interactors from the resulting protein lists of the affinity-purified samples, a large dataset approach was followed. In this approach, NSAF values were calculated for each identified protein and compared between the SnRK1 bait experiments and a representative control AP-MS dataset of 379 experiments, with 76 unrelated baits which were functionally grouped in 29 bait groups. Based on these NSAF values, a dual filtering strategy was applied. First, the dataset was screened in a qualitative manner, retaining proteins that were identified with at least two peptides in at least two out of three SnRK1 AP-MS replicates and in not more than one control bait group. In a second step, a quantitative filtering was employed to find more promiscuous proteins that were however strongly and significantly enriched with the SnRK1 bait compared to the control dataset. Thereto, mean NSAF values were Ln-transformed and compared between the SnRK1 bait and the control dataset by a two-tailed t-test. Identifications were considered significantly enriched with the SnRK1 bait versus the control dataset, if they passed the following criteria: i) two-peptide identifications present in at least two out of three replicates are significantly enriched with a mean NSAF ratio ≥ 10 AND a  Log10(p-value) ≥ 10 or with a mean NSAF ratio ≥ 20 AND a -Log10(p-value) ≥ 8, ii) one-peptide identifications present in at least three replicates, that were detected in at least one replicate with two peptides, are significantly enriched with a mean NSAF ratio ≥ 20 AND a  Log10(p-value) ≥ 50. For AP-MS experiments with DSP in cell cultures, an extra filtering was applied to remove DSP-specific background by comparing versus a smaller control dataset containing only experiments with DSP. Only proteins passing the filtering versus the large dataset and the smaller dataset with DSP were finally retained. For the SnRK1βγ AP-MS experiments in seedlings, only two replicates were done. Proteins identified with at least two peptides that were present in both experiments and in not more than one control bait group were retained. Secondly, also proteins identified with at least two peptides that were present in both experiments and showing high enrichment with a mean NSAF ratio ≥ 15 versus the control dataset were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Snrk1 complex

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Geert De Jaeger
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


