### Accession
PXD027517

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis for high- and low-aflatoxin-yield Aspergillus flavus strains isolated from natural environments

### Description
The molecular mechanisms underlying aflatoxin production have been well-studied in strains of the fungus Aspergillus flavus (A. flavus) under artificial conditions. However, aflatoxin biosynthesis has rarely been studied in natural isolates of A. flavus strains. In the present study, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with tandem-mass spectrometry analysiswere used for proteomic quantification in natural isolates of high- and low-aflatoxin-yield A. flavus strains.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were first divided into two groups, the high AF group (A. flavus HA, A. flavus HB, and A. flavus HC) and the low AF group (A. flavus LA and A. flavus LB). The samples were ground in liquid nitrogen, and the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using an ultrasonic processor (Scientz company, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, and 1% protease inhibitor). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 ×g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was removed. The remaining precipitate was washed thrice with cold acetone. The protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM TEAB; pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China). For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature (~25 °C) in the dark. The protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea solution with a concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion, which was allowed to occur overnight, and at a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 h-digestion. All the experiments were conducted in three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016) with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Aspergillus flavus database (UniProt ID: UP000001875) on the UniProt website (https:). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. Mass deviation was set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as the fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on the protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were all set to 1%. Minimum peptide length was set as 7. For quantification, TMT-sixplex was selected.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms underlying aflatoxin production have been well-studied in strains of the fungus <i>Aspergillus flavus</i> (<i>A. flavus</i>) under artificial conditions. However, aflatoxin biosynthesis has rarely been studied in <i>A. flavus</i> strains isolated from field conditions with different aflatoxin-producing ability. In the present study, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with tandem-mass spectrometry analysis were used for proteomic quantification in natural isolates of high- and low-aflatoxin-yield <i>A. flavus</i> strains. Additionally, findings obtained using the TMT-labeling method were validated using the high-resolution multiple reaction monitoring (MRM-HR) method. In total, 4,363 proteins were quantified, among which 1,045 proteins were differentially expressed between the high- and low-aflatoxin-yield <i>A. flavus</i> strains. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the up-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in carbon-related metabolism and the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, whereas the down-regulated proteins were enriched in oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover, GST proteins were found to be significantly down-regulated in high-yield <i>A. flavus</i> strains; this result contradicted previous findings obtained from <i>A. flavus</i> strains grown under artificial conditions. In summary, our study provides novel insights into aflatoxin regulation in <i>A. flavus</i> under field conditions and could facilitate the development of various strategies for the effective control of aflatoxin contamination in food crops.

### Keywords
Aspergillus flavus, Quantification proteome, Aflatoxin production, Natural environments

### Affiliations
Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics

### Submitter
涛 李

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Hu
Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics


