### Accession
PXD034982

### Title
b1-integrin binding and lysosome targeting aptamer homes to triple-negative breast cancer in mice

### Description
Targeted therapies for triple-negative breast cancer have increased the number of available treatment options for patients. However, an optimal treatment strategy is still an unmet medical need due to the lack of targetable biomarkers and tumour heterogeneity. Aptamers have high selectivity and specificity towards target proteins. Lower molecular weight, increased stability, less immunogenicity, and rapid tissue uptake make aptamers an attractive alternative to antibodies. Attempts to develop aptamer therapeutics have shown difficulties translating in vitro results to in vivo.  Aptamer GreenB1 exhibits selectivity to triple-negative MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line in vitro compared to estrogen, progesterone, and glucocorticoid receptor-expressing MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line. The aptamer is rapidly internalised into cells and trafficked to lysosomes. Here, we identify 1-integrin as the target protein for GreenB1 using proximity labelling and mass spectrometry proteomics. GreenB1 homes preferentially to the tumour in the 4T1 triple-negative breast cancer mice model in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis Gel sample was sliced to ~1 mm pieces in Protein LoBind (Eppendorf) tube,  1 ml of 1:1 acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma Aldrich):50 mM HEPES (Sigma Aldrich) pH 8.5 was added. Sample was vortexed for 30 min and supernatant (SN) was removed. Sample was washed with ACN, and SN was removed, followed by disulfide reduction and cysteine alkylation with 10 mM (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP, Acros Organics) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma Aldrich) for 5 min at 70 °C and SN removal. Sample was washed with ACN, SN was removed, and gel pieces dried. 50 ul of 10 ng/ µl trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was added and samples was incubated for 2 h on ice and overnight at 37 °C.  Gel pieces were dissolved with 1:2 5% formic acid (Honeywell Fluka):ACN. Peptides were desalted using in-house made C18 StageTips. Peptide nano-ESI LC/MS/MS analysis 1,3 µg of protein was injected to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC system (Dionex) using a 300 µm ID x 5 mm C18 (5 µm, 300 Å particles) PepMap300 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was eluted at 250 nl/min from the trap to a 75 µm ID x 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch). The separating gradient was 8-40% B 30 min and 40-100% B 5 min (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were sprayed to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV (applied through liquid-junction). The MS was operated with a top-12 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=60 000 at 200 m/z was followed by 12 higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 12 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R=30 000. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 1e5 with 45 ms injection time. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Mass spectrometric raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (version 2.0.3.0). Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Search was performed against Homo sapiens reference proteomes, using the tryptic digestion rule. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted therapies have increased the treatment options for triple-negative breast cancer patients. However, the paucity of targetable biomarkers and tumor heterogeneity have limited the ability of precision-guided interventions to live up to their full potential. As affinity-targeting ligands, aptamers show high selectivity toward target molecules. Compared with antibodies, aptamers have lower molecular weight, increased stability during transportation, reduced immunogenicity, and increased tissue uptake. Recently, we reported discovery of the GreenB1 aptamer, which is internalized in cultured triple-negative MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. We show that the GreenB1 aptamer specifically targets &#x3b2;1-integrin, a protein linked previously to breast cancer cell invasiveness and migration. Aptamer binds to &#x3b2;1-integrin with low nanomolar affinity. Our findings suggest potential applications for GreenB1-guided precision agents for diagnosis and therapy of cancers overexpressing &#x3b2;1-integrin.

### Keywords
B-integrin, Aptamer, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Latvia/University of Tartu
Faculty of Medicine, Prof.

### Submitter
Karlis Pleiko

### Lab Head
Dr Una Riekstina
Faculty of Medicine, Prof.


