### Accession
PXD040305

### Title
Maternal hyperglycemia induces alterations in hepatic amino acid, glucose and lipid metabolism of neonatal offspring: Multi-omics insights from a diabetic pig model

### Description
Intrauterine exposure to disturbed maternal glucose metabolism is associated with adverse consequences for the offspring. Hepatic disorders in affected offspring emerge in early development; thus, detection of disease biomarkers at an early stage may elucidate the underlying mechanisms of maternal hyperglycemia-induced metabolic disease and improve timely diagnosis and treatment strategies. To systematically study the molecular consequences of maternal hyperglycemia, we used data independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics and compared the molecular profiles of liver of three days old wild-type piglets born to a transgenic hyperglycemic pig model with those of wild-type piglets born to normoglycemic mothers.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver tissue samples were cryo-pulverized using a CP02 Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) using an impact level of 3 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Powdered tissue was lysed in 8 M urea/0.5 M ammonium bicarbonate (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) by ultrasonicating (18 cycles of 10 s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was used for protein quantification. Sequential 2-step digestion was performed, firstly, with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals Europe GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 4 h (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) and subsequently with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). After digestion, samples were dried before analysis using a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1 μg of peptides were transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm×2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm×50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 250 nl/min with an 80-min gradient of 5-20% of solvent B followed by a 9-min increase to 40%. Mobile phases A and B were 99.9/0.1% water/formic acid (v/v) and 99.9/0.1% acetonitrile/formic acid (v/v), respectively. Gas phase fractionation (GPF)-based chromatogram libraries were built using 6 injections of pooled samples with 25 X 4 m/z-wide DIA (30,000 resolution, AGC target 1e6 maximum inject time 55 ms, NCE 27, +3H assumed charge state) spectra using a staggered window pattern with window placements optimized by Skyline (v.22.2) (i.e. 400.43-502.48, 500.48-602.52, 600.52-702.57, 700.57-802.61, 800.61-902.66, 900.66-1002.70), yielding 300 x 2 m/z-wide windows spanning from 400 to 1000 m/z after deconvolution. For DIA measurements, 50 x 12 m/z-wide (in the range of 400-1000 m/z) precursor isolation window data-independent acquisition (DIA) spectra (15,000 resolution, AGC target 1e6, maximum inject time 20 ms, NCE 27) was acquired using a staggered window pattern. Window placements were calculated by Skyline software. Precursor spectra (in the range of 390-1010 m/z, 60,000 resolution, AGC target 1e6, max IIT 60 ms, +3H assumed charge state) were interspersed every 50 ms/ms spectra.

### Data Protocol
Protein intensities were extracted from the DIA data using predicted spectral libraries generated by DIA-NN’s (v1.8.1) built-in deep-learning-based spectra and retention time predictor which was further refined by the experimental data from project-specific GPF-based library (also generated by DIA-NN). For this, the Sus scrofa protein database (UniProt Reference Proteome – Taxonomy 9823 – Proteome ID UP000008227, 49,792 entries) alongside the MaxQuant contaminants fasta file were used. Only tryptic peptides with a maximum of one missed cleavage and charge state of +2, +3 and +4 were considered. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and the quantification strategy was set to robust LC (high precision mode). Retention time correction was performed automatically by DIA-NN and quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy mode). Similarly, mass tolerance was determined automatically by DIA-NN and was set to 9 ppm and 18 ppm for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The “Genes” column was used to count unique proteins. All other settings were left default. DIA-NN’s main output containing precursor level data was used for the downstream analysis in R using custom scripts (https://github.com/bshashikadze/maternaldiabetes-offspring-liver-omics-paper). Briefly, the output was filtered at 1% false-discovery rate, using both global and run-specific q-values for precursors and global q-values for protein groups. Peptides derived from potential contaminants, non-proteotypic peptides and peptides with a low signal quality were removed. Precursor intensities for different charge states were summed to derive peptide intensities. Normalization of raw intensities was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maternal diabetes, Metabolomics, Neonates, Clinical parameters, Protein-protein interaction, Liver, Proteomics, Pig model

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


