### Accession
PXD016230

### Title
Synaptic transmission induces site specific changes in sialylation on N-linked glycoproteins in nerve terminals

### Description
Synaptic transmission is an ultra-fast process that aims at transducing a signal from one neuron to another neuron or cell by the release of neurotransmitters. This process requires rapid response which can be transmitted through fast molecular switches such as post-translational modifications of proteins. We aimed at investigating the potential importance in dynamic modulation of sialic acids on N-linked glycoproteins that are essential for the synaptic transmission process. For this, we characterize site-specific alteration in sialylated N-linked glycosylation in the active zone of rat nerve terminals (synaptosomes) after depolarization by using quantitative sialiomics.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes of adult male rats were prepared by a discontinuous Percoll density gradient procedure. After equilibration to a metabolic equilibrium, synaptosomes were depolarized for five seconds with 76.2 mM KCl or stimulated with a control buffer. The reaction was quenched immediately thereafter by the addition of 0.1 % SDS lysis buffer, and 0.1 % SDS-insoluble proteins were separated from 0.1 % SDS-soluble proteins by ultracentrifugation. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to trypsin digestion. 100 µg tryptic peptides were labelled with TMT11plex isobaric mass tags. Sialylated glycopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide solid phase extraction and subsequently deglycosylated. Deglycosylated peptides were offline fractionated by high pH reversed-phase fractionation and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS running in a data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched against the Swissprot mus musculus and rattus norvegicus references (downloaded 18.12.2017) in Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3.0.520 (Thermo Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server combined with the Percolator for peptide validation (1 % FDR for proteins and peptides). The search included TMT6plex on lysine and the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl on cysteines as static modifications, whereas deamidation of asparagine was selected as dynamic modification. One missed cleavage was allowed. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were applied and peptides were filtered for a Mascot ion score above 20 and rank one.

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic transmission leading to release of neurotransmitters in the nervous system is a fast and highly dynamic process. Previously, protein interaction and phosphorylation have been thought to be the main regulators of synaptic transmission. Here we show that sialylation of <i>N</i>-linked glycosylation is a novel potential modulator of neurotransmitter release mechanisms by investigating depolarization-dependent changes of formerly sialylated <i>N</i>-linked glycopeptides. We suggest that negatively charged sialic acids can be modulated, similarly to phosphorylation, by the action of sialyltransferases and sialidases thereby changing local structure and function of membrane glycoproteins. We characterized site-specific alteration in sialylation on <i>N</i>-linked glycoproteins in isolated rat nerve terminals after brief depolarization using quantitative sialiomics. We identified 1965 formerly sialylated <i>N</i>-linked glycosites in synaptic proteins and found that the abundances of 430 glycosites changed after 5 s depolarization. We observed changes on essential synaptic proteins such as synaptic vesicle proteins, ion channels and transporters, neurotransmitter receptors and cell adhesion molecules. This study is to our knowledge the first to describe ultra-fast site-specific modulation of the sialiome after brief stimulation of a biological system.

### Keywords
Sialic acid, Rat, Synaptic transmission, Lc-ms/ms, Synaptosomes, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Inga Matthies

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark


