### Accession
PXD006371

### Title
Multiple Extracellular Vesicle Types in Peritoneal Dialysis Effluent are Prominent and Contain Known Biomarkers

### Description
Proteomics-based analysis of  Peritoneal Dialysis Effluent is a relatively new approach to studying the changes associated with PD. Recent studies have shown altered proteomic profiles in various conditions of PD patients, including uremia, diabetes, peritonitis, abnormal peritoneal transport function and with different peritoneal dialysis modality. However, these studies extracted proteins in PDE by precipitation techniques resulting in high abundant diffusible proteins from blood circulation which interfered with the identification of low abundant, locally secreted, yet important, biomarkers. we hypothesize that EVs are secreted from peritoneal resident cells and contain known biomarkers for PDE-related membrane injury. As a proof of concept, here we identified and characterized EVs from PDE of healthy PD patients using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). Furthermore, we did proteomics and bioinformatics analyses to determine the number and type of proteins measurable within EVs isolated from the PDE using two methods of vesicle isolation. 

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, all samples (300 ml of PDE per sample) were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min at 4 ºC to remove whole cells, cell fragments, large debris, lamellar bodies, denser ectosomes, and macrovesicles (such as traditionally described apoptotic bodies; 1 to 5 µm in size. The supernatants were then centrifuged at 110,000 x gave for 1 hour at 4 ºC to obtain low-density membrane pellets. The pellets were subsequently resuspended in 200 µl of PBS and stored at -20 ºC until further processing unless otherwise stated. Five patients used for repeat analysis had samples processed as above, and then 50% of the low-density pellet was solubilized in 400 µl of PBS and passed thru a size exclusion chromatography (SEC) column with 70 nm pore size as per company instructions for plasma (IZON Science Ltd). 500 µl fractions were collected. Fractions 1-5 (2.5 ml in total), 6-10 (2.5 ml in total), and 11-30 (10 ml in total) were combined respectively. Pooled fractions were concentrated with a 10-kDa filter (Amicon Ultra-4) by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 25 minutes. Relative percentages of protein in SEC pooled fractions were 0.5% (fraction 1-5), 4.8% (fraction 6-10), and 94.7% (fraction 11-30). Total protein amount in the SEC vesicle fraction (fraction 6-10) was 26 ± 15 µg.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The full MS scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z was selected, and precursor ions with the charge states of +1 or greater than +8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 28%. Raw LC-MS/MS files were searched by X! Tandem (CYCLONE, 2013.2.01) against human databases (ENSEMBL v.76 Homo sapiens GRCh38) plus common contaminants concatenated with their reversed sequences. A target-decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was used as a fixed modification mass. Variable modifications were oxidation at methionine. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage sites was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Peritoneal dialysis inevitability results in activation of inflammatory processes and its efficiency is highly variable between patients. An improved method to isolate biomarkers and study pathophysiological mechanisms in peritoneal dialysis effluent (PDE) is expected to be of much benefit for the development of this treatment approach and help with patient management. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released as part of normal cellular processes. Their proteome is expected to reflect both type and health of their cell of origin. Although there is a significant interest in using EVs for "liquid biopsies", little is reported of their presence or composition in plentiful dialysis waste fluids, including peritoneal dialysis effluent (PDE). Here we determined the presence of EVs in PDE and subsequently characterized their proteome. EVs were first isolated from PDE using differential centrifugation, then a further enrichment using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed. The presence of EVs was demonstrated using transmission electron microscopy, and their particle counts were investigated using nanoparticle tracking analysis and dynamic light scattering. Using tandem mass spectrometry, marker proteins from three types of EVs i.e. apoptotic bodies, ectosomes, and exosomes were identified. The proteomic results demonstrated that the isolation of EVs by differential centrifugation helped enrich for over 2,000 proteins normally masked by abundant proteins in PDE such as albumin and SEC markedly further improved the isolation of low abundant proteins. Gene ontology analysis of all identified proteins showed the marked enrichment of exosome and membrane-associated proteins. Over 3,700 proteins were identified in total, including many proteins with known roles in peritoneal pathophysiology. This study demonstrated the prominence of EVs in PDE and their potential value as a source of biomarkers for peritoneal dialysis patients.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Peritoneal dialysis

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Center, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Trairak Pisitkun
Systems Biology Center, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand


