### Accession
PXD000963

### Title
Proteins from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded prostate cancer sections that predict the risk of metastatic disease

### Description
Purpose: Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in men and the third leading cause of cancer related deaths among men living in developed countries. Biomarkers that predict disease outcome at the time of initial diagnosis would aid management of the disease.  Experimental design: Proteins extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embeddded sections were identified either using LC-MALDI MS/MS of tryptic digests or after separation by one- or two-dimensional electrophoresis. A list of potential biomarker candidates, based on proposed associations with prostate cancer, was derived from the 320 identified proteins.  Results: Four of the candidates: annexin A2, peroxiredoxin-1, prostate-specific antigen and zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein, were examined by Western blotting of extracts of biopsies from men whom there was 10-year disease outcome data. Multiplexed Western blotting using cocktails of antibodies and fluor-labeled detection reagents showed that annexin A2 provided the best prediction of risk of metastatic disease.  Conclusions and clinical relevance:  This pilot study indicates that tumour expression of ANXA2 in diagnostic biopsies of a prostate cancer is predictive for the metastatic potential of that cancer. The potential of protein profiling of each cancer is to lead to an overall reduction in mortality from metastatic prostate cancer as well as reduced treatment associated morbidity.

### Sample Protocol
Deparaffinised, air-dried tissue samples were incubated in 250 µL of extraction buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl, 2% SDS, 3% DTT) for 1 h at room temperature followed by 20 min at 100ºC. Samples were immediately centrifuged at 14000x g for 15 min and each supernatant was added to 1.25 mL of Precipitation Solution (ProteoExtract® Protein Precipitation Kit, EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) and incubated overnight at -20ºC before centrifugation at 14000x g for 30 min at 4ºC. The protein pellets were washed 2x 5 min using 500 µL ProteoExtract® Wash Solution, air-dried for 5 min and resuspended in either rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 20 mM DTT, 0. 5% IPG buffer, trace bromophenol blue) for 2DE; 1x LDS sample buffer containing Sample Reducing Agent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for Gel-MS/MS; or 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 8 M urea, 0.1% SDS for LC-MS/MS. The protein concentration of each sample was assayed using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). 1DE, 2DE, sample processing for mass spectrometry including digestion with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany), identification of proteins from 2DE gels by MALDI mass fingerprinting, and immunoblotting were carried out as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Gel-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS spectra were collected using an ABSCIEX 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer in positive ion mode. TOF/TOF data files were searched against UniProtKB human sequences (88473 sequences, final searches 17 January 2014) using ProteinPilot v3.0 (AB SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm. Search parameters were maximum one missed trypsin cleavage, maximum 50 ppm and 0.2 Da mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra respectively, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Paragon searches were conducted in “Thorough Mode” using a reversed sequence database to obtain 95% peptide identification confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ffpe / prognostic biomarkers / prostate cancer / proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Biodiscovery
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand

### Submitter
Danyl Mclauchlan

### Lab Head
Dr Bill Jordan
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand


