### Accession
PXD034478

### Title
Quantitation of ATIs in Wheat by LC-MS/MS – iTRAQ

### Description
A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro).

### Sample Protocol
Flour (25 mg) was extracted two times with 1 mL 50% 1-propanol in Tris-HCl (0.5 mol/L, pH 8.8) (v/v) containing 1% dithiothreitol (DTT) (w/v) (Svevo: 2 × 1.3 mL and R5P8b: 2 × 2.1 mL; Bobwhite and 22-2, 2 × 2.8 mL). For each extraction step, the samples were vortexed for 2 min and then stirred at 60 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatants were collected in 15 mL tubes. The solutions were homogenized by shaking. Aliquots (150 µL containing 150 µg protein) were transferred in 1.5 mL tubes. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (600 µL) overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone (200 µL). The tubes were stored at -20 °C, shipped to Australia and Austria and again stored at -20 °C until further analysis. A 4-plex kit (SCIEX, Darmstadt, Germany) was used to label the peptides. Svevo (57 µg each) was iTRAQ labeled as 114 and 116 and R5P8b (57 µg each) as 115 and 117 in the durum wheat repetition. Bobwhite (48 µg) was iTRAQ labeled as 114 and 116 and 22.2 (48 µg) as 115 and 117 in the common wheat repetition.

### Data Protocol
Obtained data was processed with PEAKS X Pro (version 10.6, Bioinformatics solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). According to the PEAKS quantitation workflow, data refinement was performed with the default settings (correct precursor: Mass only; associate feature with chimera scan: Enabled; filter features: Charge between 2 and 8). De novo search followed with error tolerance of precursor mass of 15 ppm and fragment ion of 0.5 Da, trypsin as enzyme and carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ 4plex (K, N-term) as modification. For the database search, a FASTA file containing only the 13 ATIs of interests were created and used as database. In the quantitation module, the labels were specified as described above. Quantitation mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da and false discovery rate (FDR) threshold to 1.0%. Spectrum filter settings were set to -10LgP ≥ 48.3, quality ≥ 0, reporter ion intensity ≥ 0E0, detected in at least 1 channel and protein filters to significance ≥ 0, fold change ≥ 1, significance method: PEAKSQ, has at least 0 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitation of wheat proteins is still a challenge, especially regarding amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs). A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro). To characterize the wheat proteins on protein level, complementary techniques as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gel electrophoresis were performed. The targeted approach with SIDA was able to quantitate all ATIs, even at low levels, but an optimized extraction is necessary. The labeled iTRAQ approach revealed an indistinct performance. LFQ with low resolution equipment (IonTrap) showed similar results for major ATIs, but low abundance ATIs as CM1, were not detectable. DDA measurements with an Orbitrap system and evaluation using MaxQuant showed that the relative quantitation was dependent on the wheat species. The combination of manual curation of the MaxQuant search with Skyline revealed a very good performance. The DIA approach with analytical flow found similar results compared to absolute quantitation except for some minor ATIs, which were not detected. Comparison of applied methods revealed that peptide selection is a crucial step for protein quantitation. Wheat proteomics faces challenges due to the high genetic complexity, the close relationship to other cereals and the incomplete, redundant protein database requiring sensitive, precise and accurate LC-MS/MS methods.

### Keywords
Amylase/trypsin inhibitor; wheat; crsipr-cas9; rnai;

### Affiliations
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institut of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institut of Technology
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany

### Submitter
Sabrina Geisslitz

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Scherf
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany


