### Accession
PXD030181

### Title
A dynamic and combinatorial histone code drives malaria parasite asexual and sexual development

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are frequently co-occurring on the same chromatin domains or even the same molecule. It is now established that these ‘histone codes’ are the result of cross-talk between enzymes that catalyse multiple PTMs with univocal readout as compared to these PTMs in isolation. Here, we performed a comprehensive identification and quantification of histone codes of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. We used advanced quantitative middle-down proteomics to identify combinations of PTMs in both the proliferative, asexual stages and transmissible, sexual gametocyte stages of P. falciparum. We provide an updated, high-resolution compendium of 72 PTMs on H3 and H3.3, of which 30 newly identified. Several co-existing PTMs with unique stage distinction was identified, indicating that many of these combinatorial PTMs are associated to specific stages of the parasite life cycle. We focused on the code H3R17me2K18acK23ac for its unique presence in mature gametocytes; chromatin proteomics identified a gametocyte-specific SAGA-like effector complex including the transcription factor AP2-G2 which we associated to this specific histone code, as involved in regulating gene expression in mature gametocytes. Ultimately, this study unveils previously undiscovered histone PTMs and their functional relationship with co-existing partners. These results highlight that investigating chromatin regulation in the parasite using single histone PTM assays might overlook higher order gene regulation for distinct proliferation and differentiation processes.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro cultivation of P. falciparum asexual parasites and gametocytes All in vitro experiments involving human blood donors and human malaria parasites holds ethics approval from the University of Pretoria Research Ethics Committee, Health Sciences Faculty (NAS332/2019). Intra-erythrocytic P. falciparum parasites (NF54 strain, drug sensitive) was cultivated in fresh human erythrocytes (either A⁺ or O+) in RPMI-1640 culture medium supplemented with 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5, Sigma Aldrich, USA), 0.2 mM hypoxanthine (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 0.024 µg/µL gentamycin (Hyclone, USA), 5 µg/µL Albumax II (Invitrogen, USA), 23.81 mM sodium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, USA) and 0.2 % w/v D-glucose. Cultures was maintained with daily media change and fresh erythrocyte supplementation at 5 % haematocrit, 2 % parasitaemia under hypoxic conditions (5 % O₂, 5 % CO₂, 90 % N₂) with moderate shaking at 37˚C. Parasites were synchronised to more than 90 % rings stages with D-sorbitol. Gametocytogenesis production was initiated at 0.5% parasitaemia and at a 6 % haematocrit in a glucose-free medium under hypoxic gaseous (5 % O₂, 5 % CO₂, 90 % N₂) conditions at 37˚C without shaking (Reader et al., 2015).  Histone isolation Nuclei were liberated from P. falciparum parasites using a hypotonic buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 3 mM MgCl₂, 0.2 % v/v Nonidet P40, 0.25 M sucrose and a cocktail of EDTA-free cocktail of protease inhibitors. Histones were subsequently extracted from chromatin and enriched through incubation with of 0.25 M hydrochloric acid.   Histones were precipitated using 20 % trichloroacetic acid and rinsed with acetone air-dried and reconstituted using dddH2O. Histones were subsequently concentrated by freeze drying and stored at -80°C.  Middle-down proteomics for identification of combinatorial histone PTM Middle-down MS was performed according to Coradin et al. (2020) with a few modifications (Coradin et al., 2020; Sidoli et al., 2016b). Histones (15-50 µg) were suspended in 5 mM ammonium acetate to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL (pH 4.0). GluC endoprotease was diluted to 0.2 µg/µL in the same buffer and added to the histone samples a final concentration of 1:20 GluC enzyme:histone. Histone samples were incubated for overnight at room temperature and digestion is blocked by addition of 1 % formic acid. Trifluoroacetic acid (0.1 %) was added to the digested peptides and desalted using StageTips packed with a solid phase C18 column disk (3M Empore) with porous graphitic carbon (PGC) suspended in 100 % acetonitrile (CAN) on top and washed with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted by the addition of 70 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid elution buffer. Histone protein samples were dried and suspended to a concentration of ~2 µg/µL in the sample buffer consisting of 60 % acetonitrile, 20 mM propionic acid and ethylenediamine.  Separation of digested histone peptides was performed by using nanoliter flow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an analytical weak cation exchange–hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatographic resin (PolycatA, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) column (75 μm ID, 15 cm in length, 1.7 μm in diameter and a 1000 Å porosity). Buffer A was prepared with 70 % acetonitrile and 20 mM propionic acid to adjust the pH to 6.0. Buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade H2O. HPLC gradient was setup for a nonlinear gradient: 0-70 % of buffer B for 2 min followed with 72-85 % buffer B for more than 90 min. The gradient is on hold for 5 min at 95 % buffer B to wash the column prior to consequential sample loading. To minimize sample carryover, blanks were run frequently for at least 20 min with high (80-95 %) buffer B. MS detection was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in a data dependent mode and high mass resolution mode for both MS1 events and MS2 scans for each of the three stages investigated in two to three independent biological experiments. The full mass spectrum scan was set at 665–705 m/z, as this is the range of the most intense charge states (+8) for histone H3 polypeptides. A charge filter was added to include +8 charge states targeted for fragmentation. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 300°C and the spray voltage to 2.3 kV. Fragmentation is performed by using electron transfer dissociation (ETD) at a resolution of 120 000 (MS1) and 30 000 (MS2). The ETD reaction time was 20 ms for polypeptides with +8 charge states. For high resolution spectrums, three microscans were averaged.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were deconvoluted with Xtract (Thermo) and searched using Mascot (v. 2.5) against histone sequences obtained from PlasmoDB resource (https://plasmodb.org/, version 43, released 25 April 2019). Files were searched with the following dynamic modifications: Acetylation (K), phosphorylation (ST), mono and dimethylation (RK), and trimethylation (K). The mass tolerance was set to 2.1 Da for precursor ions and 0.01 Da for fragment ions. IsoScale (http://middle-down.github.io/Software/) was used to confidently identify and quantify modified peptides. Only c/z fragment ions were allowed. PTMs were only accepted if there were at least one site determining ions on both sides of the assigned PTM.

### Publication Abstract
Histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) frequently co-occur on the same chromatin domains or even in the same molecule. It is now established that these "histone codes" are the result of cross talk between enzymes that catalyze multiple PTMs with univocal readout as compared with these PTMs in isolation. Here, we performed a comprehensive identification and quantification of histone codes of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. We used advanced quantitative middle-down proteomics to identify combinations of PTMs in both the proliferative, asexual stages and transmissible, sexual gametocyte stages of P.&#xa0;falciparum. We provide an updated, high-resolution compendium of 77 PTMs on H3 and H3.3, of which 34 are newly identified in P.&#xa0;falciparum. Coexisting PTMs with unique stage distinctions were identified, indicating that many of these combinatorial PTMs are associated with specific stages of the parasite life cycle. We focused on the code H3R17me2K18acK23ac for its unique presence in mature gametocytes; chromatin proteomics identified a gametocyte-specific SAGA-like effector complex including the transcription factor AP2-G2, which we tied to this specific histone code, as involved in regulating gene expression in mature gametocytes. Ultimately, this study unveils previously undiscovered histone PTMs and their functional relationship with coexisting partners. These results highlight that investigating chromatin regulation in the parasite using single histone PTM assays might overlook higher-order gene regulation for distinct proliferation and differentiation processes.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Histone code, Parasite, Ptm, Gametocyte, Middle-down mass spectrometry proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Sidoli
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA


