### Accession
PXD048637

### Title
CAMSAP-driven microtubule release from γ-TuRC and its regulation by nucleation-promoting factors

### Description
γ-tubulin ring complex (γ-TuRC) is the major microtubule-nucleating factor. After nucleation, microtubules can be released from γ-TuRC and stabilized by other proteins, such as CAMSAPs, but the biochemical cross-talk between minus-end regulation pathways is poorly understood. Here, we reconstituted this process in vitro using purified components. We found that all CAMSAPs could bind to the minus-ends of γ-TuRC-attached microtubules. CAMSAP2 and CAMSAP3, which decorate and stabilize growing minus ends, but not the minus-end tracking protein CAMSAP1 induced microtubule release from γ-TuRC. CDK5RAP2, a γ-TuRC-interactor, and CLASP2, a regulator of microtubule growth, strongly stimulated γ-TuRC-dependent microtubule nucleation, but only CDK5RAP2 suppressed CAMSAP binding to γ-TuRC-anchored minus ends and their release. CDK5RAP2 also improved selectivity of γ-tubulin-containing complexes for 13- rather than 14-protofilament microtubules in microtubule-capping assays. Knockout and overexpression experiments in cells showed that CDK5RAP2 inhibits formation of CAMSAP2-bound microtubules detached from the microtubule-organizing center. We conclude that CAMSAPs can release newly nucleated microtubules from γ-TuRC, whereas nucleation-promoting factors can differentially regulate this process.

### Sample Protocol
Purified γ-TuRC preparations (GCP3- and GCP6-tagged) were resuspended in 20 μL of Laemmli Sample buffer (Biorad) and were loaded on a 4%–12% gradient Criterion XT Bis-Tris precast gel (Biorad). Gel was fixed with 40% methanol/10% acetic acid and then stained with colloidal Coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour. Samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA)/5% DMSO post in-gel digestion, and analyzed with an Agilent 1290 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, CA) LC, operating in reverse-phase (C18) mode, coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm; Dr. Maisch) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), peptides were loaded at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm; Agilent) using 90 min linear gradient from 7%–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation after a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z. MS spectra in high-resolution mode (R > 30,000) were acquired, whereas MS2 was in high-sensitivity mode (R > 15,000).  To assess the quality of purified recombinant proteins (mCherry-CDK5RAP2, mCherry-CLASP2 and chTOG-mCherry), samples were digested using S-TRAP micro filters (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, 4 μg of protein samples were denatured using 5% SDS buffer and reduced and alkylated using DTT (20 mM, 10 min, 95 °C) and iodoacetamide (IAA, 40 mM, 30 min), followed by acidification and precipitation using a methanol triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer before finally loading on a S-TRAP column. Trapped proteins were washed four times with methanol TEAB buffer followed by overnight Trypsin (1 μg, Promega) digestion at 37 °C. Before LC-MS analysis, digested peptides were eluted and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were analyzed by reversed phase nLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Digested peptides were separated over a 50 cm reversed phase column, packed in-house, (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm x 75 μm) using a linear gradient with buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) ranging from 13-44% B over 38 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a column wash and re-equilibration step. MS data was acquired using a DDA method with the set MS1 scan parameters in profile mode: 60,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) target equal to 3E6, scan range of 375-1600 m/z, maximum injection time of 20 ms. The MS2 scan parameters were set at 15,000 resolution, with an AGC target set to standard, an automatic maximum injection time and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Scans were acquired using a fixed first mass of 120 m/z and a mass range of 200-2000 and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using a 1 second scan cycle, a 10 s dynamic exclusion time and a precursor charge selection filter for ion possessing +2 to +6 charges. The total data acquisition time was 55 min.

### Data Protocol
γ-TuRC  raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and a database search was performed using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, UK) against a Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy human). Whereas oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed by Trypsin. Data filtering performed using percolator resulted in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters set were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20. For iBAQ analysis, raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant (version 2.1.3.0) against the SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database using the iBAQ algorithm. Modifications, such as methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The proteinGroups.txt file was imported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis. Potential contaminants, reverse sequences and proteins identified by site were not filtered out. All other raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific). A database search was performed for MS/MS fragment spectra using Sequest HT against a human database (UniProt, year 2020) that was modified to include protein sequences from our cloned constructs and a common contaminants database. A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.06 Da was set for the search parameters. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed by Trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation was set as variable modifications. Data filtering performed using percolator resulted in 1% FDR for peptide spectrum match (PSM) and a 1% FDR was applied to peptide and protein assemblies. An additional filter with a minimum Sequest score of 2.0 was set for PSM inclusion. MS1 based quantification was performed using the Pecursor Ion Quantifier node with default settings and precursor ion feature matching was enabled using the Feature Mapper node. Common protein contaminants were filtered out from the results table.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Nucleation, Tubulin, Trafficking, Microtubule, Camsaps

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Kelly Stecker

### Lab Head
Dr Kelly E. Stecker
Utrecht University


