### Accession
PXD005520

### Title
Human Plasma Gel Filtration Fractions MS Data

### Description
Mapping Atheroprotective Functions and Related Proteins/Lipoproteins in Size Fractionated Human Plasma

### Sample Protocol
Plasma fractions (300 ul) were delipidated using chloroform: methanol, and then treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) to reduce and carbamidomethylate the proteins prior to trypsinization. Trypsinized proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) using a nanoLC-MS/MS (AB Sciex5600 +TripleTOF) mass spectrometer as previously described (J Proteome Res  2015  14(7): 2943-50) with the exception that the trap column used was a Chrom XP C18-CL NanoLC Trap Column (350 μm x  0.5 mm with a 3 μm packed bed) from Eksigent (Dublin, CA).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Mascot (version 2.2.2, www.matrixscience.com) and X! Tandem (version 2001.01.01.1) search engines against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase (2011). Search criteria included: human taxonomy, and carbamidomethylation as a variable modification; peptide tolerance was set at ±20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance set to ± 0.6 Da, and up to 3 missed trypsin cleavages allowed. Peptide and protein identification from the MS/MS were validated using Scaffold software (version 3.3.1) and only peptides with >95% identification probability and proteins with >99% identification probability were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
HDL has been shown to possess a variety of cardio-protective functions, including removal of excess cholesterol from the periphery, and inhibition of lipoprotein oxidation. It has been proposed that various HDL subparticles exist, each with distinct protein and lipid compositions, which may be responsible for HDL's many functions. We hypothesized that HDL functions will co-migrate with the operational lipoprotein subspecies when separated by gel filtration chromatography. Plasma from 10 healthy male donors was fractionated and the protein composition of the phospholipid containing fractions was analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS). Each fraction was evaluated for its proteomic content as well as its ability to promote cholesterol efflux and protect low density lipoprotein (LDL) from free radical oxidation. For each function, several peaks of activity were identified across the plasma size gradient. Neither cholesterol efflux or LDL antioxidation activity correlated strongly with any single protein across the fractions. However, we identified multiple proteins that had strong correlations (r values &gt;0.7, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) with individual peaks of activity. These proteins fell into diverse functional categories, including those traditionally associated with lipid metabolism, as well as alternative complement cascade, innate immunity and clotting cascades and immunoglobulins. Additionally, the phospholipid and cholesterol concentration of the fractions correlated strongly with cholesterol efflux (<i>r</i> = 0.95 and 0.82 respectively), whereas the total protein content of the fractions correlated best with antioxidant activity across all fractions (<i>r</i> = 0.746). Furthermore, two previously postulated subspecies (apoA-I, apoA-II and apoC-1; as well as apoA-I, apoC-I and apoJ) were found to have strong correlations with both cholesterol efflux and antioxidation activity. Up till now, very little has been known about how lipoprotein composition mediates functions like cholesterol efflux and antioxidation.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma

### Affiliations
Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation

### Submitter
Debi Swertfeger

### Lab Head
Dr L. Jason Lu
Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039


