### Accession
PXD026077

### Title
Mitochondrial retrograde signaling contributes to metabolic differentiation in yeast colonies - Proteomics of BY4742, BY-rtg1, BY-mks1, BY-rtg1mks1 and BY-rtg2mks1.

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data ........ of proteins from colonies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4742, BY-rtg1, BY-mks1, BY-rtg1mks1 and BY-rtg2mks1 strains.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested from S. cerevisiae BY4742, BY-rtg1, BY-mks1, BY-rtg1mks1 and BY-rtg2mks1 colonies grown 5 and 15 days on GMA. The cells were disrupted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 50 mM chloroacetamide buffer containing 2% sodium deoxycholate using glass beads. Protein aliquots (30 µg per sample; determined by bicinchoninic acid assay, Sigma) were used for MS sample preparation. Peptide (2 µg) from each sample was separated on Nano reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column a 50-cm x 75 m ID, PepMap C18, 2 m particles using a 1 h elution gradient and analyzed in DDA mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Three biological replicates were run for each strain and condition.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were processed in MaxQuant (v. 1.5.8.3). Searches were performed against the latest version of S. cerevisiae Uniprot database and common contaminant database.

### Publication Abstract
During development of yeast colonies, various cell subpopulations form, which differ in their properties and specifically localize within the structure. Three branches of mitochondrial retrograde (RTG) signaling play a role in colony development and differentiation, each of them activating the production of specific markers in different cell types. Here, aiming to identify proteins and processes controlled by the RTG pathway, we analyzed proteomes of individual cell subpopulations from colonies of strains, mutated in genes of the RTG pathway. Resulting data, along with microscopic analyses revealed that the RTG pathway predominantly regulates processes in U cells, long-lived cells with unique properties, which are localized in upper colony regions. Rtg proteins therein activate processes leading to amino acid biosynthesis, including transport of metabolic intermediates between compartments, but also repress expression of mitochondrial ribosome components, thus possibly contributing to reduced mitochondrial translation in U cells. The results reveal the RTG pathway's role in activating metabolic processes, important in U cell adaptation to altered nutritional conditions. They also point to the important role of Rtg regulators in repressing mitochondrial activity in U cells.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial retrograde signaling

### Affiliations
Charles University
Dept. Genet. Microbiol, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic , Biocev

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Zdena Palková
Dept. Genet. Microbiol, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic , Biocev


