### Accession
PXD028484

### Title
Drosophila nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits and their native interactions with insecticidal  peptide toxins

### Description
Description Drosophila melanogaster nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are ligand-gated ion  channels that present a target for insecticides. However, a better understanding of in vioreceptor subunit composition is needed for effective design of insecticides. Alpha-neurotxins are known as peptide toxins capable to block nAChRs by binding to its target subunits. To facilitate the analysis of nAChRs we used a CRISPR/Cas9 strategy to generate null alleles for all ten nAChR subunit genes. We studied interactions of nAChRs to a snake toxin by using styrene maleic acid lipid particles (SMALPs) extraction method. For the null alleles which are impaired in locomotor activities we examined the binding of nAChRs incorporated into SMALPs to alpha bungarotoxin by employing mass spectrometry. We show native ligand  interactions to Dalpha5, Dalpha6 and Dalpha7 subunits and reveal glycosylation sites of  Dalpha5 and Dalpha7 by a glycoproteomic approach. Finally, we report the localization of  fluorescent tagged Dalpha6 across nervous system development

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein enrichment and incorporation in SMALPs  D. melanogaster heads were obtained and separated according to (doi:10.1038/nprot.2014.192). In a 50 ml falcon tube about 6 g flies were rapidly frozen in  liquid nitrogen and vortexed for 2 times at 3 minutes, in between the tube was cooled for 30  seconds in liquid nitrogen. Heads were separated from bodies by sieving (Endecotts, London,  United Kingdom, 1201124 & 1201125). 1 ml of isotonic lysis buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 50 mM  TRIS/HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2mM EDTA, Protease inhibitor) was added to about 0.8 g separated heads. The solution was mixed three times by vortex and heads were lysed in  a dounce homogenizer by 60 up-down strokes. Membrane protein preparation was performed  by differential centrifugation-based fractionation as described by (doi:10.1038/nprot.2014.192;  doi:10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w). Membrane protein pellets were resuspended in 20 to 100  μl 5 % SMALPs solution (5 % styrene maleic acid copolymer (3:1), 5 mM Tris-Base, 0.15 mM  NaCl, pH 8.0). For efficient incorporation and formation of SMALP membrane proteins were  incubated with 5 % SMALPs solution for 2 hours at room temperature on a rocking platform.  In order to separate the insoluble proteins from the soluble SMALPs a centrifugation step at  100.000 × g at 60 minutes, 4°C was performed. Supernatants which contained the SMALPs were combined and used for the nAChRs pull-downs.  Enrichment of nAChRs by alpha-Btx pull-downs SMALPs (20-35mg/ml) were incubated with 200 μl alpha-Btx conjugated affinity beads for  16 hours, 4°C on a rotator. Following beads were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1.500 × g and  non-specific interacting proteins were removed. Next beads were washed two to three times,  10 minutes with 1 ml ice-cold TBS (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) on a rotator at 4°C.  Beads were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1.500 × g and non-specific interacting proteins were  removed and nAChRs were selectively eluted twice with 100 μl 1 M carbachol (Insight  Biotechnlogy Ltd, Wembley, United Kingdom, CAS 51-83-2). These steps were performed for  25 minutes at room temperature on a rotator. Beads were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1.500  × g and eluates were combined and ice-cold 100 % acetone in the volume of four times of the  sample was added to the samples, mixed by vortex and proteins were precipitated for 16 hours at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 13.000 × g for 15 minutes. Supernatant was removed  and dried proteins were dissolved in laemmli buffer (1M tris pH 6.8, 10 % SDS, 5 % glycerol,  2 % bromophenol blue). Proteins were heated at 60°C and loaded on mini-protean tgx precast  gel (4-15 %, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Watford, United Kingdom, catalogue # 456–1084).

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were dissolved in 20 μl of 0.1 % (v/v) FA. Approximately 1 μg peptide  solution was used for each LC-MS/MS analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed  using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA,  USA) system and a Q ExactiveTM Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc,  Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography  at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column  (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2m particle size, 100A pore size, 75 m i.d. x 50 cm length).  Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5m particle  size, 100A pore size, 300 m i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with  0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 15 L/min. After this period, the column valve  was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column.  Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water +  0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 90 minutes (the total run time  including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 minutes). In between runs columns  were washed at least four times to avoid any carryovers. The LC eluant was sprayed into the  mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). An  electrospray voltage of 2.1 kV was applied in order to ionize the eluant. All m/z values of  eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 35000 and  scanned between m/z 380-1500 Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically  isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Normalised  collision energy (NCE): 25 %) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting  fragment ions were performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Singly  charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for  MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds was employed. Peptide/protein database searching  Protein identification was carried out using mascot or sequest HT search engine software  operating in proteome discoverer 2.352,53. Raw flies were searched against the uniprot Drosophila_melanogaster_20180813 database (23297 sequences; 16110808 residues) and a  common contaminant sequences database. The search parameters using mascot algorithm  were: (i) trypsin was set as the enzyme of choice, (ii) precursor ion mass tolerance 20 ppm, (iii) fragment ion mass tolerance 0.1 Da, (iv) maximum of two missed cleavage sites were set, (v)  a minimum peptide length of six amino acids were set, (vi) fixed cysteine static modification  by carbamidomethylation, (vii) variable modification by methionine oxidation & deamidation  on asparagine and glutamine and N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc(1)dHex(1) + HexNAc on  asparagine) as variable glycopeptide modifications, (viii) A site probability threshold of 75 %  was set, (ix) Percolator was used to assess the false discovery rate and peptide filters were set  to high confidence (FDR<1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nachrs, Smalps, Toxins, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn S. Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge


