### Accession
PXD046609

### Title
Nitroxoline Resistance in Escherichia coli

### Description
Profiling of Nitroxoline resistance in Escherichia coli using full proteome analysis

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation An ONC was inoculated 1:100 in 4x5 mL fresh media and incubated at 37°C, 200 rpm, until the early stationary phase was reached (OD600 ~ 2). The samples were washed with 1000 µL cold PBS (6000xg, 5 min, 4°C) and the pallet was stored at -80°C until lysis. Lysis was done by adding 200 µL 0.4% SDS in PBS and three times sonication for 30 s at 50% intensity (Bandelin Sonoplus). Samples were centrifuged afterwards (20 min, 16900xg, RT). BCA assay was done according to manufactures instructions (Thermo Fisher) and proteome amount was adjusted to 50 µg per sample. Afterwards, the proteome was precipitated by adding 1 mL ice-cold acetone followed by incubation overnight at -20°C. Next, the samples were centrifuged (16900xg, 15 min, 4°C) and supernatant was discarded. Samples were washed two times by adding 1 mL ice-cold methanol, sonication for 10 s with 10% intensity and centrifugation (16900xg, 15 min, 4°C). Pellets were stored at -80°C.  Afterwards, samples were suspended in 200 µL X-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM HEPES, pH = 7.5) and 0.8 µL DTT (250 mM) per sample was added and incubated for 45 min, 25°C, 500 rpm (shaking). Next, 2 µL IAA (550 mM) were added and the mixture was incubated 45 min, 25°C, 450 rpm in the dark. Afterwards, additional 3.2 µL DTT (250 mM) were added and incubated for 30 min, 25°C, 450 rpm. 600 µL TEAB buffer (pH = 8) and 1 µL trypsin (0.5 µg/µL in 50 mM acetic acid) (MS grade, Promega) was added for digest overnight (>16 h) at 37°C, 450 rpm. Digestion was stopped by adding 8 µL formic acid, vortex and centrifugation (13000 rpm, 3 min, RT). Samples were desalted on SepPak C18 columns 50 mg (Waters). First, columns were equilibrated by adding 1 mL ACN, 0.5 mL elution buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and 3x1 mL 0.1% TFA. Afterwards samples were loaded and washed 3x with 1 mL TFA, 250 µL 0.5% FA and eluted into 2 mL LoBind (Eppendorf) by adding 3x 250 µL elution buffer under vaccum. Samples were dried in the speedVac (45°C, V-AQ) before dissolving in 30 µL 1% FA by 10 min sonication in a water bath. Samples were filtered using 0.22 µm centrifugal filter (Merck Millipore) and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS Sample analysis was done by using nanoElute nano flow liquid chromatography system (Bruker, Germany) coupled with a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Germany). Samples were loaded to the trap column (Thermo Trap Cartrige 5 mm) and washed with 6 µL 0.1% FA with a flow rate of 10 µL/min. Peptides were then transferred to the analytical column (Aurora Ultimate CSI 25 cm, IonOpticks) and separated by an gradient elution (0% to 3% in 1 min, 3% to 17% in 57 min, 17% to 25% in 21 min, 25% to 34% in 13 min, 34% to 85% in 1 min, 85% kept for 8 min) with H2O+0.1% FA (eluent A) and ACN+0.1% FA (eluent B) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Captive Spray nanoESI source (Bruker, Germany) was used to ionize the peptides at 1.5 kV with 180°C dry temperature at 3 L/min gas flow. timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Germany) was operated in default dia-PASEF long gradient mode with TIMS set to 1/K0 start at 0.6 Vs/cm2, end at 1.6 Vs/cm2 with a ramp and accumulation time of 100 ms each and a ramp rate of 9.43 Hz. Mass range was set from 100.0 Da to 1700 Da with positive ion polarity. Dia-PASEF mass range was set to 400.0 Da to 1201.0 Da with a mobility range of 0.60 1/K0 to 1.43 1/K0 and a cycle time of 1.80 s. Collision energy for 0.60 1/K0 was set to 20.00 eV and for 1.6 1/K0 to 59.00 eV. Tuning MIX ES-TOF was used for calibration of m/z and mobility.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing  Data were processed using DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) and proteins were identified against Uniprot E. coli reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000000625, downloaded 18/01/2023). Settings were used as default except precursor charge range was from 2 to 4. Cys-carbaidamethylation was set as fixed modification. “--relaxed-prot-inf” was added in additional options to allow further data processing with Perseus Software.  In Perseus (version 2.0.5.0) the values were transformed to their log2 and the replicates were grouped and filtered by three valid values in one group. Missing values were imputated by default settings and the differential protein abundance between different conditions were evaluated using students t-test. Cut-off for –log p-value was set to 1.3 (p-value = 0.05) and t-test difference 2 and -2. Proteins fitting these thresholds were significantly over or underexpressed compared to the wild type.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a global threat and requires the exploration of underestimated treatment options. Nitroxoline, an effective broad-spectrum antibiotic, does not suffer from high resistance rates in the clinics but surprisingly, it is not heavily used yet. Our findings provide compelling evidence that Nitroxoline resistance renders bacteria unable to cause an infection <i>in vivo</i>, thereby reinvigorating the potential of Nitroxoline in combating AMR.

### Keywords
Resistance, Timstof pro, Metabolism, E. coli, Nitroxoline, Fitness

### Affiliations
Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS). Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI). Department of Pharmacy at Saarland University, Campus Building E8.1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland

### Submitter
Felix Deschner

### Lab Head
Professor Rolf Mueller
Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS). Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI). Department of Pharmacy at Saarland University, Campus Building E8.1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.


