### Accession
PXD024039

### Title
Effect of ATP2 deletion on protein expression in Candida albicans

### Description
To investigate the effect of ATP2 knockdown on the protein expression of Candida albicans, we performed proteomic assays for atp2Δ/Δ and wild type strains. A total of 4000.0 proteins were identified in this study, of which 3652.0 proteins contained quantitative information. If a 1.5-fold differential expression change threshold and a statistical test t-test p-value < 0.05 were used as the significance threshold, then among the quantified proteins, we found that 112 proteins were up-regulated and 268 proteins were down-regulated in atp2Δ/Δ cells. Based on the above data, we performed systematic bioinformatics analysis (protein functional annotation) of all identified proteins, and performed functional classification, functional enrichment and functional enrichment-based clustering analysis of all differentially expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
C. albicans protein was extracted by a liquid nitrogen grinding method as described previously. C. albicans cells were grown in YPD liquid overnight, collected and  diluted into 1 L cultures at a starting OD = 0.5, cultured for 8 h at 30 °C, and harvested at 4 °C. The samples were ground into cell powder, then lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor) was added, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min. The sample was diluted with urea, and trypsin was added at the mass ratio of trypsin : protein = 1:50 for the first overnight digestion and 1:100 for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages provide the first-line defense against invasive fungal infections and, therefore, escape from macrophage becomes the basis for the establishment of <i>Candida albicans</i> invasive infection. Here, we found that deletion of <i>ATP2</i> (<i>atp2</i>&#x394;/&#x394;) in <i>C. albicans</i> resulted in a dramatic decrease from 69.2% (WT) to 1.2% in the escape rate <i>in vitro</i>. The effect of <i>ATP2</i> on macrophage clearance stands out among the genes currently known to affect clearance. In the normal mice, the <i>atp2</i>&#x394;/&#x394; cells were undetectable in major organs 72&#xa0;h after systemic infection, while WT cells persisted <i>in vivo</i>. However, in the macrophage-depleted mice, <i>atp2</i>&#x394;/&#x394; could persist for 72&#xa0;h at an amount comparable to that at 24&#xa0;h. Regarding the mechanism, WT cells sustained growth and switched to hyphal form, which was more conducive to escape from macrophages, in media that mimic the glucose-deficient environment in macrophages. In contrast, <i>atp2</i>&#x394;/&#x394; cells can remained viable but were unable to complete morphogenesis in these media, resulting in them being trapped within macrophages in the yeast form. Meanwhile, <i>atp2</i>&#x394;/&#x394; cells were killed by oxidative stress in alternative carbon sources by 2- to 3-fold more than WT cells. Taken together, <i>ATP2</i> deletion prevents <i>C. albicans</i> from escaping macrophage clearance, and therefore <i>ATP2</i> has a functional basis as a drug target that interferes with macrophage clearance.

### Keywords
Candida albicans; atp2 gene; macrophage

### Affiliations
Jinan University
First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University

### Submitter
Yishan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Zhang
Jinan University


