### Accession
PXD019072

### Title
Rapid speciation of cichlids fishes may be explained by evolutionary divergence of novel open reading frames

### Description
We have investigated whether we can understand the speciation of the cichlid fishes using proteogenomic approach. We have deposited both the RNA-Seq data and Mass Spectra data here. Details of methods carried out can be found in the Methods Section of the paper.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples from the same ON and PN fishes that were used for RNA extraction were used for the mass-spectrometry analysis as well. A new set of ON and PN fishes were used to obtain testes samples. To extract the total cellular proteome, ∼5 mg of tissue were lysed in buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 5mM Magnesium Acetate, 30mM Tris pH 8.0), and 15μg protein in 5x Laemmli buffer with 5% b-mercaptoethanol was loaded on Mini-PROTEAN® TGXTM Precast Gels (BioRad). Gel lanes were cut into three sections for peptide extraction. Gel sections were cut into 1-2mm cubes, washed with 50% Acetonitrile and 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate solution until blue stain is washed. Gel pieces were treated with 100% Acetonitrile, and then reduced with 10mM DTT in 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate for reduction at 56°C for 1 hour, and alkylated with 55mM Iodoacetamide in 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate in dark for 45 min at room temperature. Gel pieces were washed with 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate, and then treated with 50% Acetonitrile followed by 100% Acetonitrile. Subsequently, gel pieces were treated with diluted trypsin (5ng/ul) enzyme, overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted, dried, and dissolved in 3% Acetonitrile with 0.1% Formic Acid. A total of 36 total samples (2 fishes * 2 tissues * 3 biological replicates * 3 bands = 36) were analyzed by mass-spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The 36 Thermo mass spectrometry raw files were submitted to be searched against the respective per-fish, tissue-assembled transcriptome databases (for example liver Stringtie WR-assembled, liver Stringtie NR-assembled, liver de novo Trinity-assembled) in six frames utilizing Proteome Discoverer v2.1 and Mascot 2.6. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da, and the peptide mass tolerance set to 10ppm. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whilst variable modifications consisted of: oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. High confidence peptide identifications were determined using Percolator node, where false discovery rate estimation (FDR) < 0.01 was used. A minimum of two high confidence peptides per protein was required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Novel open reading frames (nORFs) with coding potential may arise from noncoding DNA. Not much is known about their emergence, functional role, fixation in a population or contribution to adaptive radiation. Cichlids fishes exhibit extensive phenotypic diversification and speciation. Encounters with new environments alone are not sufficient to explain this striking diversity of cichlid radiation because other taxa coexistent with the Cichlidae demonstrate lower species richness. Wagner et al. analyzed cichlid diversification in 46 African lakes and reported that both extrinsic environmental factors and intrinsic lineage-specific traits related to sexual selection have strongly influenced the cichlid radiation, which indicates the existence of unknown molecular mechanisms responsible for rapid phenotypic diversification, such as emergence of novel open reading frames (nORFs). In this study, we integrated transcriptomic and proteomic signatures from two tissues of two cichlids species, identified nORFs and performed evolutionary analysis on these nORF regions. Our results suggest that the time scale of speciation of the two species and evolutionary divergence of these nORF genomic regions are similar and indicate a potential role for these nORFs in speciation of the cichlid fishes.

### Keywords
Massspec, Orf, Evolution, Cichlids, Speciation

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Department of Genetics
Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jaime San Miguel Navas

### Lab Head
Dr Sudhakaran Prabakaran
Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge


