### Accession
PXD033127

### Title
Human tau 0N4R isoform hyperphosphorylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
Soluble aggregates of the microtubule-associated protein tau have been challenging to assemble and characterize, despite their important role in the development of tauopathies. We found that sequential hyperphosphorylation by protein kinase A in conjugation with either glycogen synthase kinase 3betaor stress activated protein kinase 4 enabled recombinant wild-type tau of isoform 0N4R to spontaneously polymerize into small amorphous aggregates in vitro. We employed tandem mass spectrometry to determine the phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Protein solutions were reduced (DTT), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and enzymatically digested in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [pH 8] with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis.  All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC  nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2m particle size, 100A pore size, 75m i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5m particle size, 100A pore size, 300m i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 L/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes.  The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 35000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the orbitrap analyzer, set at a resolution of 17500.  Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.  Post-run, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files, and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK) and searched against the UniProt Human database (93609 sequences; 37041084 residues) and a common contaminant sequences containing non-specific proteins such as keratins and trypsin (125 sequences; 41129 residues). Variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) were applied as well as fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C). The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da.  A significance threshold value of p<0.05 and a peptide cut-off score of 20 were also applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hyperphosphorylation, Human, Lc-ms/ms, Tau

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jonathan Meng

### Lab Head
Dr David Klenerman
University of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry


