### Accession
PXD019846

### Title
Reciprocal growth control by competitive binding of nucleotide second messengers to a metabolic switch in Caulobacter crescentus

### Description
Bacteria use a range of small signaling molecules to tune their physiology in response to changes in the environment. It has remained unclear if these regulatory networks operate independently or if they interact to optimize bacterial growth and survival. Here, we demonstrate that (p)ppGpp and c-di-GMP reciprocally regulate growth of Caulobacter crescentus by converging on a single small-molecule-binding protein, SmbA. Both second messengers bind to SmbA with high affinity and in a competitive manner, with the guanine moiety of (p)ppGpp and one of the guanyl bases of dimeric c-di-GMP forming identical interactions with SmbA. While c-di-GMP binding inhibits SmbA, (p)ppGpp interferes with this inhibition to sustain SmbA activity. We demonstrate that (p)ppGpp specifically promotes Caulobacter growth on glucose, while c-di-GMP inhibits glucose consumption. We find that SmbA contributes to this metabolic switch and promotes growth on glucose by quenching redox stress under these conditions. The identification of the first effector protein that acts as a central regulatory hub for two global second messengers opens up future studies on specific cross-talk between small-molecule-based regulatory networks.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for proteome analyses were taken from indicated C. crescentus NA1000 strains at their early adaptation phase in M2G after dilution from PYE stationary phase. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4°C, washed with ice-cold PBS buffer, and pellet was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Cells were resuspended in 50µl lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10mM TCEP, 100mM Tris, pH=8.5) and disrupted by indirect sonication (100% amplitude, 10 cycle ×10 s) in a VialTweeter (Hielscher). A small aliquot of the supernatant was taken to determine the protein concentration of each sample using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins obtained from the samples were alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C for 30 minutes at 500 rpm and digested with trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) over night at 37°C. The samples were acidified with 5% TFA. All peptide samples were desalted by C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus). Peptides were dried under vacuum and stored at -20ºC until further use. For LC-MS analysis, samples were solubilized in 98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid at a concentration of 0.25 ug/ul. All samples were prepared in biological triplicates. LC-MS analysis was perform as described before.

### Data Protocol
To determine changes in protein expressions across samples, a MS1-based label-free quantification was carried out. Therefore, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched with a target-decoy strategy using a database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from Caulobacter crescentus (strain NA1000/CB15N) (Uniprot, download date: 18/10/2016, total of (8496 entries) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); three missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. The peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. All quantitative analyses were performed in biological triplicates.  Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were normalized and statically analyzed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.4 (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) (PMID: 27345528) to obtain protein relative abundances. This analysis included summation of peak areas per protein and LC MS/MS run followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant proteins between conditions. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html). The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini Hochberg method. All LC-MS analysis runs are acquired from independent biological samples. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and Student t-Test MS-intensity signals are transformed from the linear to the log-scale. Unless stated otherwise linear regression was performed using the ordinary least square (OLS) method as implemented in base package of R v.3.1.2 (http://www.R-project.org/). The sample size of three biological replicates was chosen assuming a within-group MS-signal Coefficient of Variation of 10%. When applying a two-sample, two-sided Student t test this gives adequate power (80%) to detect protein abundance fold changes higher than 1.65, per statistical test. Note that the statistical package used to assess protein abundance changes, SafeQuant, employs a moderated t-Test, which has been shown to provide higher power than the Student t-test. We did not do any simulations to assess power, upon correction for multiple testing (Benjamini-Hochberg correction), as a function of different effect sizes and assumed proportions of differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria use small signalling molecules such as (p)ppGpp or c-di-GMP to tune their physiology in response to environmental changes. It remains unclear whether these regulatory networks operate independently or whether they interact to optimize bacterial growth and survival. We report that (p)ppGpp and c-di-GMP reciprocally regulate the growth of Caulobacter crescentus by converging on a single small-molecule-binding protein, SmbA. While c-di-GMP binding inhibits SmbA, (p)ppGpp competes for the same binding site to sustain SmbA activity. We demonstrate that (p)ppGpp specifically promotes Caulobacter growth on glucose, whereas c-di-GMP inhibits glucose consumption. We find that SmbA contributes to this metabolic switch and promotes growth on glucose by quenching the associated redox stress. The identification of an effector protein that acts as a central regulatory hub for two global second messengers opens up future studies on specific crosstalk between small-molecule-based regulatory networks.

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, C-di-gmp, Ppgpp, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland


