### Accession
PXD005987

### Title
Characterisation of Myst2 and Niam interactomes in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Here we undertake the characterisation of Myst2 protein interactions in mouse embryonic stem cells by affinity purification and mass spectrometry using a Myst2-FTAP tagged cell line. This protein interaction study confirms that in mouse embryonic stem cells Myst2 is part of H3 and H4 histone acetylation complexes similar to those described in somatic cells. We identify a novel Myst2- associated protein, the tumour suppressor protein Niam (Nuclear Interactor of Arf and Mdm2), and show that it also interacts with subunits of Myst2 H4 HAT complexes. Human NIAM is involved in chromosome segregation, p53 regulation and cell proliferation in somatic cells, but its role in embryonic stem cells is unknown. We describe the first Niam embryonic stem cell interactome, which includes proteins with roles in DNA replication and repair, transcription, splicing and ribosome biogenesis. Many of Myst2 and Niam binding partners are required for correct embryonic development, implicating Myst2 and NIAM in the cooperative regulation of this process and suggesting a novel role for Niam in embryonic biology. The data provides a useful resource for exploring Myst2 and Niam essential cellular functions and should contribute to deeper understanding of organism development and survival as well as the development of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
There are three different datasets included in this project:   1: Affinity purification data on Myst2-FTAP (including searches with and without acetylation) Sample processing: Whole cell extracts were prepared using a high salt lysis buffer and affinity purifications performed as previously described (PMID: 20362542). For tandem affinity purifications, the TEV eluate was diluted with calmodulin binding buffer (CBB: 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 2 mM calcium chloride, 1 mM DTT) and then incubated with calmodulin resin for 60 min at 4 °C. Final elution was carried out in CBB containing EGTA instead of calcium chloride. EGTA eluates were concentrated in Vivaspin 500 PES centrifugal filters, reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide prior to sample fractionation by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie. Whole lanes were cut in approximately 24 slices, gel pieces were de-stained completely and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted using 0.25% formic acid-50% acetonitrile and dried in a Speed Vac. Peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analysed with on-line nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an LTQ FT or an Orbitrap Velos as previously described (PMID: 20362542).  2: Blue native separation data on AP Myst2-FTAP Sample processing: Sample preparation and fractionation by blue native PAGE was carried out as previously described (PMID: 26714524)  3: Affinity purification data on Niam Sample processing: Polyclonal Niam antibodies were coupled to Dynal-Protein G beads. Antibody-coupled beads were incubated with whole cell extracts for 1-2 h at 4 °C. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by incubating the beads in LDS sample loading buffer at 70 °C for 10 min, reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide prior to sample fractionation by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie. Whole lanes were cut in approximately 24 slices, gel pieces were de-stained completely and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted using 0.25% formic acid-50% acetonitrile and dried in a Speed Vac. Peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analysed with on-line nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Velos as previously described (PMID: 20362542).

### Data Protocol
There are three different datasets included in this project:  1: Affinity purification data on Myst2-FTAP (including searches with and without acetylation) Data processing: The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the mouse Uniprot database (v. February 2013). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with an in-house Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). High confidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%). External contaminants (keratins, albumin, casein, trypsin, TEV protease) were removed from protein lists. We report only proteins identified by more than two high confidence peptides in at least one of the replicates and have chosen one representative of each set of proteins identified by the same peptides (meaningful gene symbol and highest molecular weight).  2: Blue native separation data on AP Myst2-FTAP Data processing: Processing of mass spectrometry raw data from blue native PAGE experiments for protein correlation profiling was performed as previously described (PMID: 26714524).  3: Affinity purification data on Niam Data processing: The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the mouse Uniprot database (v. January 2015). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with an in-house Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). High confidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%).External contaminants (keratins, albumin, casein, trypsin, TEV protease) were removed from protein lists.

### Publication Abstract
MYST histone acetyltransferases have crucial functions in transcription, replication and DNA repair and are hence implicated in development and cancer. Here we characterise Myst2/Kat7/Hbo1 protein interactions in mouse embryonic stem cells by affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry. This study confirms that in embryonic stem cells Myst2 is part of H3 and H4 histone acetylation complexes similar to those described in somatic cells. We identify a novel Myst2-associated protein, the tumour suppressor protein Niam (Nuclear Interactor of ARF and Mdm2). Human NIAM is involved in chromosome segregation, p53 regulation and cell proliferation in somatic cells, but its role in embryonic stem cells is unknown. We describe the first Niam embryonic stem cell interactome, which includes proteins with roles in DNA replication and repair, transcription, splicing and ribosome biogenesis. Many of Myst2 and Niam binding partners are required for correct embryonic development, implicating Myst2 and Niam in the cooperative regulation of this process and suggesting a novel role for Niam in embryonic biology. The data provides a useful resource for exploring Myst2 and Niam essential cellular functions and should contribute to deeper understanding of organism early development and survival as well as cancer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005987.

### Keywords
Myst2, Niam, Blue native page, Embryonic stem cells, Protein interactions, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


