### Accession
PXD042904

### Title
Inhibition of miR-199a-3p in a murine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) model attenuates fibrotic remodeling

### Description
Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder, characterized by cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, cardiomyocyte disarray and fibrosis, which has a prevalence of ~1:200-500 and predisposes individuals to sudden death and heart failure. The mechanisms through which diverse HCM-causing mutations cause cardiac dysfunction remain mostly unknown and their identification may reveal new therapeutic avenues. MicroRNAs have emerged as critical regulators of gene expression and disease phenotype in various pathologies. We explored whether miRNAs could play a role in HCM pathogenesis and offer potential therapeutic targets.    Methods and Results: Using high-throughput miRNA expression profiling and qPCR analysis in two distinct mouse models of HCM, we found that miR-199a-3p expression levels are upregulated in mutant mice compared to age- and treatment-matched wild-type mice.  We also found that miR-199a-3p expression is enriched in cardiac non-myocytes compared to cardiomyocytes.  When we expressed miR-199a-3p mimic in cultured primary cardiac non-myocytes and analyzed the conditioned media by proteomics, we found that several ECM proteins (e.g., TSP2, FBLN3, COL11A1, LYOX) were differentially expressed.  We confirmed our proteomics findings by qPCR analysis of selected mRNAs and demonstrated that miR-199a-3p mimic expression in cardiac non-myocytes drives upregulation of ECM genes including Tsp2, Fbln3, Pcoc1, Col1a1 and Col3a1.  To examine the role of miR-199a-3p in vivo, we inhibited its function using lock-nucleic acid (LNA)-based inhibitors (antimiR-199a-3p) in an HCM mouse model.  Our results revealed that progression of cardiac fibrosis is attenuated when miR-199a-3p function is inhibited in mild-to-moderate HCM.  Finally, guided by computational target prediction algorithms, we identified mRNAs Cd151 and Itga3 as direct targets of miR-199a-3p and have shown that miR-199a-3p mimic expression negatively regulates AKT activation in cardiac non-myocytes.   Conclusions: Altogether, our results suggest that miR-199a-3p may contribute to cardiac fibrosis in HCM through its actions in cardiac non-myocytes. Thus, inhibition of miR-199a-3p in mild-to-moderate HCM may offer therapeutic benefit in combination with complementary approaches that target the primary defect in cardiac myocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media were desalted by Zeba Desalt Spin Columns (Thermo scientific), concentrated using vacuum-centrifuge and deglycosylated at 37C. The proteins were separated on 4-12% NuPAGE gels with MOPS SDS running buffer and protein bands were visualized by silver staining. Each sample lane was cut into 12 pieces without gap and digested on ProGest robot (Digi Lab) with reduction by DTT at 37C for 15min and alkylation by iodoacetamide for 15min. After tryptic digestion, the peptide mixture were resuspended in 40ul of 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC H2O, then separated by reversed phase nano-flow HPLC (PepMap C18, 25cm x 75um, U3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 40min gradient (0-3min, 2-10%B; 3-37min, 10-35%B; 37-40min, 35-40%B; 40-50min, 99%B; 50-70min, 2%B; A=0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O; B=80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC H2O) and directly analysed by LTQ Orbitrap XL using full ion scan mode (m/z range 400-1600) with Orbitrap analyser at resolution of 60000 and with lock mass m/z = 445.1200. MS/MS was performed using CID in linear ion trap on the top 6 ions with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against UniProt/SwissProt mammalian database (2014_01, 66254 protein entries), using Mascot 2.3.01. The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for the precursor ions and at 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Search results were loaded into Scaffold (version 4.8.6) using LFDR scoring and protein cluster analysis. The following filters were used: peptides probability > 95%, protein probability >99%, minimum 2 unique peptides identified. Normalized spectra counts were exported for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Micro rna, Cardiac fibroblast, Secretome

### Affiliations
King's College London
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London


