### Accession
PXD026670

### Title
Differentially secreted proteins in KMT5B deficient-cells compared to their isogenic clone KMT5B wild-type assessed by mass spectrometry

### Description
In patient-derived DIPG models from multiple patients, with both H3K27M mutation and EZHIP overexpression, were generated CRISPR/Cas9-engineered and subclonal isogenic cells with KMT5B and/or KMT5C deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Established patient-derived cells were cultured for 5 days then starved for 24h before harvesting the secretome. The secretomes were harvested, filtered through 0.22um filters (MillexGP, Sigma) and concentrated in Amicon® Ultra Centrifugal Filters, 3k Da cut-off (Millipore). The concentrated secretome was then quantified by BCA assay. 100 µg of secretome proteins per sample was reduced by TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma), alkylated by iodoacetamide (Sigma). Proteins were precipitated by 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid, and then resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer (triethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma) followed by tryptic digestion (Pierce MS grade, Thermo Fisher) for 18 hours at 37C.  Peptides were labelled by TMT10plex according to the manufacturer’s instruction.  Samples were pooled and dried in SpeedVac, and then fractionated either by Pierce™ high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation spin column to 8 fractions, or online on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) to 6 concatenated fractions, and SpeedVac dried.  Fractionated peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid (FA)/H2O and injected for on-line LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitraip Fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system (both from Thermo Fisher). Peptides were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 nano trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5µ) then peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm) at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) with the Top Speed 3s cycle time.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 375 – 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC set at 400,000 and 50 ms maximum injection time.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 5) with intensity threshold at 5000 were fragmented in ion trap at 35% collision energy, with AGC at 10,000 and 35 ms maximum injection time, and isolation width at 0.7 Da in quadrupole.  The top 5 MS2 fragment ions were SPS selected with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented in HCD at 65% collision energy, and detected in the Orbitrap to get the report ions’ intensities at a better accuracy. The resolution was set at 50,000, and the AGC at 50,000 with maximum injection time at 86 ms.  The dynamic exclusion was set 40 s with ± 10 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 or 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against fasta files of reviewed Uniprot homo Sapiens entries and an in-house contaminate database. Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 20 ppm for Precursor, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-terminius), static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT6plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 100%.  Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification, and the SPS mass matches threshold was set at 55%.  The abundance normalization mode used the total peptide amount, and scaling mode used on all average.  Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crispr, Tmt, Kmt5b, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


