### Accession
PXD023837

### Title
RNase R is associated in a functional complex with the RhpA DEAD-box RNA helicase in Helicobacter pylori

### Description
Ribonucleases are central players in post-transcriptional regulation, a major level of gene expression regulation in all cells. Here, we characterized the 3’-5’ exoribonuclease RNase R from the bacterial pathogen Helicobacter pylori. The "prototypical" Escherichia coli RNase R displays both exoribonuclease and helicase activities, but whether this latter RNA unwinding function is a general feature of bacterial RNase R had not been addressed. We observed that H. pylori HpRNase R protein does not carry the domains responsible for helicase activity and accordingly the purified protein is unable to degrade in vitro RNA molecules with secondary structures. The lack of RNase R helicase domains is widespread among the Campylobacterota, that include Helicobacter and Campylobacter genera, and this loss occurred gradually during their evolution. An in vivo interaction between HpRNase R and RhpA, the sole DEAD-box RNA helicase of H. pylori was discovered. Purified RhpA facilitates the degradation of double stranded RNA by HpRNase R, showing that this complex is functional. HpRNase R has a minor role in 5S rRNA maturation and few targets in H. pylori, all included in the RhpA regulon. We concluded that during evolution, HpRNase R has co-opted the RhpA helicase to compensate for its lack of helicase activity.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from pull-downs were diluted in a 8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3 denaturation buffer. Proteins were reduced at 5 mM TCEP for 1 H and then alkylated at 20 mM chloroacetamide for 1 H in the dark. Proteins were digested with Mass Spec Grade rLys-C and then diluted under 1 M urea before adding Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stop with 1 % formic acid and resulting peptides were desalted with C18 stage-tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Q Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProt Helicobacter pylori (strain B8) database (download in 24/06/2019, 1,719 entries) and tagged-proteins. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition. Skip normalization was applied for the quantification. For pairwise comparisons, intensity values were normalized by median centering within conditions. Missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Statistical testing was conducted, for proteins with a fold-change over 2, using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Helicobacter pylori, Proteomics, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, CNRS UMR 2001, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Hilde De Reuse
Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, CNRS UMR 2001, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


