### Accession
PXD037958

### Title
Assessing Major Histocompatibility Complex-Associated Peptide Proteomics assay as a tool to predict immunogenicity potential of protein therapeutics and antigens

### Description
Major histocompatibility complex-II (MHC-II)-Associated Peptide Proteomics (MAPPs) is a mass spectrometry-based approach, to identify and relatively quantitate naturally processed and presented MHC-II-associated peptides, that could potentially activate CD4+T cells and elicit a patient immune response against protein therapeutics in the preclinical development phase. Methods to identify these peptide antigens are critical to the development of new vaccines. Conversely, it is critical to bring safer new biological entities (NBEs) as drug candidates into clinical trials, with a reduced risk of triggering an adaptive immune response that could hamper a therapeutic outcome. Here, we describe a robust protocol for the identification of MHCII-bound peptides from Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) of healthy donors, using nano-ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (nUHPLC–MS/MS) and recent improvements in methods for isolation of these peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen pellets were thawed and mature DCs were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris buffer pH 7.8) containing 5 mM MgCl2, 1% Triton X-100 (Roche Diagnostics, 11332481001, Rotkreuz, Switzerland), and 1 tablet of cOmplete™ Mini protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics, 11836153001) for 1 hour at 4°C. The volume was scaled accordingly to the cell pellet number. After centrifugation, the lysate was incubated with two different immunoenrichment reagents: i) biotinylated anti-HLA-DR antibody (clone G46-6, Biolegend, 307614, San Diego) coupled to Streptavidin Sepharose magnetic beads (Cytiva, GE Healthcare, 28985738, Marlborough, MA), ii) anti-HLA-DR antibody (clone G46-6, Purified NA/LE Mouse Anti-Human HLA-DR, New England BioLabs GmbH, 555809, Ipswich, MA) coupled to polyglycidyl methacrylate (pGMA) FG NHS magnetic beads (Tamagawa Seiki Co, Ltd., TAS8848N1141, Tokyo, Japan). FG beads were prepared accordingly to vendor protocol E105(29). The comparability between the two bead preparations was ensured by the equimolar quantity of the capturing reagent present in the two preparations for the same amount of beads. After overnight incubation at 4°C, beads were washed several times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and PBS containing 0.1% Zwittergent 3–12 (Merck KGaA, 693015, Darmstadt. Germany). After washing, peptides were eluted from the beads by adding 25μL of an aqueous solution containing 2% ACN 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid for two times at 37°C on a Thermomixer for 30 minutes. Eluates were pooled and injected into the LC-MS instrument.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with Sequest search algorithm against Swiss-Prot human database containing the sequence of the evaluated therapeutic antibody or antigen using Proteome Discoverer software ver. 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The search was performed with a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for precursor ions and ±0.02 Da for fragment ions. Met-sulfoxide, Asn/Gln deamidation, and N-terminal pyroglutamylation were considered as variable modifications. Data were searched without enzyme specificity, and peptide results were reported at 1% FDR cutoff. Peptides showing more than 1.9 or 2.3 of cross-correlation value (Xcorr) for doubly or triply charged ions, respectively, and less than 0.1 of the delta cross-correlation (dCn) were considered as true hits. Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) approach was used to statistically test differences among experimental conditions by Proteome Discoverer. Firstly, this was deployed to evaluate the intra-donor and intra-assay reproducibility. Secondly, it enabled us to select the optimal experimental settings to secure that the maximum number of MHCII ligands is reported by the method. The Proteome Discoverer LFQ processing workflow contained additional nodes compared to the Search workflow, such as Minora Feature Detector node for identification and quantitation, Percolator node for Peptide Spectra matches (PSMs) validation. The consensus included Feature Mapper and Precursor Ion Quantifier from which the precursor abundances were based on peptide intensities.

### Publication Abstract
MHC-II-associated peptide proteomics (MAPPs) is a mass spectrometry-based (MS) method to identify naturally presented MHC-II-associated peptides that could elicit CD4+T cell activation. MAPPs assay is considered one of the assays that better characterize the safety of biotherapeutics by driving the selection of the best candidates concerning their immunogenicity risk. However, there is little knowledge about the impact of bead material on the recovery of MHC-II MS-eluted ligands in MAPPs assays. Here, we firstly describe a robust MAPPs protocol by implementing streptavidin magnetic beads for the isolation of these peptides instead of commonly used NHS-activated beads. Moreover, we assessed the impact of the cell medium used for cell cultures on the morphology and recovery of the in vitro-generated APCs, and its potential implications in the amount of MHC-II isolated peptides. We also described an example of a MAPPs assay application to investigate drug-induced immunogenicity of two bispecific antibodies and compared them with monospecific trastuzumab IgG1 control. This work highlighted the importance of MAPPs in the preclinical in vitro strategy to mitigate the immunogenicity risk of biotherapeutics.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Mapps

### Affiliations
NBE-DMPK Innovative BioAnalytics, Merck Serono RBM S.p.A., an affiliate of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany
Merck KGaA

### Submitter
Andrea Di Ianni

### Lab Head
Dr Luca, Maria,
NBE-DMPK Innovative BioAnalytics, Merck Serono RBM S.p.A., an affiliate of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany


