### Accession
PXD009843

### Title
Mutation-specific and common phosphotyrosine signatures of KRAS G12D and G13D alleles

### Description
KRAS is one of the most frequently mutated genes across all cancer subtypes. Two of the most frequent oncogenic KRAS mutations observed in patients result in glycine to aspartic acid substitution at either codon 12 (G12D) or 13 (G13D). Although the biochemical differences between these two predominant mutations are not fully understood, distinct clinical features of the resulting tumors suggest involvement of disparate signaling mechanisms. When we compared the global and phosphotyrosine proteomic profiles of isogenic colorectal cancer cell lines bearing either G12D or G13D KRAS mutation, we observed both shared as well as unique signaling events induced by the two KRAS mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen SILAC labeled cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, sodium pyrophosphate, sodium orthovanadate, sodium fluoride, β-glycerophosphate by 3 rounds of probe sonication. Protein concentration of lysates was determined by BCA Protein Assay. Twenty milligrams of protein lysates from each labeling condition was mixed and subjected to trypsin in-solution digestion, followed by lyophilization. For phosphotyrosine enrichment, 60 mg per replicate of lyophilized tryptic peptides were used for phosphotyrosine enrichment using phosphotyrosine rabbit monoclonal antibody kit (P-Tyr-1000; Cell Signaling Technology). Anti-phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation was carried out following the manufacturer’s instructions. For total proteome analysis, a 600 μg aliquot of SILAC mix was also subjected to a separate in-solution tryptic digestion and was fractionated by basic reversed phase liquid chromatography into 24 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: Proteome Discoverer software suite (v 2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for quantitation and database searches. The MS/MS data were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithm against a Human RefSeq database (v73 containing 73,198 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Additionally, sequence entries corresponding to mutant KRAS containing G12D or G13D were added to this database. Search parameters used for SEQUEST search algorithm included trypsin as protease with full specific and a maximum of one allowed missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation at methionine as variable modification. For all the 3-State SILAC labeled samples, 13C6, 15N2-lysine, 2H4-lysine, 13C6-arginine and 13C6, 15N4-arginine as variable modifications. For data analysis of phosphotyrosine enrichments, phosphorylation at tyrosine was additionally selected as a variable modification. The precursor tolerance was set at 10 ppm while the fragment match tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The PSMs, peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate cut-off calculated using decoy database searches. Post-processing for phosphotyrosine data was done as follows: After database searching, SILAC ratios of peptides were quantified with PyQuant. Resulting SILAC ratios were maintained at the peptide level and grouped by site, and median values were calculated. Additional median normalization was applied to the G12D/Parental ratios and G13D/Parental ratios. Finally, the median values from the three replicates were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
<i>KRAS</i> is one of the most frequently mutated genes across all cancer subtypes. Two of the most frequent oncogenic <i>KRAS</i> mutations observed in patients result in glycine to aspartic acid substitution at either codon 12 (G12D) or 13 (G13D). Although the biochemical differences between these two predominant mutations are not fully understood, distinct clinical features of the resulting tumors suggest involvement of disparate signaling mechanisms. When we compared the global phosphotyrosine proteomic profiles of isogenic colorectal cancer cell lines bearing either G12D or G13D <i>KRAS</i> mutation, we observed both shared as well as unique signaling events induced by the two <i>KRAS</i> mutations. Remarkably, while the G12D mutation led to an increase in membrane proximal and adherens junction signaling, the G13D mutation led to activation of signaling molecules such as nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, MAPK kinases, and regulators of metabolic processes. The importance of one of the cell surface molecules, MPZL1, which was found to be hyperphosphorylated in G12D cells, was confirmed by cellular assays as its knockdown led to a decrease in proliferation of G12D but not G13D expressing cells. Overall, our study reveals important signaling differences across two common <i>KRAS</i> mutations and highlights the utility of our approach to systematically dissect subtle differences between related oncogenic mutants and potentially lead to individualized treatments.

### Keywords
Signaling, G13d mutation, G12d mutation, Phosphoproteome, Kras, Sw48

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey, M.D, Ph.D.
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205


