### Accession
PXD001040

### Title
Divergent Cysteines in FOXO3 and FOXO4 Mediate Paralog-Specific Redox Signaling

### Description
Reduction-oxidation (redox) signaling, the translation of an oxidative intracellular environment into a cellular response, is mediated by the reversible oxidation of specific cysteine thiols. The latter results in disulfide formation between protein (hetero)dimers that alter protein function until the cellular redox has returned to the basal state. We have previously shown that this mechanism promotes the nuclear localization and activity of the FOXO4 transcription factor. Here, we present evidence that FOXO3 and FOXO4 have acquired paralog-specific cysteines throughout vertebrate evolution. Using a proteome-wide screen we identified previously unknown redox-dependent FOXO3 interaction partners. The nuclear import receptor IPO7 forms a disulfide-dependent heterodimer with FOXO3, but not with FOXO4, which is required for reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced nuclear translocation . These findings suggest that evolutionary acquisition of cysteines has contributed to functional divergence of FOXO paralogs.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of cysteine-dependent interactors lysate of 20 million cells were used for each pulldown on 75 l of flag M2 beads (Sigma). After washing, proteins were eluted from the beads with 100 mM Glycine pH 2 and the eluate was immediately  stabilised with 1/10 volume of 1M Tris Ph 8.8. Digestion of proteins with trypsin (Promega) was performed using FASP (Wisniewski et al.,2009). Immunoprecipitations of the set of mutants were performed using four biological replicates.  Peptide samples were separated on a 30 cm column (75 m ID fused silica capillary with emitter tip (New Objective)) packed with 3 um aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. maisch) using a 40 minute gradient (0,5% HAc to 80% ACN 0,5% HAc), and delivered by an easy-nHPLC (Proxeon). Peptides were electro-sprayed directly into a LTQ-velos-Orbitrap (Thermo) and analyzed in data dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 60000, after which the top 15 peaks were selected for CID fragmentation in the Iontrap with a target setting of 5000 ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al.) with oxidation of methionine, cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide as well as Nethylmalemide, Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Deamidation (NQ) set as variable modification. For identification, the Uniprot human fasta database was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rates set to 0.01. see parameters.txt

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Foxo3 human redox

### Affiliations
Tobias B. Dansen, Ph.D. University Medical Center Utrecht Dept. Molecular Cancer Research, Universiteitsweg 100, STR 3.203 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Dansen
Tobias B. Dansen, Ph.D. University Medical Center Utrecht Dept. Molecular Cancer Research, Universiteitsweg 100, STR 3.203 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands


