### Accession
PXD002237

### Title
iTRAQ based proteome profiling of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the Cryotolerant Species S. uvarum and S. kudriavzevii during Wine Fermentation at Low Temperature

### Description
The purpose is achieving a better understanding of the protein composition of three yeast species during the alcoholic fermentation at low temperature, to achieve it we quantified proteome changes during continuous cultures using an iTRAQ approach

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellet was suspended in 150 μL of extraction buffer (25mM TRIS buffer, pH 8, 8M Urea and protease inhibitor cocktail (1/200) (Thermo Scientific)) and broken by vortexing (4 to 6 times, 30 s) in the presence of glass beads (Sigma-G8772) (a volume equivalent to that of the cell pellet). Glass beads and insoluble material were eliminated by centrifugation (10.000 rpm, 10 min). To the supernatant 150 μL of extraction buffer was added. Proteins were allowed to precipitate at −20 °C for 1 h; and the precipitate was recovered after centrifugation at 10,000 g for 15 min. The pellet was washed with 2-D Clean-Up kit (GE Healthcare). The final pellet was air-dried and solubilized in 25 μL of 7M urea, 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio] propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 2 M Tiourea, 20 mM Tris and milliQ water. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (13.000 rpm, 5 min). The protein concentration was determined by Bradford, with BSA as a standard.  Protein were precipitated with TCA (50 μL; Cf=10%) over night at 5 ºC. After centrifugation the final pellets were washed with cold (‐18ºC) acetone with vigorous stirring followed by centrifugation. Pellets were air dried. Pellets were dissolved with 75 μL of 8M Urea in 500 mM TEAB pH=8 (Sigma) with sonication (5 min at 0 ºC). The final protein concentrations were determined by Qubit (Qubit™ Protein Assay Kits; Invitrogen‐Molecular Probes) and Lowry RC DC (Biorad) according the manufacturer instructions. 100 μg was taken from each sample and the solution was dried by rotatory evaporation. The samples were resuspended in Laemlhi buffer and loaded in a 1D PAGE. The gel was stopped without resolving the samples and every slide was cut and digested according to (Shevchenko, 1996. Sample was subjected to trypsin digestion with 10 μg of Promega sequencing grade modified trypsin in 0.5 mM TEAB. The volume was adjusted to 70 μL, and the final urea concentration ws <2 M. Digestion was allowed overnight at 37 ºC. The reaction mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum. Each sample was re‐dissolve in 80 μL of TEAB + ethanol solution (3/7; v/v), with sonication for 10 min, and added to the appropriate iTRAQ reagent vial and vortex thoroughly. Immediately each sample vial was rinsed with additional 20 μL of TEAB + ethanol solution and transfer to the correct iTRAQ reagent vials, and incubated at ambient temperature for 3 hours. 300 μg of the peptide mixture were dissolved with 200 μL of 7M urea/2M thiourea/1.6% ampholytes. One IPG strip (GE; 13 cm, 3‐11 NL) were hydrated with the peptide solution o.n. at room temperature. And the peptides were isoelectrofocused with 5000 V to 30000 V h. After focusing the strip was washed with milliQ grade water, and cut into 15 equal pieces. The peptides were extracted with 100 μL of the ACN solutions: A. 5% ACN 0.1% TFA, B. 50% ACN 0.1% TFA, C. ACN 0.1% TFA. All the peptide fractions were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation and re dissolved with 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. The sample was cleaned and concentrated by POROS R2.  The clean peptide mixture were dried by speed vacuum and re suspended to a concentration of ca. 0.25 µg/µL in 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS): 5 μl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (Nano LC Column, 3μ C18‐CL, 75 µm x 15 cm; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 2μl/min during 10 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 75 µm x 25 cm, Eksigen) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a35% B in A for 90min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.075-s product ion scans from 100– 1500 m/z on the 25 most intense 2-5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot was used to search in Expasy protein database (515203 sequences; 181334896 residues) with the following parameters: iTRAQ Quantitation. Trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation (IAM), no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to throughout. To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins are grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein‐Pilot Progroup algorithm. Thus, proteins sharing MS/MS spectra are grouped, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that can explain more spectral data with confidence is shown as the primary protein of the group. Only the proteins of the group for which there is individual evidence (unique peptides with enough confidence) are also listed with different list number, usually toward the end of the protein list.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Translation, Quantitative proteomic, Saccharomyces, Itraq, Low temperature

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Departamento de Biotecnología de los alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los Alimentos (CSIC), Avda. Agustín Escardino, 7, E-46980-Paterna, Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel Guillamón
Departamento de Biotecnología de los alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los Alimentos (CSIC), Avda. Agustín Escardino, 7, E-46980-Paterna, Valencia, Spain


