### Accession
PXD016778

### Title
Semi-Synthesis of an Evasin from Tick Saliva Reveals a Critical Role of Tyrosine Sulfation for Chemokine Binding and Inhibition

### Description
Blood feeding arthropods produce anti-inflammatory salivary proteins called evasins that function through inhibition of chemokine-receptor signalling in the host. Herein, we show that the evasin ACA-01 from the Amblyomma cajennense tick can be post-translationally sulfated at two tyrosine residues, albeit as a mixture of sulfated variants. Homogenously sulfated variants of the proteins were efficiently assembled via a semi-synthetic native chemical ligation strategy. Sulfation significantly improved the binding affinity of ACA-01 for a range of pro-inflammatory chemokines and also enhanced the ability of ACA-01 to inhibit chemokine signalling through cognate receptors. Comparisons of evasin sequences and structural data suggest that tyrosine sulfation serves as a receptor mimetic strategy for recognizing and suppressing the pro-inflammatory activity of a wide variety of mammalian chemokines. As such, the use incorporation of this PTM or mimics thereof into evasins may provide a strategy to optimize these salivary tick proteins for anti-inflammatory applications

### Sample Protocol
Identification of in vivo sulfation via LCMS/MS Protein preparation and digestion were performed as described previously with modifications45. Briefly, 10 µg of purified ACA-01 protein expressed in HEK293 cells was added to 25 µl of buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) before being heated to 37 °C for 30 minutes to reduce the disulfide bonds in the protein. Chloroacetamide was then added to 20 mM final concentration and heated to 37 °C for 30 minutes to alkylate cysteine residues and quench remaining DTT. The protein was digested to peptides by the addition of either 200 ng trypsin, or chymotrypsin, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 16 h. For peptide clean-up C18 StageTips containing two layers of 3M Empore C18 disks (Cat No. 66883-U, Sigma) were used in the Spin96 device. Each tip was wetted with 100 µL of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 100 µL of H2O (neutral pH), with centrifugation for each at 1,000 x g for 3 min. Each StageTip was then loaded with the digested peptides (neutral pH). The peptides were washed twice with 100 µL of water (neutral pH). To elute the peptides, 100 µL of 50% acetonitrile in H2O (neutral pH) was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min. Peptides were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the HPLC setting at 35oC for 1.25 h. Dried peptides were resuspended in 30 µL of H2O (neutral pH) and stored at 4 °C until analysed by LC-MS/MS. Using a Thermo Fisher Dionex RSLCnano uHPLC, peptides in water (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 45 cm x 75 μm C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over a gradient of 45 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Formic acid at 0.1% final concentration was included in both buffers used to form the gradient. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV and the ion transfer capillary temperature was set to 150 °C to minimise artefactual loss of labile sulfate groups during peptide ion transfer. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using either EThcD, or HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) and the search output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target- decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained a subset of secreted human proteins from the UniProt database46 and the full-length ACA-01 protein sequence. Mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to semi-specific N-ragged digestion with either chymotrypsin (cleavage C-terminal to FYWLM) or trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to KR), having a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Oxidation of Met (common2), pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln or Glu) (rare1), sulfation of tyrosine (common2) and protein N-terminal acetylation (rare1) were set as variable modifications. Two common modifications and one rare modification were allowed per peptide spectral match. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. Extracted ion chromatograms were generated using Qual Browser (Thermo) with a 5 ppm error tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Blood-feeding arthropods produce antiinflammatory salivary proteins called evasins that function through inhibition of chemokine-receptor signaling in the host. Herein, we show that the evasin ACA-01 from the <i>Amblyomma cajennense</i> tick can be posttranslationally sulfated at two tyrosine residues, albeit as a mixture of sulfated variants. Homogenously sulfated variants of the proteins were efficiently assembled via a semisynthetic native chemical ligation strategy. Sulfation significantly improved the binding affinity of ACA-01 for a range of proinflammatory chemokines and enhanced the ability of ACA-01 to inhibit chemokine signaling through cognate receptors. Comparisons of evasin sequences and structural data suggest that tyrosine sulfation serves as a receptor mimetic strategy for recognizing and suppressing the proinflammatory activity of a wide variety of mammalian chemokines. As such, the incorporation of this posttranslational modification (PTM) or mimics thereof into evasins may provide a strategy to optimize tick salivary proteins for antiinflammatory applications.

### Keywords
Chemokine, Synthetic, Evasin, Sulfation

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


