### Accession
PXD014488

### Title
Differential protein secretome induced by TNF-alpha

### Description
Endothelial-mesenchymal-transition (EndMT) is an important source of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which are known to facilitate tumor progression. We have previously shown that EndMT is present in pancreatic tumors and that deficiency of the Tie1 receptor induces EndMT in human endothelial cells. Pancreatic tumors are characterized by the presence of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). We now show that TNF-α strongly induces human endothelial cells to undergo EndMT. In order to know the secretory feature of cells which undergo EndMT by TNF-α, we conducted a comparative analysis of HMVEC secretome treated or not for 24h and 48h with TNF-α. Secretome study shows that cells treated with TNF-α have an important fibroblast-like secretory capacity, and a proinflamatory signature. Moreover, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) shows that pathways implicated in migration, inflammation and fibrosis are predicted to be activated and that necrosis and apoptosis pathways are inhibited. Accordingly cell survival, viability and cycle progression are activated. We show that TNF-α- treated cells secrete proteins related to 16 protumoral pathways, confirming their fibroblastic characteristic. Finally, among the predicted upstream regulators activated, IPA analysis shows that, TNFSF12 and its receptor are present at hight levels in PDAC patients. Altogether these results show the fibroblastic characteristic of treated cells and demonstrate that TNF-α induces CAFs.

### Sample Protocol
1x106 HMVECs were seeded into 100-mm dishes. 24h after, cells were washed twice with PBS and treated with human recombinant TNF-α (100 ng/ml; Sigma) for 24 or 48 hours. After the indicated time, 10 ml of each supernatant was collected and cells debris was removed by centrifugation (4000g, 20 mn). Cleared supernatant were then dialyzed against 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate using Amicon® Ultra 15 ml Centrifugal Filters (cutoff 3kda, Millipore) and concentrated until 2 ml. 10% of the total volume was dried using vacuum concentrator and kept apart for SDS-PAGE analysis, (silver stained gel for quality check of the sample). The remaining 90% was dried and protein pellets were solubilized in 8M urea. After cysteine reduction in presence of 10 mM DTT and alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide, proteins were digested with high-sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Peptides were further desalted, cleaned on Sep-Pak C18 Plus cartridge according to manufacturer instructions (Waters, Milford MA) and were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available pararallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.3.8. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a UniProt Human database (date 2017.05; 20200 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants. The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.5.6.0) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 100% of samples in at least one condition. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). In this way, imputation of missing values in the controls allows statistical comparison of protein abundances that are present only in the inhibitors samples. To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) is an important source of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which facilitates tumour progression. PDAC is characterised by abundant CAFs and tumour necrosis factor-&#x3b1; (TNF-&#x3b1;). Here, we show that TNF-&#x3b1; strongly induces human endothelial cells to undergo EndMT. Interestingly, TNF-&#x3b1; strongly downregulates the expression of the endothelial receptor TIE1, and reciprocally TIE1 overexpression partially prevents TNF-&#x3b1;-induced EndMT, suggesting that TNF-&#x3b1; acts, at least partially, through TIE1 regulation in this process. We also show that TNF-&#x3b1;-induced EndMT is reversible. Furthermore, TNF-&#x3b1; treatment of orthotopic mice resulted in an important increase in the stroma, including CAFs. Finally, secretome analysis identified TNFSF12, as a regulator that is also present in PDAC patients. With the aim of restoring normal angiogenesis and better access to drugs, our results support the development of therapies targeting CAFs or inducing the EndMT reversion process in PDAC.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Endothelial cell, Tnfalpha, Secretome, Mesenchymal cell, Cancer

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Protéomique, CRCM, IPC, Inserm U1068, CNRS UMR 7258

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Marseille Protéomique, CRCM, IPC, Inserm U1068, CNRS UMR 7258


