### Accession
PXD023613

### Title
Minute-scale proteomics with Scanning SWATH and high-flow chromatography

### Description
Great advances have been made to quantify proteomes at depth and high precision. However, the inherent complexity of the proteome still creates huge challenges to deal with large sample series and longitudinal experiments. Here we report a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method, Scanning SWATH, and new software algorithms, that combine the advantages of data-dependent and DIA acquisition. Exploiting a continuous movement of the precursor isolation window to assign precursor mass to the MS2 fragment traces, Scanning SWATH increases the precursor identifications of up to 70% compared to conventional DIA methods on 1-5 minute chromatographic gradients. Moreover, we achieve significant acceleration of the mass spectrometric duty cycles, facilitating the generation of quantitative precise proteomes with high-flow (800 µL/min) chromatography and gradients that can be as fast as 30 seconds. We demonstrate the application of ultra-fast proteomics in drug mode-of-action screening. Scanning SWATH proteomes capture the mode-of-action of azoles and statins acting as fungistatic drugs.

### Sample Protocol
The human cell lysate was obtained commercially (Promega) and was dissolved in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Plasma samples were prepared as previously described 20. The yeast samples for the drug response measurements were prepared and digested as follows: Auxotrophic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4741 (∆his3, ∆leu2, ∆ura3, ∆met15) was rendered prototrophic via genomic knock-in of the missing genes. This prototrophic, wild-type strain was grown on agar plates containing synthetic minimal (SM) media for 3 days. Subsequently, colonies were inoculated in SM liquid media (25 ml) and incubated at 30°C for 1 day. The yeast culture was transferred to 96 deep well plates and drugs were added to achieve a working concentration of 10 μM (1 ml total volume/well). The yeast culture was incubated at 30°C and was grown overnight to the exponential phase. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 3220 rcf for 5 minutes, the supernatant was discarded and plates were stored at −80°C until further processing.  200 μl 7M Urea/ 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and glass beads (~100 mg/well) were added to the frozen pellet. Subsequently, the plates were sealed (Cap mats, Spex, 2201) and lysed in a bead beater for 5 minutes at 1500rpm (Spex Geno/Grinder). After 1 minute centrifugation at 4000 rpm, 20 μl 55mM DL-Dithiothreitol was added (final concentration 5 mM), mixed and the samples were incubated for 1h at 30°C. Subsequently, 20 μl 120 mM Iodoacetamide was added (final concentration 10 mM) and incubated 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. 1 ml 100mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, centrifuged 3 minutes at 4000 rpm and 230 μl were transferred to prefilled trypsin plates (9 μl 0.1 μg/μl trypsin). After incubation of the samples for 17 hours at 37°C, 24 μl 10% formic acid was added. The digestion mixtures were cleaned-up using C18 96-well plates (96-Well MACROSpin C18, 50-450 μL, The Nest Group, SNS SS18VL). For the solid phase extraction, 1-minute centrifugation steps at the described speeds (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R) were applied to push the liquids through the stationary phase. A liquid handler (Biomek NXP) was used to pipette the liquids onto the material in order to make four 96-well plates/batch feasible. The plates were conditioned with methanol (200 μl, centrifuged at 50g), washed twice with 50% ACN (200 μl, centrifuged at 50g and flow-through discarded), equilibrated three times with 3% ACN, 0.1% FA (200 μl, centrifuged at 50g/80g and 100 g respectively and flow-through discarded). Then 200 μl of digested samples were loaded (centrifuged at 100g), washed three times with 3% ACN, 0.1% FA (200 μl, centrifuged at 100g). After the last washing step, the plates were centrifuged another time at 180g before the peptides were eluted in 3 steps (twice with 120 μl and once with 130 μl) 50% ACN (180g) into a collection plate (1.1 ml, Square well, V-bottom). The collected material was completely dried on a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) and redissolved in 40 μl 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid before transferred into a 96-well plate (700 μl round, waters, 186005837). QC samples for repeat injections were prepared by pooling 3 μl of each digested sample. All pipetting was done with a liquid handling robot (Biomek NXP automated liquid handler), shaking was done with a thermomixer (Eppendorf Thermomixer C) after each step and for incubation a Memmert IPP55 incubator was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was carried out with DIA-NN version 1.7.12 and with default settings in “robust LC (high accuracy)” mode.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate quantification of the proteome remains challenging for large sample series and longitudinal experiments. We report a data-independent acquisition method, Scanning SWATH, that accelerates mass spectrometric (MS) duty cycles, yielding quantitative proteomes in combination with short gradients and high-flow (800&#x2009;&#xb5;l&#x2009;min<sup>-1</sup>) chromatography. Exploiting a continuous movement of the precursor isolation window to assign precursor masses to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) fragment traces, Scanning SWATH increases precursor identifications by ~70% compared to conventional data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods on 0.5-5-min chromatographic gradients. We demonstrate the application of ultra-fast proteomics in drug mode-of-action screening and plasma proteomics. Scanning SWATH proteomes capture the mode of action of fungistatic azoles and statins. Moreover, we confirm 43 and identify 11&#x2009;new plasma proteome biomarkers of COVID-19 severity, advancing patient classification and biomarker discovery. Thus, our results demonstrate a substantial acceleration and increased depth in fast proteomic experiments that facilitate proteomic drug screens and clinical studies.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Scanning swath, High-flow chromatography, Drug screen, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Messner

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, Berlin, Germany


