### Accession
PXD041099

### Title
LiP-MS on HEK293 lysate treated with Probe Candidate TR06189215 and Negative Control TR03633723

### Description
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a structural proteomics technique that can be used to identify the targets of small molecules. This is achieved by incubating lysate with the drug of interest, which induces structural changes such as occupation of the binding site or changes and protein-protein interactions. This is followed by a limited proteolysis step in which the unspecific protease proteinase K is added to the treated lysate. The protease preferentially cleaves accessible and flexible regions of the proteins, thus generating peptides that reflect the changes in surface accessibility caused by the treatment with the small molecule. Here we treated HEK293 cell lysate with the candidate probe TR06189215 and the corresponding negative control TR03633723 to profile target engagement and other structural effects. This project is part of the IMI EUbOPEN project and was performed in collaboration with Kilian Huber (University of Oxford).

### Sample Protocol
A HEK293 cell pellet was lysed in native conditions. The lysate was diluted to 1 µg/µl and 50 µl lysate was used for each sample. In quadruplicates, a final concentration of 10 µM of probe, negative control, or DMSO was added to the sample for 5 minutes. This was followed by a 5 minute limited proteolysis step in which proteinase K was added. For the trypsin control samples, no proteinase K was added, and instead the step was carried out using water only. The samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin in denaturing conditions. The peptides were desalted using a C18 resin and measured using SWATH-MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an Waters Aquity M-Class UPLC System. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 3% to 35% acetonitrile in water over the course of 120 minutes. The MS1 spectra were acquired in a scan range of 350-1400 m/z with an Orbitrap resolution of 120000. The normalized AGC target is set to 50% with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The RF lens was set to 30%. The targeted MS2 spectra are acquired for the desired masses with variable isolation windows listed below and fragmented with a HCD of 28%. The spectra are measured with an Orbitrap resolution of 30000 with variable scan ranges. The AGC target is set to 200% with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. The RF lens was set to 30%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was uploaded to the commercial software Spectronaut v. 17. The data was seached against the library VR_Ex31_DDA.kit. Factory settings were used, except that the Minor grouping in the Quantification Settings was set to Precursor, and in the Post analysis Settings the Differential abundance grouping was set to Minor group. The data were further analyzed using the R package protti to identify structural changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Target engagmenet profiling, Lip-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Viviane Reber

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Matthias Gstaiger
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


