### Accession
PXD001306

### Title
Cell line adaptation Changes in the proteome level during a step-wise adaptation of an adherent Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell line 

### Description
In this work, changes in the proteome level during a step-wise adaptation of an adherent Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell line to suspension growth and chemically defined medium were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
The protein load for the 2-D PAGE (isoelectric focusing in the first dimension and SDS-PAGE in the second dimension)  was 500 µg and contained a pool of all samples of the various stages of cell line adaptions. Before gel electrophoresis it was purified by phenol extraction. After gel fixation (50% methanol (aq), 10% acidic acid (aq)) and Coomassie staining protein spots for identification were manually picked. Spots were incubated in washing solution (50 % (v/v) methanol, 45 % (v/v) water, 5 % (v/v) acetic acid) by shaking at room temperature for 30 min. Subsequently, destruction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of proteins were induced by incubation with 45 mM DTT (shaking in the dark at 55 °C for 30 min) and 100 mM iodoacetamide (shaking at RT for 30 min) dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3). A washing step with ABC-buffer was successive. After each treatment, spots were dehydrated with pure acetonitrile (ACN). Finally, gel spots were soaked with 3 µl of 1 µg/ ml trypsin solution (dissolved in ABC-buffer; modified porcine trypsin: sequencing grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) and covered with ABC-buffer after 10 min. Enzymatic digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. Peptide extraction was carried out by incubation with two parts extraction buffer (50 % (v/v) ACN, 50 % (v/v) water, 1 % (v/v) trifluoracetic acid (TFA)) by shaking at RT for 30 min.

### Data Protocol
In-gel digestion with trypsin (modified porcine trypsin: sequencing grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) and mass spectrometric analysis by nanoHPLC online coupled QSTAR XLTM (QqTOF) MS/MS (Applied Biosystems/MDS/Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) and MALDI-TOF-MS/MS (Ultraflextreme, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was carried out as described previously (Vester et al. (2009) Proteomics 9 (12):3316-3327 and Kluge et al. (2013) Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97(12):5493-5506). For automatic database search of product-ion spectra MASCOT (Perkins et al. (1999), Electrophoresis, 20(18):3551-67 ) (version 2.2.07, Matrix Science, London, UK) was utilized to identify the corresponding peptides, and to screen the NCBI non-redundant (nr) database. Established search parameters: species – Mammalia; tryptic digest with a maximum of one missed cleavage; variable modification – carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine; peptide charge 1+; monoisotopic peptide masses; peptide tolerance of 50 ppm; MS/MS tolerance of 0.7 Da. Proteins with at least two peptides were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2-d dige, Maldi-tof-ms/ms, Mdck cell line

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Bioprocess Engineering Sandtorstraße 1, 39106 Magdeburg
Bioprocess Engineering

### Submitter
Sabine Kluge

### Lab Head
Dr Erdmann Rapp
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Bioprocess Engineering Sandtorstraße 1, 39106 Magdeburg


