### Accession
PXD000296

### Title
Female mouse liver quantitative analysis

### Description
Proteomic analysis of regulated proteins in female mouse liver extracts derived from 1 week and 8 weeks of hURI expression.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins from liver mouse tissue were clean-up by methanol-chloroform extraction. Pellets were dissolved in 7M urea 2M thiourea 0.1M TEAB. Protein concentration was determined according to the Bradford assay. 100 ug of total protein from each group were digested using a filter unit (FASP protocol). Briefly, samples were reduced (10 mM DTT), alkylated (55mM IA) and doubly digested using LysC (1:50) (6h, RT) and trypsin (1:100) (overnight, 37ºC). Peptides were labeled with iTRAQ tags according to manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides were pooled, desalted and separated using an Agilent 3100 OFFgel fractionator. Each fraction was clean-up, concentrated and analyzed on a LC-MS system (Eksigent nanoLC coupled to a LTQ Velos Orbitrap) (trap cartridge: ReproSil Pur C18-Aq 5 µm 0.3 x 10 mm trapping cartridge (SGE Analytica); column: RP ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 3 µm 200 x 0.075 mm (Dr. Maisch GmbH).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer RAW data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 software suite (Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database (release date: October 19, 2011; 16407 entries) using MASCOT as the search engine (v 2.2) with the precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 10 ppm and 0.075 Da, respectively, and with up to two missed cleavages. Lysine and peptide N-termini labeling with iTRAQ-4plex reagent as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was chosen as variable modification for database searching. Peptides identification was filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and thus not dependent on the peptide score. Only peptides with high confidence were considered. The results were then exported into Excel for manual data interpretation. A 1.3-fold change cutoff for all iTRAQ ratios (ratio <0.77 or >1.3) was selected to classify proteins as up- or down-regulated. Only proteins identified with 2 or more unique peptides and at least 3 iTRAQ peptide counts were considered. Gene Ontology analyses of the identified proteins were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular mechanisms responsible for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain largely unknown. Using genetically engineered mouse models, we show that hepatocyte-specific expression of unconventional prefoldin RPB5 interactor (URI) leads to a multistep process of HCC development, whereas its genetic reduction in hepatocytes protects against diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced HCC. URI inhibits aryl hydrocarbon (AhR)- and estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated transcription of enzymes implicated in L-tryptophan/kynurenine/nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) metabolism, thereby causing DNA damage at early stages of tumorigenesis. Restoring NAD(+) pools with nicotinamide riboside (NR) prevents DNA damage and tumor formation. Consistently, URI expression in human HCC is associated with poor survival and correlates negatively with L-tryptophan catabolism pathway. Our results suggest that boosting NAD(+) can be prophylactic or therapeutic in HCC.

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Mouse, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Uri

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Nabil Djouder
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


