### Accession
PXD028590

### Title
Amphiregulin mediates non-cell-autonomous effect of senescence on reprogramming

### Description
Cellular senescence is an irreversible growth arrest with a highly dynamic secretome, termed the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Senescence has been implicated in somatic reprogramming to pluripotency. The cell-intrinsic proliferation arrest is a barrier for reprogramming, whereas the SASP facilitates the cell fate conversion in nonsenescent cells. However, the mechanisms by which reprogramming-induced senescence regulates cell plasticity are not well understood. Here, we have further investigated how the heterogeneity of paracrine senescence impacts reprogramming. We show that senescence promotes in vitro reprogramming in a stress-dependent manner. We identified a catalog of SASP factors and pathways potentially involved in the cell fate conversion using an unbiased proteomic analysis. Amphiregulin (AREG), a growth factor frequently secreted by the senescent cells, promotes in vitro reprogramming by accelerating proliferation and MET via the EGFR signaling pathway. Of note, AREG treatment diminished the negative effect of donor age on reprogramming. Finally, AREG enhances in vivo reprogramming in the skeletal muscle. Hence, senescence could facilitate cellular plasticity via various SASP factors to promote reprogramming and tissue repair.

### Sample Protocol
OIS and mock-infected cells were washed with DMEM twice before incubation with DMEM (without FBS and Pen/Strep) for 48 hours at 37°C under normal conditions. CM was collected, centrifuged 10 min at 500g, filtered through 0,2μm filter unit and centrifuged at 12 000g for 30 min at 4°C. Pellets (containing sEVs) were removed. CM was centrifuged for additional 3 hours at 100 000g. CM was kept frozen for further analysis. Proteins from the secretome were precipitated 1hour at 4°C with TCA (20%) and centrifugated 15min at 16 000g in 4°C. The pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in denaturation buffer containing 8M Urea/100mM ammonium bicarbonate. The mixtures were reduced with 50mM TCEP (37°C for 1 hour), then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (1 hour at RT in the dark). Samples were diluted 9-fold with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA) at a 1:40 enzyme:substrate ratio (wt/wt). 4% FA was added to stop the reaction. Digested peptides were purified with Sep-Pak C18 and were eluted with 80% (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid in water. Resulting peptides were dried and resuspended in 2% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid in water.  Samples acquisitions were performed on a Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). 1µg of peptides were injected onto a home-made 55 cm C18 column (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, ReproSil-Pur Basic C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and eluted with a multi-step gradient , using buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the mus musculus SwissProt database (53.449 entries from UniProt the 24/07/2018). Variable modifications (methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation) and fixed modification (cysteine carbamidomethylation) were set for the search and trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was chosen for searching. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Match between runs option was selected for biological replicates of a same condition. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode as previously described. Unique and razor peptides, included modified peptides, with at least 2 ratio counts were accepted for quantification. For the differential analyses, reverses,only proteins with at least 6 LFQ values in a condition were kept. After log2 transformation, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR). Exclusive proteins that are present in only one condition were grouped and isolated as “differentially abundant proteins”. Next, missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Proteins with a fold-change under 2.0 were considered not differentially abundant. Statistical testing of the remaining proteins (having a fold-change over 2.0) was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to an FDR of 1% were considered as differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is an irreversible growth arrest with a dynamic secretome, termed the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Senescence is a cell-intrinsic barrier for reprogramming, whereas the SASP facilitates cell fate conversion in non-senescent cells. However, the mechanisms by which reprogramming-induced senescence regulates cell plasticity are not well understood. Here, we investigate how the heterogeneity of paracrine senescence impacts reprogramming. We show that senescence promotes in&#xa0;vitro reprogramming in a stress-dependent manner. Unbiased proteomics identifies a catalog of SASP factors involved in the cell fate conversion. Amphiregulin (AREG), frequently secreted by senescent cells, promotes in&#xa0;vitro reprogramming by accelerating proliferation and the mesenchymal-epithelial transition via EGFR signaling. AREG treatment diminishes the negative effect of donor age on reprogramming. Finally, AREG enhances in&#xa0;vivo reprogramming in skeletal muscle. Hence, various SASP factors can facilitate cellular plasticity to promote reprogramming and tissue repair.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Senescence, Mouse, Secretome, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Plasticité cellulaire et modélisation des maladies, CNRS UMR 3738, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Han Li
Plasticité cellulaire et modélisation des maladies, CNRS UMR 3738, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


