### Accession
PXD019467

### Title
How legumes control nitrogen fixation by root nodule bacteria

### Description
Rhizobia are soil bacteria that can enter into complex symbiotic relationships with legumes, where rhizobia induce the formation of nodules on the plant root. Inside nodules, rhizobia differentiate into nitrogen-fixing bacteroids that reduce atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, secreting it to the plant host in exchange for carbon. During the transition from free-living bacteria to bacteroids, rhizobial metabolism undergoes major changes. To investigate the metabolism of bacteroids and contrast it with the free-living state, we quantified the proteome of unlabelled bacteroids relative to 15N-labelled free-living rhizobia. The data were used to build a core metabolic model of pea bacteroids for the strain Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteroids were obtained from nodules of pea (Pisum sativum cv. Avola) plants inoculated with Rhizobium leguminosarum Rlv3841. Bacteroids were isolated by percoll centrifugation from nodules obtained from a total of 21 plants and processed as 3 independent replicates.  Free-living Rlv3841 cultures were grown in AMS medium with 20 mM succinate and 10 mM 15NH4Cl. Cultures were grown to late log phase (OD600 ~0.8) at 28°C on a gyratory shaker at 250 rpm, and sub-cultured into fresh AMS six times, as preliminary trials showed this yielded >99% 15N incorporation into cell proteins. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed in AMS and stored at -80°C. Bacteroid and cell pellets were resuspended in 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.2) buffer and an aliquot of each taken and lysed by two rounds on a FastPrep FP120 Ribolyser (BIO101/Savant). The protein content of the extracted aliquots was then determined by Bradford assay and these values used to mix equivalent proportions of bacteroid and cells. Mixed bacteroid and cell samples were then ribolysed as described above, another Bradford determination performed to confirm the protein concentration, and then the equivalent of 50 µg of protein was extracted by methanol-chloroform-water precipitation. The proteins from the three replicates were separated on a Novex-gel (10% Bis-Tris SDS-gel)  and stained with InstantBlueTM . The gel lanes were cut into 12-15 slices which were washed, reduced and alkylated, and treated with trypsin according to standard procedures. Peptides were extracted and analysed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a nanoAcquityTM UPLCTM-system (Waters, Manchester, UK). Sample aliquots were loaded onto a trap column  (SymmetryR C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters), and the peptides were then separated on an analytical column (BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) and infused into the mass spectrometer via a 10 µm SilicaTip™ nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) attached to a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Danmark). LC gradient: solvents A (0.1% formic acid in water)  and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1: solvent B at start: 0%; 0-3 min: linear ramp to 5% B; 3-56 min: ramp to 40% B; 56-62 min: ramp to 85% B; 85% B kept for 3 min followed by 100% A for 20 min for re-equilibration. Data dependent analysis was carried out in orbitrap-IT parallel mode using CID fragmentation on the top 5 most abundant ions in each cycle. The full scan MS was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 over the range m/z 350-1800. For the CID-MS2 the mono-isotopic 2+ and 3+ charged precursors were selected with an isolation width of 2 Da. MS2 was triggered by a minimal signal of 103 with an AGC target of 3×104 ions and 150 ms maximum scan time using the chromatography function for peak apex detection. Collision energy was 35, and dynamic exclusion was set to 1 count and 60 s with a mass window of ±20 ppm. MS scans were saved in profile mode while MS2 scans were saved in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of all gel fractions from 3 replicates resulted in 52 raw files (with replicate 2 run twice). Data were processed using Mascot Distiller 2.7 and Mascot Server 2.7 through Mascot Daemon 2.7 (Matrixscience, London, UK). Peaklists generated by Mascot Distiller were used for a database search using  Mascot Server on  the  GeneDB_Rleguminosarum_Proteins fasta database from https://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/downloads/bacteria/rhizobium-leguminosarum.html (May 2020, 7144 entries). For protein annotation, data from https://rhizosphere.org/lab-page/molecular-tools/genomes/rlv3841-genome/ (May 2020, 7288 entries) was used. A small database containing common contaminants (MaxQuant contaminants 2017, 250 entries) was included in the search. Each raw file was processed and searched separately using the enzyme trypsin with 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q), acetylation (protNterm) as variable modifications. Intensities for light and heavy 15N labelled peptides were extracted using a Mascot Server 15N metabolic quantitation method with the following parameters: 99.2% labelling (as determined by Mascot Distiller), Simpson's integration, isotope match rho = 0.6, XIC threshold = 0.1, isolation threshold = 0.5, peptide expect threshold = 0.05, outlier removal auto, normalisation none. The experimental design with 3 replicates and corresponding fractions was generated in the quantitation table exported via Mascot Daemon. The resulting expression table was used for ratio calculation and statistical analysis in RStudio 1.2.5033 with R version 3.6.3. Ratios were calculated as median from the replicates, and statistical testing performed using the limma eBayes function in R.

### Publication Abstract
Rhizobia induce nodule formation on legume roots and differentiate into bacteroids, which catabolize plant-derived dicarboxylates to reduce atmospheric N<sub>2</sub> into ammonia. Despite the agricultural importance of this symbiosis, the mechanisms that govern carbon and nitrogen allocation in bacteroids and promote ammonia secretion to the plant are largely unknown. Using a metabolic model derived from genome-scale datasets, we show that carbon polymer synthesis and alanine secretion by bacteroids facilitate redox balance in microaerobic nodules. Catabolism of dicarboxylates induces not only a higher oxygen demand but also a higher NADH/NAD<sup>+</sup> ratio than sugars. Modeling and <sup>13</sup>C metabolic flux analysis indicate that oxygen limitation restricts the decarboxylating arm of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, which limits ammonia assimilation into glutamate. By tightly controlling oxygen supply and providing dicarboxylates as the energy and electron source donors for N<sub>2</sub> fixation, legumes promote ammonia secretion by bacteroids. This is a defining feature of rhizobium-legume symbioses.

### Keywords
15n labeling, Rhizobium, Bacteroid, Quantifiication, Pea, Protein

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Sciences University of Oxford South Parks Road Oxford, OX1 3RB, UK
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Poole
Department of Plant Sciences University of Oxford South Parks Road Oxford, OX1 3RB, UK


