### Accession
PXD020860

### Title
Identification of key regulatory pathways in response to long-term zinc supplementation in human primary retinal pigment epithelium: a multi-omics approachIdentification of key regulatory pathways in response to long-term zinc supplementation in human primary retinal pigment epithelium: a multi-omics approach

### Description
In age-related macular degeneration (AMD), both systemic and local zinc concentrations are decreased. Elevating zinc levels by nutrition or oral supplementation has a positive impact on delaying the progression to end-stage AMD in clinical studies. Here we set out to identify key regulatory pathways involved in this beneficial effect.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of the experiments, cells were washed with PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) 3 times for 2 minutes. Then differentiation media was replaced with serum-free Minimum Essential Medium Eagle Alpha Modifications (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). After 24 hours, apical and basal medium (approximately 600 and 900 µl, respectively) were collected, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ˚C until proteomics analysis was conducted. The transwell membranes containing the cells were excised and divided into five equal-sized wedges. These were either immediately snap-frozen and kept at -80 ˚C.  Proteomic sample preparation For proteomic analysis, all solvents and water were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) as HPLC-grade purity. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Taufkirchen, Germany) unless stated otherwise. HPLC columns were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Dreieich, Germany). To analyze the secretomes of the RPE transwell cell culture, apical and basal supernatants were thawed on ice and concentrated to approximately 100 µL volume by evaporation. To generate sample fractions for optional metabolomic and lipidomic analyses in addition to proteomics the SIMPLEX extraction method was applied according to the protocol described elsewhere (Coman, Solari et al. 2016).  Finally, the methanol-containing phase was removed, and the protein pellet was air-dried and frozen at -80°C until further analysis.  For cellular proteomic analysis 200 µL of cold lysis buffer (Tris-buffered saline containing 1% NP-40 and 2% cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany /Roche, Basel, Switzerland)) were added to one snap-frozen wedge of each transwell chamber, and the cells were detached on ice using a cell pestle (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, # Z359947-100EA). The resulting suspension was vortexed and subsequently centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min. The clear supernatant was recovered, and protein concentration was determined using a conventional assay (Bradford, Biorad, California, USA). For each sample a volume containing 10 mg of total protein was used to perform a methanol/chloroform precipitation. The resulting protein pellet was air-dried and used for proteome analysis as described in the following section.  Proteome analysis by mass spectrometry Frozen protein pellets were recovered in 30 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution plus additional 4 µL RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). Proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol followed by an incubation with iodacetamide to alkylate cystein residues. Finally, limited proteolysis was performed by adding 1 µL 0.5 µg/µl trypsin (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and incubation at 37 °C for 12 hours. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 5 %. After centrifugation, the supernatants were processed using StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on a NanoRSLC3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were trapped on a nano trap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), and separated on an analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) applying a gradient of actetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative analysis, MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann 2008). Two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. The initial mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 4.5 ppm and the first search option was enabled with 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The SwissProt_2014 database (selected for homo sapiens, 20203 entries) was used for peptide and protein identification. The MaxQuant software-generated output file “proteingroups.txt” was utilized for Pearson correlation, clustering and statistical analysis using Perseus software version 1.5.5.3. All data were filtered for potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence. The dataset was filtered further on Log2 transformed LFQ values to the minimum number of valid values “in at least one in total”, and missing values were imputed using normal distribution in “separately for each column” mode. All numeric values were expressed as the mean  ±  standard deviation (SD) for the respective groups. Benjamini–Hochberg corrections of significance B calculated by the Perseus software package were used to identify the intensity-dependent significant outliers relative to a certain populations (Cox and Mann 2008). The adjusted p-value of less than 0.05 was considered a significantly enriched protein.

### Publication Abstract
In age-related macular degeneration (AMD), both systemic and local zinc levels decline. Elevation of zinc in clinical studies delayed the progression to end-stage AMD. However, the molecular pathways underpinning this beneficial effect are not yet identified. In this study, we used differentiated primary human fetal retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cultures and long-term zinc supplementation to carry out a combined transcriptome, proteome and secretome analysis from three genetically different human donors. After combining significant differences, we identified the complex molecular networks using Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The cell cultures from the three donors showed extensive pigmentation, development of microvilli and basal infoldings and responded to zinc supplementation with an increase in transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) (apical supplementation: 443.2 &#xb1; 79.3%, basal supplementation: 424.9 &#xb1; 116.8%, compared to control: 317.5 &#xb1; 98.2%). Significant changes were observed in the expression of 1044 genes, 151 cellular proteins and 124 secreted proteins. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed changes in specific molecular pathways related to cell adhesion/polarity, extracellular matrix organization, protein processing/transport, and oxidative stress response by zinc and identified a key upstream regulator effect similar to that of TGFB1.

### Keywords
Age-related macular degeneration, Multi-omics approach, Retinal pigment epithelium, Zinc

### Affiliations
Queens University Belfast, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Experimental Medicine
The Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Science, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

### Submitter
Imre Lengyel

### Lab Head
Dr Imre Lengyel
The Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Science, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.


