### Accession
PXD013057

### Title
Multi-omics discovery of exome-derived neoantigens in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
HLA class I ligandome dataset obtained from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as well as corresponding adjacent benign liver tissue (n=16) characterizing respective HLA immunoprecipitates. Additionally, from a subset of the mentioned HCC/ adjacent benign liver samples datasets gained from shotgun protein identification, comprising HCC as well as adjacent benign liver tissue (n=7) are provided. Further, for one patient shotgun protein identification was also performed in serum (blood) samples obtained after HCC recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
HLA ligandomics:
HLA class I-peptide complexes were isolated from HCC and corresponding (non-malignant) liver tissue samples after lysis by immunoaffinity purification as described previously (Kowalewski et al. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;960:145-157. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-218-6_12), using the pan-HLA class I-specific monoclonal antibody W6/32 and eluted using 0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid.   Peptide extracts were separated by UHPLC at a flow rate of 175 nl/min using a 50 μm × 25 cm C18 column and a linear gradient ranging from 3 to 40 % solvent B over the course of 90 minutes (Solvent A: 0.15 % formic acid; Solvent B: 80 % ACN) in several technical replicates, as described previously (Löffler et al. Cancer Res. 2018;78(16):4627-4641. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-1745).  Eluting peptides were analyzed in an online coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer operated in automated data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In the orbitrap, survey scans of peptides with 400-650 m/z as well as 2+ and 3+ as permitted charge states were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 with subsequent selection of the five most abundant precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation (CID). The normalized collision energy was set to 35, activation time to 30 ms and the isolation width to 2.0 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (LTQ) and corresponding precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 3 s after fragmentation.   Alternatively, an online coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) was used. In the Orbitrap, survey scans of precursor ions (HCC025: 320-670 m/z, HCC026: 300-650 m/z; 2+ and 3+ as permitted charge states) were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 with subsequent selection for collision-induced dissociation (CID). The normalized collision energy was set to 35 and the isolation width to 1.4 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000.  In addition to PRM tandem MS2 measurements targeting two mutated antigens with evidence on proteome level (PNE Prot ; ALB K375E in HCC025 and RECQL H19R in HCC026), we performed one top n run in DDA mode (HCC025: 320-670 m/z, HCC026: 300-650 m/z) per sample. In the Orbitrap, survey scans of precursor ions (HCC025: 320-670 m/z, HCC026: 300-650 m/z; 2+ and 3+ as permitted charge states) were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 with subsequent selection for CID. The normalized collision energy was set to 35 and the isolation width to 1.4 m/z. At a resolution of 30,000, MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap and corresponding precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 7 s after fragmentation.

Shotgun proteomics:
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Roskilde, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher). Peptide mixtures were separated on a 15 cm fused silica emitter of 75 µm inner diameter (Proxeon), in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were injected with solvent A (0.5 % acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and separated at 200 nl/min. Separation was performed using a linear 130 min gradient of 5-33 % solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.5 % acetic acid). Each of four samples was run as one technical replicate. LTQ Orbitrap Elite was operated in the positive ion mode. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from 300 to 2,000 m/z followed by MS/MS spectra acquisition of the 20 most intense precursor ions. Higher-energy CID (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 and a target value of 40,000. The normalized collision energy was set to 35, activation time to 0.1 ms and the first mass to 120 Th. Fragmented masses were excluded for 60 s after MS/MS. The target values were 1E6 charges for the MS scans in the Orbitrap and 5,000 charges for the MS/MS scans with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and 150 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
HLA ligandomics:
MS data obtained from analysis of HLA-immunoprecipitates was assessed using functionality provided by tools of the open-source software library for LC/MS OpenMS 2.3 (Bertsch et al. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;696:353-67. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-987-1_23). Identification and post-scoring were performed using the OpenMS adapter to Comet 2016.01 rev. 3 (Eng et al. Proteomics. 2013;13(1):22-4. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200439) and Percolator (3.1.1) (Käll et al. Nat Methods. 2007;4(11):923-5. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth1113). HLA ligand identification was performed against a personalized version of the human reference proteome (Swiss-Prot, reviewed UP000005640), including the patient-specific mutanome. Database search was carried out without enzymatic restriction and oxidation of methionine residues as the only dynamic modification (maximal number of modifications per peptide set to 3). The digest mass range was set to 800-2,500. Precursor charge was fixed to 2-3 and the precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm. In addition, a fragment bin tolerance of 1.0 Da and a fragment bin offset of 0.4 Da was set and neutral losses were included for each peptide spectrum match (PSM). A 5 % PSM FDR threshold was calculated using Percolator, based on a competitive target-decoy approach using reversed decoy sequences and merged identifications of all replicate runs if available. Peptide quantification was achieved using MapAlignerIdentification and FeatureFinderIdentification (Weisser et al. J Proteome Res. 2017;16(8):2964-2974. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome) with default settings. IDs of replicates were treated as internal IDs and the median intensity of consensus features was used as final quantification value. Only quantified identifications were considered as valid hits.

Shotgun proteomics:
Label-free protein quantification was done using MaxQuant v1.5.00 (Cox et al. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367-72. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1511). Parameter groups were defined for non-malignant liver- and tumor-derived raw files, respectively. The multiplicity was set to one. Protein N-terminal acetylation as well as oxidation of methionine residues were selected as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. TrypsinP was selected as enzyme with specific digestion mode. Further, we specified the match type as MatchFromAndTo and set the number of MaxMissedCleavages to two. Requantification and matching between runs were enabled. As a reference, we specified the Swiss-Prot reviewed human proteome (version UP000005640, derived: 02/16/2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Next-generation sequencing, Immunotherapy, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Hla, Hla ligandomics, Peptide prediction, Personalized medicine, Mass spectrometry, Multi-omics, Neoantigen, Immunoinformatics

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Leon Bichmann

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Georg Rammensee
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


