### Accession
PXD043743

### Title
Identificaiton of DHX9 phosphorylation sites after UV

### Description
Immunoprecipitated DHX9 for identification of phosphorylation sites before and after UV irradiation

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous DHX9 proteins immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells treated with or without UV 20 J/m^2 were subjecte to SDS-PAGE and the band of DHX9 was cut for in-gel digestion with trypsin. Samples were processed by the MS CORE facility

### Data Protocol
The data were acquired by Academia Sinica Common Mass Spectrometry Facilities at the IBS, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant DNA/RNA hybrids (R-loops) formed during transcription and replication disturbances pose threats to genome stability. DHX9 is an RNA helicase involved in R-loop resolution, but how DHX9 is regulated in response to genotoxic stress remains unclear. Here we report that DHX9 is phosphorylated at S321 and S688, with S321 phosphorylation primarily induced by ATR after DNA damage. Phosphorylation of DHX9 at S321 promotes its interaction with &#x3b3;H2AX, BRCA1&#xa0;and RPA, and is required for its association with R-loops under genotoxic stress. Inhibition of ATR or expression of the non-phosphorylatable DHX9S321A prevents DHX9 from interacting with RPA and R-loops, leading to the accumulation of stress-induced R-loops. Furthermore, depletion of RPA reduces the association between DHX9 and &#x3b3;H2AX, and in vitro binding analysis confirms a direct interaction between DHX9 and RPA. Notably, cells with the non-phosphorylatable DHX9S321A variant exhibit hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress, while those expressing the phosphomimetic DHX9S321D variant prevent R-loop accumulation and display resistance to DNA damage agents. In summary, we uncover a new mechanism by which ATR directly regulates DHX9 through phosphorylation to eliminate stress-induced R-loops.

### Keywords
Hela cell dhx9 ip phosphorylation

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
National Taiwan University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Ching-Shyi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ching-Shyi Peter
National Taiwan University College of Medicine


