### Accession
PXD014197

### Title
The heat shock protein family A (HSPA8) acts as a surface receptor of alveolar macrophages specific for recognition and phagocytosis of Lichtheimia corymbifera spores

### Description
Mucormycosis is a life-threatening disease especially in immunocompromised patients  that was caused my mucoralean fungi. The rate of mortality is tremendously increased  in the last decades due to the lack of appropriate diagnostic tools, insufficient  knowledge about the immune response toward the mucormycosis and unavailability of  specific antifungal drugs. Several species of mucoralean fungi cause mucormycosis  such as Lichtheimia, Rhizopus, and Mucor. Lichtheimia species ranks the second and  third cause of mucormycosis in Europe and the USA, respectively. In this study, we  investigated the receptors present on the surface of immune cells that bind to the  spores of Lichtheimia. We focus on two strains of L. corymbifera (FSU:9682 and  FSU:10164) using resting and heat-killed spores. Additionally, we choose alveolar  macrophages (MH-S) to carry out our experiment. MH-S is the first line of defense in  the lung and the major component in the innate immune system. MH-S surface proteins  were biotinylated and incubated with Lichtheimia spores. The surface proteins and  putative binding partners were enriched by streptavidin. LC-MS/MS analysis showed  that several proteins are highly expressed in presence of Lichtheimia spores, of  which the heat shock protein family A (HSPA8) was one of the most abundant proteins.  FACS analysis and immunofluorescence examination confirmed that HSPA8 is highly  abundant on the surface of the MH-S, but not on the surface of Lichtheimia spores.  Moreover, our study showed that the intensity of HSPA8 on the surface of MH-S  depends on the multiplicity of infection (MOI). Additionally, the blocking with  anti-HSPA8 antibody reduced the capability of MH-S to engulf the Lichtheimia spores,  but not Aspergillus fumigatus spores. This confirms that HSPA8 is specific to  Lichtheimia. THis is the first study addressing the determination of surface  receptors of alveolar macrophages that in the context of Mucoralean fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Two strains of L. corymbifera (virulent strain: 9682 and attenuated strain: 10164)  were cultivated at 37°C on malt extract medium (40 gm of malt extract, 4 gm of yeast  extract, and 15 gm agar per one liter) for 7 days. Plates were washed with PBS to  collect the Spores. Spores were filtered through a 40 µm cell-strainer to remove  debris and hyphae. Heat killed spores were obtained by heating at 99°C for one hour  with shaking. Aspergillus fumigatus ATCC 46645 was cultivated for five days on the  Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM).Murine alveolar macrophages MH-S (ATCC: CRL-2019)  were cultivated in RPMI-1640 with heat inactivated FBS, sodium bicarbonate,  gentamycin sulphate, and beta-mercaptoethanol. 1e8 Confluent and adherent alveolar  macrophages were co-incubated with 1e7 spores (either dormant heat-killed). The  cells were kept on the ice for 30 minute and then incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C  in 5% CO2 incubator. The supernatant was removed and washed three times with PBS to  remove the excess of spores. The surface of cells were biotinylated with 0,5 mg/ml  of EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS- Biotin (Thermo) dissolved in PBS supplemented with Ca2+ and  Mg2+ for 12 minutes at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were washed three times with PBS with  Ca2+ and Mg2+. MH-S cells were scraped in PBS with Ca2+ and Mg2+ and centrifuged for  5 minutes at 4°C at 100 g. the supernatant was discarded and MH-S cells were lysed  by incubation in 58 mg/ml n-Octyl-β-D-Glucopyranoside for 20 min on ice. The MH-S  membrane proteins were collected by centrifugation for one hour at 4°C. For  isolation of MH-S receptors 250µg of lysed MH-S membrane proteins were incubated  with 8e8 spores at 37°C for 1h. The spores were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min  and washed with PBS with Ca2+ and Mg2+ 3 times. The spores were incubated with  elution buffer (25mM glycine and 1% SDS at pH2) for 5 min at RT. The bounded  proteins are collected by centrifugation at 6.000 g for five minutes. MH-S proteins  bound to spores of L. corymbifera were enriched by streptavidin. Briefly, Roti®- MagBeads Streptavidin (ROTH) were washed three times with buffer A solution (1% NP- 40, 0, 1% SDS in PBS), confronted with bound proteins for 2h on ice. Unbound  proteins were removed and the streptavidin beads were washed 3 times with buffer A  and two times with buffer B (0,4M Nacl in buffer A). The beads were washed once with  50mM tris- Hcl. The captured proteins were released with 400µl of 5% 2-  mercaptethanol in PBS at 30°C for 30 minutes (3 times). All eluted proteins were  precipitated by 10% TCA for 30 minutes on ice. The proteins were precipitated by  centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet  was washed once with 1ml of ethanol-ether (1:1).Dried pellets were dissolved in  200µl 50mM NH4HCO3, sonicated for 15 minutes at RT, and heated for 10 minutes at  95°C. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) with at a ratio of 25:1  protein:protease at 37°C for 16h. Dried peptides were redissolved in 0,05% TFA in 2%  ACN. 3 biological replicates were analyzed. As a control we repeated the above  mentioned procedure without biotinylation of MH-S surface proteins to exclude  unspecifically bound proteins that bind to streptavidin beads. LC–MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a  a QExactive HF (I) and to a QExactive Plus (II) mass spectrometer (both Thermo  Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column  (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min followed by gradient elution separation on an  Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm). Eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid  in water) was mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10  acetonitrile/water) as follows, (I): 0 min at 4% B, 6 min at 8% B, 30 min at 12% B,  75 min at 30% B, 85 min at 50% B, 90–95 min at 96% B, 95.1–120 min at 4% B. (II): 0 -4 min at 4% B, 10 min at 7%, 40 min at 10% B, 80 min at 25% B, 90 min at 30% B, 110  min at 50% B, 115 min at 60% B, 120–125 min at 96% B, 125.1–150 min at 4% B.  Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter and  a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive HF was  operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored  at m/z 300–1500 at a resolution of 120,000 (I)/ 70,000 (II) full width at half- maximum (FWHM) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an automatic  gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z = 2–5 were  filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 30%  normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 (I) / 17,500 (II)  FWHM (ITmax = 90 ms (I) / 120 ms (II), AGC = 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor  ions was set to 30 s. The LC–MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2 (I) /  6.8 (II), QExactive Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 (I) / 3.0 (II) software.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search tandem mass spectra were searched against the database of  Lichtheimia corymbifera 9682_v1-2 (http://www.genome- resource.de/html/lcorymbifera/lcorymbifera.html; 2018/09/24) as well as the UniProt  database of Mus musculus (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589;  2018/09/24). Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and v2.2 and the search algorithms of Mascot  2.4 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD1.4 and PD2.2) and MS Amanda (1.0  and 2.0). PD1.4 was used for the biotinylated samples. Control samples without  biotinylation were measured at a later timepoint with PD2.2. Two missed cleavages  were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to  10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were  defined as dynamic Met oxidation and static Cys carbamidomethylation. At least two  peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for  positive protein hits. The Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for  q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the  top-scored proteins were counted.

### Publication Abstract
Mucormycosis is an emergent, fatal fungal infection of humans and warm-blooded animals caused by species of the order Mucorales. Immune cells of the innate immune system serve as the first line of defence against inhaled spores. Alveolar macrophages were challenged with the mucoralean fungus Lichtheimia corymbifera and subjected to biotinylation and streptavidin enrichment procedures followed by LC-MS/MS analyses. A total of 28 host proteins enriched for binding to macrophage-L. corymbifera interaction. Among those, the HSP70-family protein Hspa8 was found to be predominantly responsive to living and heat-killed spores of a virulent and an attenuated strain of L. corymbifera. Confocal scanning laser microscopy of infected macrophages revealed colocalization of Hspa8 with phagocytosed spores of L. corymbifera. The amount of detectable Hspa8 was dependent on the multiplicity of infection. Incubation of alveolar macrophages with an anti-Hspa8 antibody prior to infection reduced their capability to phagocytose spores of L. corymbifera. In contrast, anti-Hspa8 antibodies did not abrogate the phagocytosis of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia by macrophages. These results suggest an important contribution of the heat-shock family protein Hspa8 in the recognition of spores of the mucoralean fungus L. corymbifera by host alveolar macrophages and define a potential immunomodulatory therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Hspa8, Biotinylation, Lichtheimia corymbifera, Mass spectrometry, Alveolar macrophages, Surface receptor

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


