### Accession
PXD019301

### Title
Appressorial proteomics analysis of the wild-type and GAG biosynthetic mutant of Metarhizium robertsii

### Description
Exopolysaccharide galactosaminogalactan (GAG) is a fungal cell wall component composed of α-1,4 linked galactose, N-acetyl galactosamine and galactosamine, which has been demonstrated in Aspergillus fumigatus in association with fungal adhesion, biofilm formation and virulence. The gene cluster responsible for GAG biosynthesis has only been characterized in Aspergillus fungi. We found that the highly conserved gene cluster for GAG biosynthesis is also present in the insect pathogenic fungi Metarhizium species. Functional investigations in M. robertsii revealed that GAG is only produced on fungal cell wall during fungal germination, filamentation and the formation of the infection structure appressoria. Gene deletions revealed that, relative to the wild-type (WT), the appressorial mucilage production was abolished in the null mutant of M. robertsii. Since multiple enzymes are produced in appressorial mucilages, appressorial samples of the WT and mutant formed on cicada wings were collected and subjected to iTRAQ comparative proteomic analysis. We found that different protein families were up- or down-regulated in the null mutant when compared with the WT.

### Sample Protocol
We collected the appressorial samples of the WT and mutant formed on cicada wings. SDT buffer was added to the sample. And then, the homogenate was homogenized , sonicated and boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters . The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit .

### Data Protocol
Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski, Zougman et al.  and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex itraq reagent. The samples were labeled as (WT1)-115, (WT2)-116, (WT3)-117, (G1)-118, (G2)-119，(G3)-121.  And then, the labeled peptides were mixed and fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The collected fractions (about 30 fractions) were finally combined into 10 pools and desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma). Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 μl of each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (5 μg) was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 140 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.)  against  uniprot  Metarhizium robertsii database(11684 sequences, download at 11,14,2019) and the decoy database. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), itraq 8plex(K), itraq 8plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M), FDR≤0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metarhizium robertsii, Itraq, Gag

### Affiliations
shanghai
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Science(CEMPS)/Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)

### Submitter
yanzhen Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Chengshu Wang
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Science(CEMPS)/Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)


