### Accession
PXD035757

### Title
Site-specific N-glycosylation Characterization of Micro Disease-related Proteins Based on EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS

### Description
Monoclonal immunoglobulin produced by clonal plasma cells is the main cause in multiple myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance. Because of the complicated purification method and the low stoichiometry of purified protein and glycans, site-specific N-glycosylation characterization for monoclonal immunoglobulin is still challenging. Studies reporting the N-glycosylation profiles for this monoclonal immunoglobulin have been rare until now. Therefore, in this study, we presented an integrated workflow for micro serum monoclonal IgA and IgG purification from patients with multiple myeloma in the HYDRASYS system, in-agarose-gel digestion, LC‒MS/MS analysis without intact N-glycopeptide enrichment, and compared the identification performance of different mass spectrometry dissociation methods (EThcD-sceHCD, sceHCD, EThcD and sceHCD-pd-ETD). The results showed that EThcD-sceHCD was a better choice for site-specific N-glycosylation characterization of micro in-agarose-gel immunoglobulin proteins (~2 μg) because it can cover more unique intact N-glycopeptides (37 and 50 intact N-glycopeptides from IgA1 and IgG2, respectively) and provide more high-quality spectra than sceHCD, EThcD and sceHCD-pd-ETD. We demonstrated the benefits of the alternative strategy in site-specific N-glycosylation characterizing micro disease-related proteins obtained from bands separated by electrophoresis. This work could promote the development of clinical N-glycoproteomics and related immunology.

### Sample Protocol
Serumsamples from patients with multiple myeloma were pooled before analysis. Serum monoclonal IgA and IgG were purified by using HYDRAGEL 4 IF kit (Sebia, Cedex, France) in the semiautomated agarose electrophoresis and immunofixation HYDRASYS system. We modified the manufacturer’s instructions for monoclonal immunoglobulin purification in the HYDRASYS system. In brief, for protein electrophoresis, 10 μL volume 2-4 times diluted serum samples were applied manually to the applicator wells. The applicator was placed into the wet storage chamber with the teeth up and samples were allowed to diffuse into teeth for 5 min. Then protein migration was completed in the HYDRASYS system with the applicators placed. After electrophoresis, all wells were incubated with fixative solution, except one with IgA antiserum or IgG antiserum as positive control. Next, we removed the remanent fixative solution and antiserum by filter paper and washed the agarose gel with HYDRASYS wash solution for three times and stained it with amidoblack stain for 15 minutes at room temperature. Distain was performed using 0.1% acetic acid and ddH2O, respectively. Finally, refer to control band with IgA or IgG antiserum incubation, the bands of monoclonal IgA or IgG (~2 μg) were excised from lanes fixed only with fixative solution.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data files were searched using Byonic software (version 3.10.10, Protein Metrics, Inc.). The human IgG or IgA Uniprot database was chosen. Mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 6 ppm and ± 20 ppm, respectively. Fragmentation type was set as “Both HCD & EThcD”, “HCD”, “EThcD” or “Both HCD & ETD”. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. The "182 human N-glycans" was set as the N-glycan modification. Protein groups were filtered to 1% FDR. Quality control methods for intact N-glycopeptide identification included a Byonic score of over 200, a logProb value of over 2, and at least 5 amino acids. Each spectrum of intact N-glycopeptide should be confirmed manually.

### Publication Abstract
Monoclonal immunoglobulin produced by clonal plasma cells is the main cause in multiple myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance. Because of the complicated purification method and the low stoichiometry of purified protein and glycans, site-specific N-glycosylation characterization for monoclonal immunoglobulin is still challenging. To profile the site-specific N-glycosylation of monoclonal immunoglobulins is of great interest. Therefore, in this study, we presented an integrated workflow for micro monoclonal IgA and IgG purification from patients with multiple myeloma in the HYDRASYS system, in-agarose-gel digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis without intact N-glycopeptide enrichment, and compared the identification performance of different mass spectrometry dissociation methods (EThcD-sceHCD, sceHCD, EThcD and sceHCD-pd-ETD). The results showed that EThcD-sceHCD was a better choice for site-specific N-glycosylation characterization of micro in-agarose-gel immunoglobulins (~2 &#x3bc;g) because it can cover more unique intact N-glycopeptides (37 and 50 intact N-glycopeptides from IgA1 and IgG2, respectively) and provide more high-quality spectra than sceHCD, EThcD and sceHCD-pd-ETD. We demonstrated the benefits of the alternative strategy in site-specific N-glycosylation characterizing micro monoclonal immunoglobulins obtained from bands separated by electrophoresis. This work could promote the development of clinical N-glycoproteomics and related immunology.

### Keywords
N-glycosylation; microscale; serum; monoclonal immunoglobulin; mass spectrometry; ethcd-scehcd

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


