### Accession
PXD019988

### Title
A cross-kingdom conserved ER-phagy receptor maintains endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis during stress

### Description
We have identified a potential selective autophagy receptor protein in Arabidopsis thaliana, C53/AT5G06830/ERP1, that is recruited to ER upon ER-stress activation and induces autophagosome formation. By affinity proteomics IP/MS with ATG8A and E, we identified this new ER-phagy receptor, which is also conserved in metazoans. With biophysical characterization, we revealed its unprecedent binding mode to ATG8 (sAIM). C53 senses proteotoxic stress in the ER lumen by forming a tripartite receptor complex with the ER-associated ufmylation ligase UFL1 and its membrane adaptor DDRGK1. However, its cargo targeted for degradation is still elusive. Initial quantitative proteomics analyses (TMT) of wild type and Atc53 mutant lines revealed that Atc53 mediates degradation of ER resident proteins as well as proteins passaging the ER to the cell wall, apoplast, and lipid droplets.

### Sample Protocol
0.5 - 1 g seedlings for immune-precipitation and mass spectrometry were grown in half-strength MS media with 1% sucrose liquid culture for 5 d under continuous light with shaking at 80 rpm. Media was supplemented with 10 μg/ml Tunicamycin in DMSO. The plants were kept in the dark to provide drug stability. Pure DMSO was added to control samples.  Affinity proteomics IP/MS: For IP/MS of mCherry-ATG8A, mCherryATG8e and mCherry, seedling treatment was stopped after 8 h of treatment. Samples were homogenized in a bead mill (RetschMM300; 30 Hz, 90 s) with zirconium oxide grinding beads. After grinding of frozen samples, G-TEN buffer (10% Glycerole, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% [v/v] Nonidet P-40/Igepal, Complete protease inhibitor tablet) was added, vortexed, and lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16 000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was equally adjusted using Bradford protein assay (Sigma). Each sample was divided on 2 new tubes. For competition, each tube was supplemented with 100 μM of AIM mut peptide or AIM wt peptide respectively. 25 μl of RFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek) were equilibrated and added to each lysate and incubated for 2 h at 4°C on a turning wheel. Beads were washed 3 times with 1 mL G-TEN buffer and then 3 times with low-salt buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA). After the last wash, beads were resuspended in 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate buffer and then submitted for chymotrypsin digestion.   Quantitative proteomics (TMT-11plex): For analyzing total protein degradation in TMT, seedlings of Col-0 (WT) and c53-mutant (here with old label erp1) were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen after 24 h +/- Tunicamycin treatment. Samples were homogenized in a bead mill (RetschMM300; 30 Hz, 90 s) with zirconium oxide grinding beads.  Cell Lysis 100 mg of plant powder were lysed in 200 μL SDT Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100mM Tris HCl pH7.5) at 95°C at 1100 rpm in a Thermo shaker. Then the samples were sonicated with with 30 pules at maximum intensity and subsequently centrifuged at 20000xg for 15 min. The pellet was discarded.  FASP: 30 μL were loaded onto a 30 kDa Mass cutoff 0.5mL Amicon centrifugal filter (Merck). Then 200 μL 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 were added and centrifugation was performed at 14000 g for 20 min. This step was repeated once. For alkylation of the Cysteins 100 µl of 0.1M IAA in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 were loaded and left 30 min in the dark and then centrifuged at 14000 g for 20 min. 100 μL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 were added and centrifugation was performed at 14,000 g for 20 min. This was repeated twice. 100 μL of 100 mM Hepes pH 7.6 were added and centrifugation was performed at 14,000 g for 20 min. This was repeated twice. 46 μL of 100 mM Hepes pH 7.6 and 4 μL 1 μg/μL Trypsin Gold (Promega) were added to the Amicon. The Amicon was sealed with parafilm and digest was performed overnight. The mass cut off filter was transferred in a new collection tube and then centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min. 50 μL of 100 mM Hepes pH 7.6 were added and centrifugation was performed at 14000 g for 15 min. The samples were run on a monolytic column for quantification so that 100 μg can be used for TMT labelling.   Labelling with TMT: 100 μg of the samples were diluted with 100 mM Hepes (ph=7,5) to a total volume of 100μL. 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile were added. TMT Reagents and the samples were mixed and incubated for 1h. Before mixing the different channels, the organic content was removed from each sample with the speedvac and diluted with 0.1 % TFA to final concentration of 1 µg/µL. For a first experiment 35µL of each channel were mixed and 500 ng of this sample were analyzed in a LC-MS/MS experiment to determine the mixing ratio by calculating the median value at 500 most abundant proteins of the sample. As well as the labelling efficiency was calculated from this sample. To determine the labelling efficiency of the single channel 500ng of the 127N and 131N labelled sample was analyzed with an LC-MS/MS experiment.  According to the results derived from the LC-MS/MS analysis different amount of the channels were added to correct the median value to 1:1: 1:1: 1:1 to ensure that equal amounts of the eight samples are mixed.  SCX-separation The dried sample was then dissolved in SCX Buffer A (5 mM Na-PO4 pH 2.7 15 % ACN) SCX was performed using an Ultimate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 35 µl/min and a TSKgel column (ToSOH) column (5 µm particles, 1 mm i.d. x 300 mm).  200 µg of peptide were loaded. For the separation a ternary gradient was used. Along the the gradient fractions were collected.  LC-MS/MS Each of the 140 fractions were analysed with LC-MS. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Affinity proteomics IP/MS: For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.14114 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). For the 1st step search the RAW-files were searched against the databases Madlen_peptides_mCherry.fasta 93 sequence, 266 residues); PD_Contaminants_2014_11_updated_w_IGGs_and_TAGs_v9.fasta; TAIR10_pep_20101214_changeSymbol.fasta (32,785 sequences, 14,482,855 residues), using following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 15ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database was generated for further processing. For the 2nd step the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database called subdb_20200602_QExHFX2_RSLC8_Stephani_Dagdas_GMI_onbead_chymo_dig_2c5per_18xSample_18xWT_step1.fasta. The following search parameters were used:  Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, biotinylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Peptide areas have been quantified using IMP-apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J Proteome Res. 2018 Nov 2). C53 is designated as AT5G06830, the gene identifier.  Quantitative proteomics (TMT-11plex): MS/MS Data Analysis: Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Database searches were performed using MS Amanda (version 2.3.0.14114) against the TAIR10 database (32785 sequences). The raw files were loaded as fractions into the processing workflow. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT on peptide N-termini were specified as fixed modifications, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMT on lysine, carbamylation on peptide N-termini and acetylation on protein N-termini were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was defined as the proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine or arginine. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 15 ppm respectively. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator and filtered to 0.5% FDR at the peptide spectrum match level. Protein grouping was performed in Proteome Discoverer applying strict parsimony principle. Proteins were subsequently filtered to a false discovery rate of 1% at protein level. Phosphorylation sites were localized using IMP-ptmRS implemented in Proteome Discoverer using a probability cut-off of >75% for unambiguous site localization. TMT-quantification: TMT Reporter ion S/N values were extracted from the most confident centroid mass within an integration tolerance of 20 ppm. PSMs with average TMT reporter S/N values below 10 as well as PSMs showing more than 50% co-isolation were removed. Protein quantification was determined based on unique peptides only. Samples were sum normalized and missing values were imputed by the 5% quantile of the reporter intensity in the respective sample. Statistical significance of differentially abundant proteins was determined using limma. Gene Ontology enrichment was determined using DAVID (version 6.8). Cross species comparison of regulated proteins was performed by mapping proteins to ortholog clusters available in eggnog. Proteins containing signal peptides were predicted using SignalP 5.0.  C53 is designated as ERP1 (ER-associated protein 1), the initial name.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotes have evolved various quality control mechanisms to promote proteostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Selective removal of certain ER domains via autophagy (termed as ER-phagy) has emerged as a major quality control mechanism. However, the degree to which ER-phagy is employed by other branches of ER-quality control remains largely elusive. Here, we identify a cytosolic protein, C53, that is specifically recruited to autophagosomes during ER-stress, in both plant and mammalian cells. C53 interacts with ATG8 via a distinct binding epitope, featuring a shuffled ATG8 interacting motif (sAIM). C53 senses proteotoxic stress in the ER lumen by forming a tripartite receptor complex with the ER-associated ufmylation ligase UFL1 and its membrane adaptor DDRGK1. The C53/UFL1/DDRGK1 receptor complex is activated by stalled ribosomes and induces the degradation of internal or passenger proteins in the ER. Consistently, the C53 receptor complex and ufmylation mutants are highly susceptible to ER stress. Thus, C53 forms an ancient quality control pathway that bridges selective autophagy with ribosome-associated quality control in the ER.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Tmt-11plex, Er-stress, Whole seedlings, Ip/ms, Tunicamycin, Er-phagy

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Yasin Dagdas
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at


