### Accession
PXD014520

### Title
Reanalysis of Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry data from a ribisomal cellular fraction for benchmarking purposes

### Description
Reanalysis of a cross-linked ribosomal cellular fraction dataset, that is a subset of a fragmentation parameters optimization dataset (PRIDE project PXD006131). The HCD fragmented part of the dataset was searched with the Cross-Linking MS identification tools OpenPepXL, pLink2, Kojak and XiSearch.

### Sample Protocol
The combined ribosomal fractions obtained by size exclusion chromatography of HEK 293 cell lysate were a complex mixture comprising about 1700 proteins. From PXD006131: Proteins were cross-linked using a 1:1 weight-to-weight (w/w) cross-linker to protein ratio. C3b buffer was exchanged using 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filters (Millipore, Cork, Ireland), into cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8). Protein and cross-linker were mixed to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml. The mixture was incubated on ice for 2 h before the reaction was stopped by ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, 50 mM final concentration). Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea. Disulfide bonds were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT, 2.5 mM, 50 °C for 15 min) and alkylated by iodoacetamid (IAA, 5 mM, RT for 30 min in the dark). The samples were diluted to 2 M urea using 50 mM ABC and digested with trypsin (50:1 protein to enzyme w/w ratio, 37 °C, over-night). Digestions were stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) until the pH was <2. Digests were desalted using self-made C18 StageTips16 and peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile and 20%, 0.1% TFA in water. Eluates were dried and resuspended in 0.1 % TFA. The injected amount was 1 µg of peptides. Data acquisition. All samples were analyzed using a UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% water. Peptides were loaded onto a 500 mm C-18 EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with 2% B at 300 nl/min flow rate for 11 min and eluted at 300 nl/min flow rate with a linear gradient from 2% - 40% B over 139 min.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files of all datasets were converted into mzML and MGF files using MSConvertGUI from the ProteoWizard toolkit version 3.0.10577. Reversed sequence decoy protein databases were generated from the target protein databases using the TOPP tool DecoyDatabase from OpenMS 2.4. Because it creates its own decoys, only the target database was provided to pLink2. OpenPepXL 1.1 with the TOPP tool XFDR for False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation, XiSearch 1.6.731 with xiFDR 1.1.27 for FDR estimation, TPP 5.1.0 with Kojak 1.6.0 and PeptideProphet for FDR estimation and pLink 2.3.5 with its built in FDR estimation algorithm were used to identify cross-links. The parameters of the different tools were set to equal values where possible and to reasonable or similar values otherwise. The parameters were: precursor tolerance = 6 ppm, fragment tolerance = 20ppm, max. number of missed cleavages = 4, enzyme = Trypsin, min. peptide length = 5, fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M), max. variable modifications per peptide = 3, charges = +3 to +7 , cross-linker = BS3, cross-link mass = 138.0680796, mono-link masses = 156.07864431 and 155.094628715, linked residues = K and N-terminal. Additional filtering and post-processing was partly done with the TOPP tools IDFilter, IDMerger and TextExporter for OpenPepXL and xQuest output and otherwise with R scripts. An FDR cut-off of 5% on PSM level was applied to every tool. Additionally after this cut-off only unique residue pairs found in at least two of the remaining peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were kept. Also a filter for link distance was applied to intra-protein links. Linked residue pairs were only kept, if they were at least 4 residues apart in the database sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking MS (XL-MS) has been recognized as an effective source of information about protein structures and interactions. In contrast to regular peptide identification, XL-MS has to deal with a quadratic search space, where peptides from every protein could potentially be cross-linked to any other protein. To cope with this search space, most tools apply different heuristics for search space reduction. We introduce a new open-source XL-MS database search algorithm, OpenPepXL, which offers increased sensitivity compared with other tools. OpenPepXL searches the full search space of an XL-MS experiment without using heuristics to reduce it. Because of efficient data structures and built-in parallelization OpenPepXL achieves excellent runtimes and can also be deployed on large compute clusters and cloud services while maintaining a slim memory footprint. We compared OpenPepXL to several other commonly used tools for identification of noncleavable labeled and label-free cross-linkers on a diverse set of XL-MS experiments. In our first comparison, we used a data set from a fraction of a cell lysate with a protein database of 128 targets and 128 decoys. At 5% FDR, OpenPepXL finds from 7% to over 50% more unique residue pairs (URPs) than other tools. On data sets with available high-resolution structures for cross-link validation OpenPepXL reports from 7% to over 40% more structurally validated URPs than other tools. Additionally, we used a synthetic peptide data set that allows objective validation of cross-links without relying on structural information and found that OpenPepXL reports at least 12% more validated URPs than other tools. It has been built as part of the OpenMS suite of tools and supports Windows, macOS, and Linux operating systems. OpenPepXL also supports the MzIdentML 1.2 format for XL-MS identification results. It is freely available under a three-clause BSD license at https://openms.org/openpepxl.

### Keywords
Technical dataset, Bs3, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
1. Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany; 2. Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany; 3. Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of Tübingen, Germany; 4. Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany; 5. Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany
Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology

### Submitter
Eugen Netz

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Kohlbacher
1. Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany; 2. Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany; 3. Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of Tübingen, Germany; 4. Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany; 5. Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany


