### Accession
PXD027806

### Title
The life history of Drosophila sperm depends on molecular continuity between male and female reproductive tracts: heavy-female isotopic labeling to estimate abundances of female-derived sperm protein

### Description
Interactions between sperm and the female reproductive tract (FRT) are critical to fertility, but knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which the FRT interacts with sperm and influences sperm fate remains limited. Here, we used sex-specific isotopic labeling to estimate the relative abundance of female-derived sperm proteins after long-term storage in the female’s sperm storage organs. In combination with whole-cell quantitative proteomics to track the protein composition of sperm across three female reproductive tissues (bursa, seminal receptacle, and spermatheca) and three post-mating timepoints (30 minutes, 2 hours, and 4 days), as well as an expansion of the seminal vesicle sperm proteome, our data provide a comprehensive, quantitative analysis of the molecular life history of Drosophila sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Female flies were raised from embryos on media containing heavy labeled yeast (13C6 15N2 L-lysine and 13C6 15N4 L-arginine). Males were raised on standard cornmeal media. Heavy-labeled females and unlabeled males were collected and maintained as virgins on their respective media for 4-5 days prior to experiments. To collect sperm samples, 20 males were paired with 10 females in food vials for 90 minutes. Females were transferred the females to clean food vials and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen four days after mating. The lower reproductive tract of approximately 600 females were dissected in PBS, and the sperm in the seminal receptacle were isolated and pooled in PBS. Sperm samples were washed in PBS and pelleted by centrifugation.   Washed sperm samples were solubilized in 2X Laemmli buffer with TCEP and several cycles of heating and sonication. Solubilized samples were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation LC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting ions (range between 380-1500 Da) were measured at a resolution of 70,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (Top 20) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions at 32.5% NCE. Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 35,000. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis, and dynamic exclusion was 60s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were searched against the Drosophila melanogaster protein database (dmel-all-translation-r6.32, FlyBase.org), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org), using the standard workflow in PEAKS X+ (de novo + PEAKS DB + PEAKS PTM + SPIDER; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search database only included the longest protein sequence for genes with multiple isoforms. Spectral data were analyzed using the following search parameters: mass tolerance of 20 ppm for parent ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications, and up to three missed tryptic cleavages. Heavy lysine (13C6 15N2: 8.01), heavy arginine (13C6 15N4: 10.01), and the metabolic conversion of arginine to proline (R to P: 6.01) were also added as variable modifications to identify heavy-labeled female proteins. Heavy labeling of both lysine and arginine ensured that all tryptic peptides were heavy labeled, but we also applied a stringent peptide filter of -10lgP score ≥ 35 (equivalent to FDR < 0.01%) to minimize false positive identifications. Protein identifications were filtered further to a -10lgP score ≥ 20 and at least two unique PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceIn species with internal fertilization, sperm spend an important part of their lives within the female. To examine the life history of the sperm during this time, we used semiquantitative proteomics and sex-specific isotopic labeling in fruit flies to determine the extent of molecular continuity between male and female reproductive tracts and provide a global catalog of sperm-associated proteins. Multiple seminal fluid proteins and female proteins associate with sperm immediately after mating. Few seminal fluid proteins remain after long-term sperm storage, whereas female-derived proteins constitute one-fifth of the postmating sperm proteome by then. Our data reveal a molecular "hand-off" from males to females, which we postulate to be an important component of sperm-female interactions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Female reproductive tract, Fertility, Sperm, Silac, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Erin McCullough

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


