### Accession
PXD022005

### Title
Human prostate cancer and Lysine succinylation

### Description
: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed genital cancer in men worldwide. Among patients who developed advanced PCa, 80% suffered from bone metastasis, with a sharp drop in the survival rate.  Using quantitative global succinylome analysis, we characterized a significant increase of lysine 118 succinylation (K118su) of lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), which plays a role in increasing LDHA activity. As a substrate of SIRT5, LDHA-K118su significantly increased the migration and invasion of PCa cells and LDHA activity in PCa patients.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis. Sample preparation and in-solution tryptic digestion. Dishes of SILAC-labeled cancer cells were washed twice with PBS on ice and then scraped into 4% SDS lysis buffer with halt protease inhibitor cocktail, 4 M sodium butyrate, and 2 M nicotinamide as HDAC inhibitors. To ensure complete protein extraction, the cell lysates were disrupted by sonication at 4°C for 1 min and heated for 5 min at 98°C. Any unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was transferred to a low-protein binding E-tube. Proteins from PC-3 and PC-3M cells were measured using a BCA protein assay kit. The same amount of proteins from PC-3 and PC-3M cells were carefully mixed for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. The combined proteins were sequentially reduced and alkylated with 15 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and 60 mM IAA for 30 min at RT in the dark. The detergent and chemical reagents present in the protein mixture were removed after protein precipitation with 10% trichloroacetic acid for 4 h at 4°C. After centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C, the protein pellets were washed twice with 20°C acetone and then resuspended in 50 mM ABC buffer using sonication for 5 min on ice. To generate the peptides, the SILAC proteins were digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight on a rotator. A 10% solution of TFA was added to the peptides to a final concentration of 1% to stop the trypsin reaction. The reaction mixture was centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min to remove the enzyme and any undigested protein. Before immunoprecipitation to assess lysine succinylation, the peptides were cleaned using a C18 Sep-Pak according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The C18 3cc Sep-Pak was wetted with 3 mL of 100% ACN and 2 mL of 50% ACN. For equilibration, the Sep-Pak was washed three times by adding 2 mL water containing 0.1% TFA. The peptides were loaded slowly into the cartridge and then desalted three times using 2 mL water containing 0.1% TFA. The samples were eluted twice with 1 mL of 75% ACN containing 0.1% TFA each time and for a third time to maximize peptide recovery. The purified samples were dried using a speed-vacuum system. A quantitative colorimetric peptide assay was used to measure the amount of peptide in the samples. LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide fractionation for in-depth quantitative proteomics. To improve protein identification, the SILAC peptides were separated by two different processes, high-pH reverse-phase fractionation and 3100 OFFGEL fractionation. The fractionation of peptides was performed according to the manufacturer’s procedures. Briefly, peptides (100 μg) were made of 0.1% TEA in ACN and separated using high-pH reverse-phase fractionation kit using eight different elution buffers (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% ACN in 0.1% TFA). The eight samples were combined into four samples (e.g., fractions 1 and 5, 2 and 6, etc.). Peptides (200 μg) were separated by OFFGEL fractionation using high-resolution 24-well frame IPG strips (pH 3–10). These were also combined into 12 samples derived from 24 fractions. All fractionated samples were desalted using a C18 zip tip and completely dried using a speed-vacuum system before further analysis. Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. All samples were dissolved in solvent A (98% water in 0.1% FA). In particular, IP samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min to remove any remaining beads. Samples were analyzed using a high-resolution, accurate MS connected to the Eksigent nanoLC system. Peptide separation was conducted using a home-made C12 reverse-phase analytical column with a linear gradient of 0–23% solvent B (100% ACN in 0.1% FA) for 95 min, 23–90% solvent B for 9 min, and 90% solvent B for 6 min at a sustained flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-velos Orbitrap was operated in the top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS data were collected using the following settings: electrospray source voltage 1.8 kV and a 300°C capillary temperature; FTMS 300–1800 m/z range with 60,000 resolution (m/z 400); collision-induced dissociation mode at 28% NCE and an isolation width of 1.7 m/z; and 500 minimum signals were required for DDA. Lock mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was enabled to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics. Data analysis and bioinformatics for the succinylome. To identify proteins and Ksucc proteins, MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 to query the UniProtKB human database (including 71,772 protein sequences; 19029910). The search parameters used a full mass error of 20 ppm and an MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. Trypsin/p was used as the digestion enzyme, allowing for two missing cleavages. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine. For the proteomic search, the oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were set as the variable modifications. For succinylation analysis, Ksu was added as the variable modification. For quantification by SILAC, Lys8 (13C615N2) and Arg10 (13C615N4) were specified as the heavy labels (H) and Lys0 (12C614N2) and Arg0 (12C614N4) were set as the light labels (L). The SILAC pairs (H/L) were detected and quantified from full MS using MaxQuant software. The ratio determined the H/L and 2 of the minimum ratio count. The other parameters for MaxQuant were set to the default values. The search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of below 0.01, a MaxQuant score more than 40, discarding potential contaminants, and those only identified by a site modification. Also, Ksu sites were specified using a site localization probability of > 0.75. It should be noted that the Ksucc ratio was normalized to protein levels. All ratios of proteins and lysine succinylated peptides were converted to a log2 scale.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed genital cancer in men worldwide. Around 80% of the patients who developed advanced PCa suffered from bone metastasis, with a sharp drop in the survival rate. Despite great efforts, the detailed mechanisms underlying castration-resistant PCa (CRPC) remain unclear. Sirtuin 5 (SIRT5), an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent desuccinylase, is hypothesized to be a key regulator of various cancers. However, compared to other SIRTs, the role of SIRT5 in cancer has not been extensively studied. Here, we revealed significantly decreased SIRT5 levels in aggressive PCa cells relative to the PCa stages. The correlation between the decrease in the SIRT5 level and the patient's reduced survival rate was also confirmed. Using quantitative global succinylome analysis, we characterized a significant increase in the succinylation at lysine 118 (K118su) of lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), which plays a role in increasing LDH activity. As a substrate of SIRT5, LDHA-K118su significantly increased the migration and invasion of PCa cells and LDH activity in PCa patients. This study reveals the reduction of SIRT5 protein expression and LDHA-K118su as a novel mechanism involved in PCa progression, which could serve as a new target to prevent CPRC progression for PCa treatment.

### Keywords
Lysine succinylation, Metastasis, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University


