### Accession
PXD000874

### Title
Cardiac myofilament isoforms -  Identification of cardiac myofilament protein isoforms using multiple mass spectrometry based approaches

### Description
Purpose: The identification of protein isoforms in complex biological samples is challenging. We, therefore, used a mass spectrometry (MS) approach to unambiguously identify cardiac myofilament protein isoforms based on the observation of a tryptic peptide consisting of a sequence unique to a particular isoform. Experimental design: Three different workflows were used to isolate and fractionate the rat cardiac myofilament subproteomes. All fractions were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap MS, proteins were identified using various search engines (Mascot, X!Tandem, X!Tandem Kscore and OMSSA) with results combined via PepArML Meta-Search Engine, and a post-search analysis performed by MASPECTRAS. Results: The combination of multiple workflows and search engines resulted in a larger number of non-redundant proteins identified than individual methods. A total of 461 proteins were observed overlapping in two or three of the workflows. Literature search for myofilament presence with manual validation of the MS spectra was carried out for unambiguous identification: 10 cardiac myofilament and 17 cardiac myofilament-associated proteins were confirmed to have multiple isoforms or sub-isoforms. Conclusion and clinical relevance:  We have identified multiple isoforms of myofilament proteins that are present in cardiac tissue using unique tryptic peptides. Changes of distribution of these protein isoforms under pathological conditions could ultimately allow for clinical diagnostics or as therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction methods of the myofilament subproteome The first method used to isolate cardiac muscle myofibrils was according to the original preparation by Solaro et al. using Triton X-100 [10]. Briefly, tissue from a rat heart (Pel Freeze Biologicals) was homogenized in 75 mM KCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM NaN3, 10 mM imidazole, 4 mM phosphocreatine, 1 mM ATP, 50 mM BDM, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM benzaamidine-HCI, pH 7.2 (commonly termed relax buffer [11]) with 1% Triton X-100, 0.1 M EDTA and 1/100 µl phosphatase inhibitor II (Sigma) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) added. Homogenates were centrifuged at 3,000g for 5 min at 4ºC and the supernatant fraction removed. The pellet was resuspended in a 75 mM KCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM NaN3, 10 mM imidazole, pH 7.2 (also called rigor buffer) containing 1% Triton X-100 and the same protease and phosphatase inhibitors added to the buffer as with the relax buffer. The pellet after centrifugation at 3,000 g for 5 min at 4ºC was washed two times in rigor buffer without Triton X-100 added followed by one wash in relax buffer without Triton X-100. After the last washing step, the pellet was dissolved in Loading buffer (Invitrogen) containing 2% SDS and 0.1 M DTT.  A second method to obtain the myofilament subproteome was a modified version of the “IN Sequence” subproteomic extraction method, which uses only one buffer extraction to remove the cytoplasmic and soluble proteins [9]. Briefly, rat heart tissues were homogenized at 4ºC at the ratio of tissue weight:buffer volume = 1:4 (whole tissue homogenate) in 20 mM Tris (pH6.8) and 2mM EDTA with 1/100 µl protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma). The homogenate was centrifuged at 3000g and the pellet homogenated in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 1mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (pH 2.3). After the pellet was homogenized, it was spun down and the supernatant collected. This soluble fraction is highly enriched for the myofilament proteins. Protein concentrations for both the Triton X-100 and “IN Sequence” myofilament enriched samples were determined using the CB-X assay (G-Biosciences) in triplicate and the samples aliquoted and stored at -80ºC until further use.   Protein fractionation High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC): The “IN Sequence” separated myofilament fractions were mixed with solvent to a final concentration of 20% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 1% (v/v) TFA, pH 2.3 and centrifuged at 18000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. 100μg (total protein) was resolved on a reversed phase C8 column (4.6mm id x 76mm, 80 Å pore size, particle size 3µm, Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA) with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min and monitored at 214 nm. The optimal separation was achieved using a linear AB gradient from 20-70 % in which solvent A consisted of 0.6% aqueous TFA and solvent B was 0.45 % TFA in ACN. The column was regenerated using a 7 minute 70-100% linear A/C gradient where solvent C was composed of 2% TFA in isopropanol:acetonitrile (1:4 v/v)) prior re-equilibration in starting buffer. One minute fractions were collected, concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator (ThermoSauvant) to 5-10 μL, and neutralized by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (1 M) raising the pH of the sample to 8.0.  1-DE: The myofilament samples obtained from either Triton X-100 or “IN Sequence” separation methods were diluted in 2x sample buffer (invitrogen) with 2% SDS and 0.1M DTT to a concentration of 1 µg/µL. 20µg of protein homogenate was separated on a 4-12% SDS gradient gel. The gels were fixated using 5% acetic acid and stained using Colloidal Coomassie Blue staining (Biorad). The gel bands were cut in 8 pieces for fractionation purposes.  Protein digestion Neutralized HPLC fractions were digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:20) (Promega, Madison, WI) and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. In gel digestion was carried out as previously described [11, 12]. Eluted peptides were dried and then desalted using an Omix C18 tip column (Varian) following the manufacturer's protocol.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Each trypsin digested sample was analyzed on an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a C18 RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 10 cm self-packed with 5 μm, 200 Å Magic C18; MichromBio Resources, Auburn, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL / min where mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 90% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water. Initial loading condition was 2% B for 8.5 minutes at a flow rate of 2 µL/min to allow for equilibration and for samples to reach the column, followed by a linear gradient of 10-45% B over 60 minutes, 45-65% B over 11 minutes and 65-95% B over 2 minutes. Each MS1 scan was followed by collision induced dissociation (CID, acquired in the LTQ part) of the 5 most abundant precursor ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 seconds and exclusion duration of 60 seconds. Only MS1 signals exceeding 1000 counts triggered the MS2 scans and +1 and unassigned charge states were not selected for MS2 analysis. For MS1, 2x105 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 500 ms and scanned at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (from 375-2000 m/z). MS2 spectra were acquired in normal scan mode in the LTQ with a target setting of 104 ions and accumulation time of 30 milliseconds. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% and one microscan was acquired for each spectra.  Database searching and processing MS raw data were converted to mzXML format using msConvert 2.2.2814 from ProteoWizard [13]. Data were uploaded and searched using the PepArML Meta-Search engine [14] that includes Mascot [15], OMSSA [16] and X!Tandem [17] with native and K-Score pluggable scoring modules against the concatenated target/decoy rat Uniprot database release date 2011-10-05, version 2011_09 [18, 19]. The search was performed with the following parameters: Trypsin-based digestion with a maximum of one missed cleavage; parent-ion mass tolerance of 2.0 Da; fragment-ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; a fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Met Oxidation, Phosphorylation (ST), Phosphorylation (Y) and Pyro-carbamidomethyl (N-term C). The results from the search were subsequently processed through the PepArML result combiner that merges all the search results together and estimates the statistical significance of the end-result using the decoy searches. The PepArML combined search results as well as the individual X!Tandem, Mascot and OMSSA search results were parsed and analyzed using MASPECTRAS 2  at a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% with proteins identified by one or more unique peptides [20]. Furthermore, the CD-HIT clustering tool was used to cluster highly similar proteins with sequence homology above 90% over the entire protein [21]. A Blastp search was additionally performed on uncharacterized protein hits to resolve multiple protein name assignments for the same peptide sequence [22]. The isoform validation process was performed by a preliminary sequence homology comparison of all the isoforms and splice variants of the primary protein of interest from Human, Mouse and Rat using Clustal Omega Program [23] followed by the manual spectral validation of all the identified isoform-specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple search engines, Protein isoforms, Myofilament proteome, Protein sub-isoforms, Cardiomyocyte, Rat cardiac tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Sarcomere, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Cedar-Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute Advanced Health Science Pavillion, Room A9307 8700 Beverly Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90048

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer E Van Eyk
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute Advanced Health Science Pavillion, Room A9307 8700 Beverly Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90048


