### Accession
PXD023579

### Title
K27-linked ubiquitylation promotes p97 substrate processing and is essential for cell proliferation

### Description
Conjugation of ubiquitin (Ub) to numerous substrate proteins regulates virtually all cellular processes. Eight distinct ubiquitin polymer linkages specifying different functional outcomes are generated in cells. However, the roles of some atypical poly-ubiquitin topologies, in particular linkages via lysine 27 (K27), remain poorly understood due to a lack of tools for their specific detection and manipulation. Here, we adapted a cell-based ubiquitin replacement strategy to enable selective and conditional abrogation of K27-linked ubiquitylation, revealing that this ubiquitin linkage type is essential for proliferation of human cells. We demonstrate that K27-linked ubiquitylation is predominantly a nuclear modification whose ablation deregulates nuclear ubiquitylation dynamics and impairs cell cycle progression in an epistatic manner with inactivation of the ATPase p97/VCP. Moreover, we show that a p97-proteasome pathway model substrate (Ub(G76V)-GFP) is directly modified by K27-linked ubiquitylation, and that disabling the formation of K27-linked ubiquitin signals or blocking their decoding via overexpression of the K27 linkage-specific binder UCHL3 impedes Ub(G76V)-GFP turnover at the level of p97 function. Our findings suggest a critical role of K27-linked ubiquitylation in supporting cell fitness by facilitating p97-dependent processing of ubiquitylated nuclear proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome sample preparation Snap-frozen sample pellets were lysed in 20% [v/v] 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 supplemented with 5 mM DTT and heated for 10 min at 95 °C. Lysates were sonicated in a Biorupter (Diagenode) for 15 min prior to addition of 25 mM chloroacetamide and incubated for 20 min. Samples were eluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (1:50) overnight at 37 °C at 1500 rpm. Peptides were desalted and purified with styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) StageTips prepared in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were washed and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN); 1% ammonia prior to vacuum-drying. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. Affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) sample preparation HA-tag affinity purification was performed as described above. Partial on-bead digest was performed using 2 M urea; 2 mM DTT; 20 g/ml Trypsin; 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 incubated at 37 °C for 30 min at 1,400 rpm. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes, alkylated with 25 mM chloroacetamide and further digested overnight at RT. Digestion was terminated with 1% TFA. Peptides were desalted subject to SDB-RPS StageTipping and eluted as for whole proteome samples. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Nanoflow LC-MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC1200 system (Thermo) via a nano-electrospray ion source. Approx. 0.25 µg of sample was loaded on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75-μm inner diameter, New Objective, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5% to 60% solvent B (80% CAN; 0.1% formic acid) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Run duration was 100 min (whole proteome) or 60 min (AP-MS). Column temperature was maintained at 60 °C. Peptide detection occurred using ‘top-15’ (whole proteome) or ‘top-10’ (AP-MS) data-dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300–1650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. The most intense ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 1x105 and a maximum ion injection time of 28 ms (whole proteome) or 50 ms (AP-MS). Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw file processing and bioinformatic analyses MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.5.0.38). The integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of <1%. The human UniProtKB database (October 2017) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. A modified ubiquitin sequence substituting lysine at position 27 with arginine (K27R substitution) was included. A minimum threshold of 7 amino acids was used for peptide identification. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group (Cox and Mann, 2008). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Protein ratios were determined based on median peptide ratios and only common peptides were used for pair-wise ratio calculations. The ‘match-between-runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across runs based on high mass accuracy and normalized retention times. Prior to data analysis, proteins found as reverse hits or only identified by site-modification, were filtered out. All statistical and bioinformatic analyses were performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) or the R framework (https://www.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
While a significant fraction of topological materials has been characterized using symmetry requirements<sup>1-4</sup>, the past two years have witnessed the rise of novel multi-gap dependent topological states<sup>5-9</sup>, the properties of which go beyond these approaches and are yet to be fully explored. Although already of active interest at equilibrium<sup>10-15</sup>, we show that the combination of out-of-equilibrium processes and multi-gap topological insights galvanize a new direction within topological phases of matter. We show that periodic driving can induce anomalous multi-gap topological properties that have no static counterpart. In particular, we identify Floquet-induced non-Abelian braiding, which in turn leads to a phase characterized by an anomalous Euler class, being the prime example of a multi-gap topological invariant. Most strikingly, we also retrieve the first example of an 'anomalous Dirac string phase'. This gapped out-of-equilibrium phase features an unconventional Dirac string configuration that physically manifests itself via anomalous edge states on the boundary. Our results not only provide a stepping stone for the exploration of intrinsically dynamical and experimentally viable multi-gap topological phases, but also demonstrate periodic driving as a powerful way to observe these non-Abelian braiding processes notably in quantum simulators.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, K27, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Protein Signaling Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Niels Mailand
Protein Signaling Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


