### Accession
PXD012837

### Title
IP-MS analysis

### Description
It has recently been shown that HSV-1 infection induces widespread defect in host gene transcription termination while viral genes are unaffected. However, The underlying mechanism remain poorly understood. According to our sequencing data, ICP27 as an immediate early protein of HSV-1 was involved in disrupting host transcription termination.  To elucidate the underlying mechanism, we performed IP-MS to figure out interaction proteins with ICP27. Other than export proteins, 3’ end processing factors strongly associated with ICP27 based on this IP-MS data. Pre-mRNA 3’ end processing is required for transcription termination. As expected, this MS data as well as our in vitro and in vivo data suggested that ICP27 functions in pre-mRNA 3’ end processing to regulate transcription termination in a sequence dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were plated in 10-cm dishes to be 100% confluence on the day of infection. HSV-1 and ICP27-deleted HSV-1 (27LacZ) were used to infect Hela cells at MOI=10. Cells were harvested at 8 hours post infection and re-suspended in 1 ml IP buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1% Triton X-100 and 0.5% NP-40, 1 x protease inhibitor and 10 μg RNase A/T1). 3 μg of ICP27 antibody (P1119) and 30 μl protein G magnetic beads were added in cell lysate after sonication and centrifugation. Beads were heated in 25 μl 1 x SDS loading buffer at 95 oC for 5 min after binding and washing. Samples were run in 10% SDS-PAGE and stopped until all proteins entered separating gel. The gel pieces containing proteins were cut out and washed with water before cutting into small pieces. Proteins were digested in-gel by trypsin at 37C overnight and peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were desalted, separated by nano-HPLC on Proxeon Easy nLC1000 and analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was completed by searching the human and viral Uniprot protein database with Maxquant software with a false discovery rate of 1% for protein identification using reverse decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Infection by viruses, including herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), and cellular stresses cause widespread disruption of transcription termination (DoTT) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) in host genes. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the HSV-1 immediate early protein ICP27 induces DoTT by directly binding to the essential mRNA 3' processing factor CPSF. It thereby induces the assembly of a dead-end 3' processing complex, blocking mRNA 3' cleavage. Remarkably, ICP27 also acts as a sequence-dependent activator of mRNA 3' processing for viral and a subset of host transcripts. Our results unravel a bimodal activity of ICP27 that plays a key role in HSV-1-induced host shutoff and identify CPSF as an important factor that mediates regulation of transcription termination. These findings have broad implications for understanding the regulation of transcription termination by other viruses, cellular stress and cancer.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, 3’ end processing, Icp27, Hsv

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities


