### Accession
PXD029904

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based characterization of SET1/COMPASS complex in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Changes in histone post-translational modifications are associated with aging through poorly defined mechanisms. Histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation at promoters is deposited by SET1 family methyltransferases acting within conserved multiprotein complexes known as COMPASS. Using co-immunopurification coupled to mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we characterized complex members and binding partners in various genetic contexts, using WDR-5 or CFP-1 proteins as baits.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations were performed on frozen embryos prepared by hypochlorite treatment from animals grown at 20°C on enriched NGM seeded with concentrated HB101 bacteria. After hypochlorite treatment embryos were washed once in IP buffer (50 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7,5; 300 mM KCl; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM MgCl2; 0.2% Igepal-CA630 and 10% glycerol) and flash-frozen in beads in liquid nitrogen. Embryos were then grounded to powder, resupended in IP buffer containing complete protease inhibitors (Roche) and sonicated on ice at an amplitude of 30% for 2.5 min (15’’ON/ 15’’OFF pulses) using an Ultrasonic Processor (Bioblock Scientific). Protein extracts were recovered in the supernantant after centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4°C.  For CFP-1 interactome analysis, CFP-1 was fused to GFP. Then, 70 mg of total protein extract was incubated for preclearing with 200μL slurry of binding control magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek bmab-20) in IP buffer for 1h at 4°C. Then 200 μl of GFP-TRAP MA beads slurry (Chromotek) were added to each sample and incubation continued for additional 3h on a rotator. Beads were collected with a magnet, washed three times in IP buffer and once in Benzo buffer (HEPES/KOH 50 mM pH 7,5; KCl 150 mM; EDTA 1 mM; MgCl2 1 mM; Igepal-CA630 0.2%; glycerol 10%). Beads were then incubated in 400 μl of Benzo buffer containing 2,500 units of benzonase (Sigma) for 1 h at 4°C and washed three times in IP buffer. Eluates were recovered by incubation at 95°C for 10 min in 60 μl of 1x LDS buffer (Thermo Fischer). The IP was performed from animals with wild-type background in which CFP-1 was not tagged with GFP (Ctrl) and in which CFP-1 was tagged with GFP (WT), and from animals expressing GFP-CFP-1 in different backgrounds (ok952 in which set-2 is mutated but catalytically active and animals undergo longer lifespan, and syb2085 in which set-2 is catalytically inactive). For WDR-5 interactome analysis, WDR-5 was fused to HA-tag. Then, 60 mg of total protein extract was incubated with protein G agarose beads [Sigma-Aldrich] in Bio-Spin Chromatography columns [Bio-Rad] for 30 min at 4°C on a rotator. Flow-through was collected and incubated with 240 µl slurry of anti-HA affinity matrix beads [Roche] in a fresh Bio-Spin Chromatography column for 90 min at 4°C on a rotator. The matrix was washed three times in IP buffer at 4°C and once in Benzo buffer (HEPES/KOH 50 mM pH 7,5; KCl 150 mM; EDTA 1 mM; MgCl2 1 mM; Igepal-CA630 0.2%; glycerol 10%). The matrix was then incubated in 400 µl of Benzo buffer containing 2500 units of benzonase [Sigma] for 1 h at 4°C and washed three times in IP buffer. Four successive elutions were performed at 37°C for 15 min each with HA peptide (250 µg/ml in 240 µl of IP buffer). The first three eluates were pooled and concentrated 20 times (final volume 35 µl) using a 10 kDa Amicon Ultra centrifugal device [Merck]. The IP was performed from animals with wild-type background in which WDR-5 was not tagged with HA (WT_Ctrl) and in which WDR-5 was tagged with HA (WT_WDR5), and from animals with modified background (set-2 null mutant, Del-set2_Ctrl and Del-set2_WDR5). The eluted proteins were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (respectively UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF and UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific, for CFP-1 and WDR-5 IP eluates). For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on 75 µm x 150 mm and 75 µm x 250 mm C18 columns (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch for CFP-1 IP eluates and PepMap C18, 3 µm, Thermo Scientific for WDR-5 IP eluates) using 120-min gradients. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.7.0.1, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Caenorhabditis elegans taxonomy), a homemade classical database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm for Q-Exactive HF data, and 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro data. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, peptide-spectrum-match score ≥ 25, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation and grouping of the protein groups identified in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Nanolc-ms/ms, Interactome, Set1/compass complex

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


