### Accession
PXD037846

### Title
Acclimation strategies of the green alga Chlorella vulgaris to different light regimes revealed by physiologic and comparative proteomic analysis

### Description
Acclimation to different light regimes is at the base of survival for photosynthetic organisms regardless their evolutive origin. This study investigated the consequences of acclimation to different irradiances in Chlorella vulgaris, focusing on both photosynthetic and mitochondrial activities. Proteomic analysis of cells acclimated to high light or low light allowed to identify the main targets of acclimation in terms of differentially expressed proteins. The results obtained demonstrate photosynthetic adaptation to high vs. low light. Increased mitochondrial respiration measured in high light acclimated cells mainly relied on alternative oxidative pathway dissipating the reducing power produced in excess due to enhanced carbon flow. Finally, proteins involved in cell metabolism, intracellular transport, gene expression and signaling, were identified as strongly differently expressed in high vs. low light suggesting their key role in acclimation to different light regimes.

### Sample Protocol
Chlorella vulgaris cells were mechanically disrupted prior to a protein extraction step. Proteins were subsequently precipitated with acetone, resuspended, and sample protein amounts was measured utilizing BSA as standard.Proteins were then reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin and purified. The resulting peptides were resusupended in LC-MS buffer prior to LC-MS analysis in directDIA mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data was processed using the Spectronaut software package (Version 15, Biognosys) against a Chlorella vulgaris protein database in directDIA mode. A dataset containing potential protein contaminants as well as sequences of iRT peptides used for retention time normalization was utilized in the Spectronaut data processing. Further data processing was performed in the R statistical environment. For each protein, the obtained quantification values, for its quantified peptides and charge states, were summed. Proteins with missing values in less than 50% of the samples were retained. Data were log-transformed and normalized for equal medians across all samples. For the detection of differentially expressed proteins, a linear model was fitted for the treatment and control groups and p-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach. The Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) method was used to correct for multiple hypotheses testing. GO term related to protein found differentially expressed in cells grown in HL or LL light were grouped using the plant slim subset and visualized using REVIGO, where dots size correspond to the number of genes related to each GO slim term.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Chlorella vulgaris, Dia

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International
Philip Morris Products SA Neuchatel, Switzerland

### Submitter
catherine Nury

### Lab Head
Dr Bjoern Titz
Philip Morris Products SA Neuchatel, Switzerland


