### Accession
PXD015488

### Title
Gcn5 and Esa1 function as histone crotonyltransferases to regulate crotonylation-dependent transcription

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are critical for processes such as transcription. The more notable among these are the non-acetyl histone lysine acylation modifications such as crotonylation, butyrylation and succinylation. However, the biological relevance of these PTMs is not fully understood because their regulation is largely unknown. Here, we set out to investigate whether the main histone acetyltransferases in budding yeast, Gcn5 and Esa1, possess crotonyltransferase activity. In vitro studies revealed that the Gcn5-Ada2-Ada3 (ADA) and Esa1-Yng2-Epl1 (Piccolo NuA4) histone acetyltransferase complexes have the capacity to crotonylate histones. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that ADA and Piccolo NuA4 crotonylate lysines in the N-terminal tails of histone H3 and H4, respectively. Functionally, we show that crotonylation selectively affects gene transcription in vivo in a manner dependent on Gcn5 and Esa1. Thus, we identify the Gcn5- and Esa1-containing ADA and Piccolo NuA4 complexes as bona fide crotonyltransferases that promote crotonylation-dependent transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices containing histone H3 or H4 protein were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide using Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Next, lysines were modified with acetic acid anhydride in order to block excessive tryptic cleavage of the arginine and lysine rich histone proteins. We used deuterated acetic acid anhydride to discriminate between acetylation by the Gcn5-Ada2-Ada3 and Esa1-Yng2-Epl1 complexes and the blocking agent. Slices were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature in 20 %(v/v) acetic anhydride-d6 (Sigma Aldrich 175641), 60 %(v/v) methanol and 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4. Next, they were washed with three times with acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4 prior to protein digestion with trypsin. Peptides were lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid and subsequently analyzed by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 10% to 40% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 30 min. The nano-HPLC column was Gcn5 and Esa1 function as histone crotonyltransferases 7 drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 32 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400- 1500, at an AGC target of 400,000 @maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion after n=1 with exclusion duration of 10 s. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da. First mass was set to 110 Da. The MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 with an AGC target of 50,000 @maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot database (452772 entries) using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (Matrix Science) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Methionine oxidation and D6- acetylation, acetylation and crotonylation of lysines were set as variable modification. Carbamidomethyl on cysteïne was set as a fixed modification. All reported acetylated and crotonylated spectra were also inspected manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crotonylation, Gcn5-ada2-ada3 (ada) complex, Epigenetics, Esa1- yng2-epl1 (piccolo nua4) complex, Histone modification, Gene transcription

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Dr. P.A. van Veelen LUMC Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Head Proteomics group

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr P.A. van Veelen
Dr. P.A. van Veelen LUMC Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Head Proteomics group


