### Accession
PXD033740

### Title
Target deconvolution in Plasmodium falciparum using pulldowns

### Description
Parasite lysates were centrifuged (20,000 g, 4°C, 15 min). Beads (blank and with linker attached) were washed 3× with water then twice with lysis buffer. The lysate (~2 mg total protein) was first incubated with 2 mg blank beads for 30 min at 4°C with rotating agitation. The lysate was divided into two then incubated with either 1% DMSO or 100 µM DDD01510706 (competitor) for 30 min at 4°C with agitation. Finally, lysates were incubated with 2 mg of compound-bound beads for 1 h at 4°C with agitation. The beads were then washed 3× with wash buffer (0.8% (w/v) octyl β-D-glucopyranoside, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mg/mL BSA) and 2× Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). Samples were run 1.5 cm into a Bis-Tris 10% (w/v) acrylamide gel and stained with Coomassie quick reagent for 30 min. The entire gel bands were removed and subjected to in-gel reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide and digestion with 12.5 μg/mL trypsin (Pierce) for >16 h at 37°C. Recovered tryptic peptides were then vacuum dried prior to analysis

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of peptides was performed on a Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used were as follows:  Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). Aliquots of each sample (10 μL) were loaded at 15 µL/min onto a trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 10% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 10% buffer B to 18% buffer B in 89 min, then to 27% Buffer B at 134 min and finally to 90% at 139 min. The column was then washed with 90% buffer B for 10 min and re-equilibrated in 10% buffer B for 25 min. Orbitrap Eclipse was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 380-1500, with an automatic maximum ion injection time, a resolution of 120,000 and a standard automatic gain control (AGC) target value) followed by sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, maximum ion injection time at 50 ms and standard AGC target) and MS3 scans (with a resolution of 50,000, an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, maximum injection time at 120 ms and 400% AGC target). The real-time search feature was active during the analysis. To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the resulting MS data was performed using the software MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 2.0.3.0). Carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ) and Gln-> pyro-Glu were set as a variable modification. The P. falciparum 3D7 (plasmodb.org, version 49) and the human proteomes (uniprot.org, 9606) were used in protein searches. Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Reporter ion MS3 mode was selected using the TMT-10plex labels on N-terminus and lysine. Protein abundance was calculated according to the normalized reporter ion intensities. The FDR threshold for peptides and proteins was 0.01. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, FTMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
There is a pressing need for new medicines to prevent and treat malaria. Most antimalarial drug discovery is reliant upon phenotypic screening. However, with the development of improved target validation strategies, target-focused approaches are now being utilized. Here, we describe the development of a toolkit to support the therapeutic exploitation of a promising target, lysyl tRNA synthetase (<i>Pf</i>KRS). The toolkit includes resistant mutants to probe resistance mechanisms and on-target engagement for specific chemotypes; a hybrid KRS protein capable of producing crystals suitable for ligand soaking, thus providing high-resolution structural information to guide compound optimization; chemical probes to facilitate pulldown studies aimed at revealing the full range of specifically interacting proteins and thermal proteome profiling (TPP); as well as streamlined isothermal TPP methods to provide unbiased confirmation of on-target engagement within a biologically relevant milieu. This combination of tools and methodologies acts as a template for the development of future target-enabling packages.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Pulldown, Drug target, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Principal Investigator, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Victoriano Corpas-Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Wyllie
Principal Investigator, University of Dundee


