### Accession
PXD013305

### Title
THE EFFECTS OF SPACE FLIGHT FACTORS ON THE HUMAN PLASMA PROTEOME, INCLUDING BOTH REAL SPACE MISSIONS AND GROUND-BASED MODEL EXPERIMENTS.

### Description
The aim of the study was to continue of the proteomic data accumulation on the effects of  space flight factors on the human body, including ground-based model experiments. Blood plasma samples were collected from 5 healthy men included in the 21 days head-down bed rest experiment (HDBR) and 5 volunteers participating in a 21 day long dry immersion  experiment.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis samples were prepared via the FASP[18] protocol using 10kDa filters. Plasma proteins were reduced with 0.1 М DTT in 8 M Urea (pH 8.5); alkylated with 0.55M iodoacetamide and digested using trypsin (17 hours, 37C).   The tryptic peptide fraction (injection volume 2 uL) was analyzed in triplicate on a nano-HPLC Dionex Ultimate3000 system (Thermo) coupled to a MaXis 4G (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) using a nanospray ion source(positive ion mode, 1600 V). HPLC separation was performed on a C18 capillary column (75 µm x 50cm, C18, 3µm, 100 A) at a flow rate of 0.3 uL/min by gradient elution with the mobile phase A being 0.1%formic acid in water and mobile phase B - 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The separation was carried out by a 120-min gradient (H2O/ACN containing 0.1% of formic acid) from 3% to 90% of ACN.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant (v 1.5.4.1) [19] program against the SwissProt Human database with the initial precursor mass error – 10 ppm. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to 7 amino acids; the match between the runs option was activated. The cutoff false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides was set to 0.01 (1% FDR). At least two unique peptide identifications per protein were required. Label free quantitative analysis was performed in order to determine the significantly changed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of the study was to compare proteomic data on the effects of spaceflight factors on the human body, including both real space missions and ground-based experiments. LC-MS/MS-based proteomic analysis of blood plasma samples obtained from 13 cosmonauts before and after long-duration (169-199 days) missions on the International Space Station (ISS) and for five healthy men included in 21-day-long head-down bed rest (HDBR) and dry immersion experiments were performed. The semi-quantitative label-free analysis revealed significantly changed proteins: 19 proteins were significantly different on the first (+1) day after landing with respect to background levels; 44 proteins significantly changed during HDBR and 31 changed in the dry immersion experiment. Comparative analysis revealed nine common proteins (<i>A1BG, A2M, SERPINA1, SERPINA3, SERPING1, SERPINC1, HP, CFB, TF</i>), which changed their levels after landing, as well as in both ground-based experiments. Common processes, such as platelet degranulation, hemostasis, post-translational protein phosphorylation and processes of protein metabolism, indicate common pathogenesis in ground experiments and during spaceflight. Dissimilarity in the lists of significantly changed proteins could be explained by the differences in the dynamics of effective development in the ground-based experiments. Data are available via ProteomeXchange using the identifier PXD013305.

### Keywords
Spaceflight, Extreme conditions, Ground-base experiments, Proteomics, Head down bed rest, Dry immersion, Astronauts, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
MIPT
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Kononikhin
MIPT


