### Accession
PXD031907

### Title
T-cell-derived Hodgkin lymphoma has motility characteristics intermediate between Hodgkin and anaplastic large cell lymphoma

### Description
Global proteomics profiling of anaplastic large cell lymphoma cell lines DEL, SU-DHL-1 (ALK+), Mac-1, Mac-2A (ALK-) as well as Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines L-428, L-540, L-1236 and HDLM-2.

### Sample Protocol
All cell lines underwent quantitative proteomics based on tandem mass tagging (TMT). For this, 5x106 cells were harvested and lysed in urea buffer as previously described.  After protein extraction and digestion with trypsin, peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The individually labeled peptides were combined in multiplexed samples. For normalization among multiplexes an internal reference was included consisting of peptides from each condition. After pre-fractionation using a high-pH C18 reversed-phase kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the TMT-labeled peptide mixtures were separated by C18-reversed-phase-HPLC on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides eluting from the analytical column were analyzed by nano-ESI Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry on a Fusion Lumos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0, MPI for Biochemistry). This included protein identification by searching mass spectra against the Uniprot human protein database (downloaded in February 2019) and a collection of common lab contaminants followed by extraction of TMT reporter ion intensities for protein quantitation. After recalibration, the mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethlyation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, allowing up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Both on the peptide and protein level a maximum FDR of 1% was applied using a reversed decoy database. For downstream data processing with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7, MPI for Biochemistry) potential contaminants, proteins identified solely with modified peptides and hits to the decoy database were removed. After normalization of TMT reporter ion intensities across multiplexed samples the data was subjected to unsupervised hierachical clustering based on the Euclidean distance and average linkage method, either using all quantified protein groups or after mapping motility-related proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is usually characterized by a low tumour cell content, derived from crippled germinal centre B cells. Rare cases have been described in which the tumour cells show clonal T-cell receptor rearrangements. From a clinicopathological perspective, it is unclear if these cases should be classified as cHL or anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma (ALCL). Since we recently observed differences in the motility of ALCL and cHL tumour cells, here, we aimed to obtain a better understanding of T-cell-derived cHL by investigating their global proteomic profiles and their motility. In a proteomics analysis, when only motility-associated proteins were regarded, T-cell-derived cHL cell lines showed the highest similarity to ALK<sup>-</sup> ALCL cell lines. In contrast, T-cell-derived cHL cell lines presented a very low overall motility, similar to that observed in conventional cHL. Whereas all ALCL cell lines, as well as T-cell-derived cHL, predominantly presented an amoeboid migration pattern with uropod at the rear, conventional cHL never presented with uropods. The migration of ALCL cell lines was strongly impaired upon application of different inhibitors. This effect was less pronounced in cHL cell lines and almost invisible in T-cell-derived cHL. In summary, our cell line-derived data suggest that based on proteomics and migration behaviour, T-cell-derived cHL is a neoplasm that shares features with both cHL and ALCL and is not an ALCL with low tumour cell content. Complementary clinical studies on this lymphoma are warranted.

### Keywords
Cell motility, Global proteome, Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt Dr. Senckenberg Institute of Pathology Frankfurt am Main Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Sylvia Hartmann

### Lab Head
Dr Sylvia Hartmann
Goethe University Frankfurt Dr. Senckenberg Institute of Pathology Frankfurt am Main Germany


