### Accession
PXD002977

### Title
Human HDL 2D-LC-MS/MS -  Proteome profiles of HDL particles of patients with chronic heart failure are associated with immune response and also include bacteria proteins

### Description
Besides modulation of reverse cholesterol transport, high density lipoprotein (HDL) is able to modulate vascular function by stimulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Recently, it could be documented that this function of HDL was significantly impaired in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). We investigated the impact of HDL proteome in CHF patients. Therefore, HDL was isolated from 5 controls (HDLhealthy) and 5 CHF patients of NYHA-class IIIb (HDLCHF). Proteome of HDL particles was performed by two-dimensional liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (SCX/RP LC-MS/MS). In total, we identified 494 distinct proteins, of which 107 proteins were commonly found in both groups (HDLCHF and HDLhealthy) indicating a high inter-subject variability across HDL particles. Several important proteins (e.g. ITGA2, APBA1 or A2M) varied in level. Functional analysis revealed intracellular regulated pathways. A minor proportion of bacteria-derived proteins were identified in the analyzed HDL-particles. The extension of the list of HDL-associated proteins allows beside their mere description new insights into alterations in HDL function in diseases. In addition, the detection of bacterial proteins bound to HDL will broaden our view of HDL not only as a cholesterol carrier but also as a carrier of several regulating proteins and even bacterial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HDL was isolated from frozen serum obtained from controls (HDLhealthy), and CHF patients (HDLCHF) by sequential density ultracentrifugation (d=1.006–1.21 g/mL). Quality of isolated HDL was evaluated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining as well as by Western blot analysis.  In total, 5 µg of protein extracts were diluted with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of less than 1 M urea. Samples were reduced (2.5 mM DTT ultrapure (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 1 h at 60°C) and alkylated (10 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo, USA) for 30 min at 37°C) as described [46]. Briefly, proteolysis was performed overnight using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were separated by online strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation using 2D salt steps on a nano column (Poros 10S, 300 µm x 10 cm, nanoViper, SCX, 10 µm) via an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific, former Dionex, Idstein, Germany). 5 µg of tryptically digested peptides were loaded and subsequently eluted in 7 fractions using salt plug concentrations ranging from 2 mM NaCl to 500 mM NaCl by injection of 12 µL salt buffer. Tryptic peptides were loaded on a trap-column with 75 μm inner diameter, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Scientific) and analyzed using a 15 cm analytical column packed with 2 μm C18 particles (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Reversed phase chromatography was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% acetic acid, 2% ACN (buffer A) and 100% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of buffer B from 2% up to 25% for 30 min for SCX prefractionated samples with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The columns were operated at a constant temperature of 40°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via the TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences, Norwich, UK). The MS-instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS settings were as follow: survey full-scan spectra were acquired with a resolution R = 70,000 automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 ions, the maximum injection time was set to 250 ms. MS/MS scan events were repeated for top 10 peaks using the higher energy dissociation mode (HCD) at normalized collision induced energy of 27.5%, the underfill ratio (5%) with an intensity threshold of 8.3e4 ions was selected. Already targeted MS/MS ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s with monoisotopic precursor selection enabled.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched using an iterative search strategy. First, the raw data were search against the NCBInr database (2014/08) restricted to the human taxonomy without any modification settings using MASCOT. All spectra that missed a confidence value of p<0.01 were passed to a second search. There, the residual spectra were searched against the NCBInr database (2014/08) restricted to bacteria using the MASCOT algorithm. Only peptides with a FDR <1% (high confident) and Mascot ion score >50 were considered as identified. The protein reports were further analyzed using “PROteomics results Pruning & Homology group ANotation Engine” (PROPHANE, [47]) to remove redundant protein groups and to assign bacterial proteins to their taxonomic origin by Blastp.

### Publication Abstract
Besides modulation of reverse cholesterol transport, high density lipoprotein (HDL) is able to modulate vascular function by stimulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Recently, it could be documented that this function of HDL was significantly impaired in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). We investigated alterations in the HDL proteome in CHF patients. Therefore, HDL was isolated from 5 controls (HDLhealthy) and 5 CHF patients of NYHA-class IIIb (HDLCHF). Proteome analysis of HDL particles was performed by two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (SCX/RP LC-MS/MS). In total, we identified 494 distinct proteins, of which 107 proteins were commonly found in both groups (HDLCHF and HDLhealthy) indicating a high inter-subject variability across HDL particles. Several important proteins (e.g. ITGA2, APBA1 or A2M) varied in level. Functional analysis revealed regulated pathways. A minor proportion of bacteria-derived proteins were also identified in the HDL-particles. The extension of the list of HDL-associated proteins allows besides their mere description new insights into alterations in HDL function in diseases. In addition, the detection of bacterial proteins bound to HDL will broaden our view of HDL not only as a cholesterol carrier but also as a carrier of proteins.

### Keywords
Hdl variability; hdl functionality lc-ms/ms, Human hdl

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics


