### Accession
PXD016509

### Title
DnaK interaction and folding of firefly luciferase studied by hydrogen/deuterium exchange – mass spectrometry

### Description
The ATP-dependent chaperones of the Hsp70 class (DnaK in E. coli) function in protein folding in cooperation with J proteins and nucleotide exchange factors (DnaJ and GrpE in E. coli, respectively). Hsp70 prevents protein aggregation, increasing the folding yield, but whether it also enhances the rate of folding is unclear. Equilibrium hydrogen/deuterium exchange – mass spectrometry showed that DnaK stabilizes a poorly structured state of firefly luciferase (FLuc). Pulsed-label experiments, together with orthogonal analyses by spFRET, identified compact inter-domain misfolded states of FLuc that convert slowly to the native state. DnaK binding expands the misfolded region and thereby resolves the kinetically-trapped intermediates, with folding occurring upon GrpE-mediated release. By resolving misfolding and accelerating folding the Hsp70 system can maintain proteins in their native states under otherwise denaturing stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For equilibrium H/DX-MS experiments, native FLuc was prepared at final concentration of 1 µM in HDX buffer (25 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 10 mM Mg(OAc)2 , 2 mM DTT,5 mM ATP). The FLuc:DnaK complex was prepared by dilution of GuHCl-denatured FLuc to final 1 µM in HDX buffer containing 10 µM DnaK, 3.3 µM DnaJ and 5 mM ATP. FLuc:DnaK complexes were tested by luminescence assay for their ability to support accelerated folding of Fluc upon addition of GrpE. Deuterium exchange was initiated by 10-fold dilution into deuterated H/DX buffer, followed by incubation at 25 °C for 10 s, 30 s, 100 s or 300 s. FLuc:DnaK complexes were analysed immediately after they were prepared, to avoid release of FLuc over prolonged incubation times. This consideration also precluded analysis of exchange times longer than 300 s. Exchange reactions were quenched by addition of an equal volume of ice-cold quench buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate pH 2.1, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 1 M GuHCl), to a final pH of 2.6. Three independent replicates were performed for each condition, each using a new preparation of the chaperone:substrate complex. For pulsed-label H/DX, FLuc:DnaK complexes were prepared as described above for the equilibrium experiments, and FLuc folding was initiated by addition of 5 µM GrpE. At different folding times (10 s, 5 min, 30 min), 5 µl aliquots of the reaction were withdrawn and added to 45 µl deuterated HDX buffer. Deuterium labelling was allowed to proceed for 10 s, before quenching by addition of 50 µl quench buffer containing 20 % glycerol, and snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80 °C for no longer than one week before analysis. Three independent folding reactions were analyzed. Quenched samples were injected into a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-class with H/DX held at 0 °C, via a 50 µl sample loop. Proteins were digested using an Enzymate BEH-pepsin column (Waters) at a flow rate of 100 µl min-1 and temperature of 20  ̊C. Peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min at 200 µl.min-1 on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column (Waters) before elution onto an ACQUITY UPLC peptide BEH C18 column (Waters). Peptides were eluted over 7 min at 40 µl.min-1 with an 8%–40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid pH 2.5. Mass analysis was performed on a Waters Synapt G2-Si in HD-MSe mode. Source and ion guide settings were adjusted to minimize gas-phase back exchange during ion mobility separation as described previously (Guttman et al., 2016. DOI: 10.1007/s13361-015-1330-8).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from quintuplicate undeuterated samples using PLGS 3.0 (Waters). Peptides were initially filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters) using the following threshold criteria: minimum intensity of 1000 counts; maximum length of 25 amino acids; minimum length of 3 amino acids; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.1; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Automated processing was performed in DynamX, followed by manual inspection of all peptides and charge states. Peptides with low signal-to-noise ratio or obvious erroneous assignments were discarded. Peaks were manually assigned or unassigned where necessary. In the case of spectra with bimodal patterns, all isotopes of each entire bimodal distribution were selected for processing, and relative deuterium incorporation was calculated based on the centroid of the isotopic distribution. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange, and are reported as relative.

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent Hsp70 chaperones (DnaK in E. coli) mediate protein folding in cooperation with J proteins and nucleotide exchange factors (E. coli DnaJ and GrpE, respectively). The Hsp70 system prevents protein aggregation and increases folding yields. Whether it also enhances the rate of folding remains unclear. Here we show that DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE accelerate the folding of the multi-domain protein firefly luciferase (FLuc) ~20-fold over the rate of spontaneous folding measured in the absence of aggregation. Analysis by single-pair FRET and hydrogen/deuterium exchange identified inter-domain misfolding as the cause of slow folding. DnaK binding expands the misfolded region and thereby resolves the kinetically-trapped intermediates, with folding occurring upon GrpE-mediated release. In each round of release DnaK commits a fraction of FLuc to fast folding, circumventing misfolding. We suggest that by resolving misfolding and accelerating productive folding, the bacterial Hsp70 system can maintain proteins in their native states under otherwise denaturing stress conditions.

### Keywords
Firefly luciferase, Dnak, Chaperone, Deuterium exchange, Folding

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Cellular Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
David Balchin

### Lab Head
Dr F. Ulrich Hartl
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Cellular Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany


