### Accession
PXD037497

### Title
Loss of the E3 ubiquitin ligases UBR-5 or HECD-1 restores Caenorhabditis elegans development in the absence of SWI/SNF function

### Description
SWItch/Sucrose Non-Fermenting (SWI/SNF) complexes are a family of chromatin remodellers that are conserved across eukaryotes. Mutations in subunits of SWI/SNF cause a multitude of different developmental disorders in humans, most of which have no current treatment options. Here we identify an alanine to valine causing mutation in the SWI/SNF subunit snfc-5 (SMARCB1 in humans) that prevents embryonic lethality in C. elegans nematodes harbouring a loss-of-function mutation in the SWI/SNF subunit swsn-1 (SMARCC1/2 in humans). Furthermore, we found that the combination of this specific mutation in snfc-5 and a loss-of-function mutation in either of the E3 ubiquitin ligases ubr-5 (UBR5 in humans) or hecd-1 (HECTD1 in humans) can restore development to adulthood in swsn-1 loss-of-function mutants that otherwise die as embryos. Using these mutant models, we established a set of 335 genes that are dysregulated in SWI/SNF mutants that arrest their development embryonically but exhibit near wild-type levels of expression in the presence of suppressor mutations that prevent embryonic lethality, suggesting that SWI/SNF promotes development by regulating this specific subset of genes. In addition, we show that SWI/SNF protein levels are reduced in swsn-1; snfc-5 double mutants and partly restored to wild-type levels in swsn-1; snfc-5; ubr-5 triple mutants, consistent with a model in which UBR-5 regulates SWI/SNF levels by tagging the complex for proteasomal degradation. Our findings establish a link between two E3 ubiquitin ligases and SWI/SNF function and suggest that UBR5 and HECTD1 might be viable therapeutic targets for the many developmental disorders caused by missense mutations in SWI/SNF subunits.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, protein lysates were supplemented with LDS Sample Buffer (insert here the one you used) with 1 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were heated at 70°C for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide, and 50 µg were loaded onto 4–12% gradient Bis–Tris gels. Proteins were separated by SDS–PAGE, stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and in‐gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel and desalted on reversed‐phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).PeptPeptides were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) as described (Kelstrup et al., 2012; Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C‐trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al., 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states < +2, were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.ides were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) as described (Kelstrup et al., 2012; Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C‐trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al., 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states < +2, were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
aw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (development version 1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 28420 C.elegans protein sequences obtained from WormBase (WS269 release), as well as against 4190 proteins in the Ensembl Bacteria E. coli REL606 database using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whilst N-terminal acetylation and oxidation were set as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a FDR < 1% estimated using a target‐decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007). LFQ quantification was performed in the MaxQuant software using at least two LFQ ratio counts; the fast LFQ and the match between run options were turned on.Processed data from MaxQuant was analyzed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016) and visualized with RStudio (version 4.1). Proteins or peptides flagged as “reverse”, “only identified by site” or “potential contaminant” were excluded from downstream analysis. Only proteins identified by no less than two peptides and at least one unique peptide were used in downstream analysis. Proteins mapped to the E.coli protein database were discarded. This dataset was further filtered so that proteins identified in at least two out offour replicates for each condition were kept. Missing values were imputed using random values from a Gaussian distribution using the default parameters in Perseus. P-values were calculated with a standard two-sided t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used for FDR calculation.

### Publication Abstract
SWItch/sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) complexes are a family of chromatin remodelers that are conserved across eukaryotes. Mutations in subunits of SWI/SNF cause a multitude of different developmental disorders in humans, most of which have no current treatment options. Here, we identify an alanine-to-valine-causing mutation in the SWI/SNF subunit <i>snfc-5</i> (<i>SMARCB1</i> in humans) that prevents embryonic lethality in <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> nematodes harboring a loss-of-function mutation in the SWI/SNF subunit <i>swsn-1</i> (<i>SMARCC1/2</i> in humans). Furthermore, we found that the combination of this specific mutation in <i>snfc-5</i> and a loss-of-function mutation in either of the E3 ubiquitin ligases <i>ubr-5</i> (<i>UBR5</i> in humans) or <i>hecd-1</i> (<i>HECTD1</i> in humans) can restore development to adulthood in <i>swsn-1</i> loss-of-function mutants that otherwise die as embryos. Using these mutant models, we established a set of 335 genes that are dysregulated in SWI/SNF mutants that arrest their development embryonically but exhibit near wild-type levels of expression in the presence of suppressor mutations that prevent embryonic lethality, suggesting that SWI/SNF promotes development by regulating some subset of these 335 genes. In addition, we show that SWI/SNF protein levels are reduced in <i>swsn-1; snfc-5</i> double mutants and partly restored to wild-type levels in <i>swsn-1; snfc-5; ubr-5</i> triple mutants, consistent with a model in which UBR-5 regulates SWI/SNF levels by tagging the complex for proteasomal degradation. Our findings establish a link between two E3 ubiquitin ligases and SWI/SNF function and suggest that UBR5 and HECTD1 could be potential therapeutic targets for the many developmental disorders caused by missense mutations in SWI/SNF subunits.

### Keywords
Ubr-5, Hectd1, Ubiquitination, C. elegans, Swi/snf, Hecd-1, Development, Ubr5

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology gGmbH(IMB), Mainz, 55128, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology gGmbH(IMB), Mainz, 55128, Germany


