### Accession
PXD025791

### Title
Specialised skin cancer library spectral library for use in data independent mass spectrometry

### Description
A specialised spectral ion reference library for use in data independent acquisition mass spectrometry applications for the purposes of skin specific research with a particular focus on melanoma and keratinocytic carcinoma

### Sample Protocol
All samples were incubated with 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and sonicated (1 min, 15% intensity) prior to heating (95ᵒC, 30 min). Samples were quantified for trypsin calculation following centrifugation (16,000 x g, 4⁰C, 30 min), disulphide bonds were reduced in 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (30 min, 60ᵒC), alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, in the dark), and overnight trypsin digestion (1:40 trypsin:protein ratio) at 37⁰C. Finally, cleavage of RapiGest by acidification (pH<2, 37⁰C, 30 min), and precipitated by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 4⁰C, 30 min). Supernatant was desalted using 1 cc Oasis HLB cartridges Samples were quantified, aliquoted and dried with the Savant SpeedVac concentrator

### Data Protocol
Library 1 proteins were identified and generated in a single search using ProteinPilot 5.0 software. All DDA tripleTOF6600.wiff files of every HILIC fraction were loaded into the ProteinPilot environment and searched against the SwissProt database and selected for Homo sapiens, trypsin digestion, and iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation. Specific processing parameters included biological modifications, a thorough search effort, protein threshold of 0.05 (10%) detection and false discovery rate analysis. Then, peptides with a confidence score of greater than 0.05 were selected. The result .group file was imported into the SWATH Acquisition Microapp 2.0 in PeakView Software (AB Sciex) environment removing shared peptides and setting a threshold of 6 peptides and 6 transitions, with parameters were set to 95% confidence threshold for peptides and a  5min XIC extraction window and 75ppm XIC width. The maximum number of protein to import for spectral library generation was set as the number of proteins identified at 1% global FDR from fit. The exported .txt file was loaded onto the R Programming Script version 4.0.2 to filter out duplicates and finally exported as the Master Skin Library Version 1.txt.   Library 2 proteins were identified in multiple searches by ProteinPilot 5.0 software and combined together using OneOmics library merge algorithm. Briefly, using the same parameters as in Library 1, DDA tripleTOF6600.wiff files were loaded into the ProteinPilot  5.0 software environment as five separate libraries (cell lines, tape stripped non-melanoma, FFPE non-melanoma batch 1, FFPE early melanoma, and FFPE non-melanoma batch 2). The five separate result .group  files were uploaded the SWATH Acquisition Microapp 2.0 in PeakView Software environment removing shared peptides and setting a threshold of 6 peptides and 6 transitions, with parameters were set to 95% confidence threshold for peptides and a  5min XIC extraction window and 75ppm XIC width. The maximum number of protein to import for spectral library generation was set as the number of proteins identified at 1% global FDR from fit. The results were exported as a .txt file which was then loaded onto Microsoft Excel to remove duplicate data and finally loaded onto the online SCIEX Cloud using CloudConnect Software to merge the five libraries using the OneOmics platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Carcinoma, Proteomics, Melanoma, Skin, Keratinocytic

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Professor in Dermatology, Department of Dermatology Westmead Clinical School, Westmead Hospital

### Submitter
Rachel Teh

### Lab Head
Dr Pablo Fernandez Penas
Professor in Dermatology, Department of Dermatology Westmead Clinical School, Westmead Hospital


