### Accession
PXD013662

### Title
Identification of mouse embryonic fibroblast secreted protein factors that are responsible for reprogramming human pluripotent stem cell metabolism

### Description
Previously we found that human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) utilize glucose differently depending on the presence of the feeder cells, which are mouse embryonic fibroblasts, or MEFs. More specifically, feeder-free cultured hPSCs are more reliant on glycolysis for proliferation.  Therefore, we hypothesized that secreted factors by MEFs might be responsible for reprogramming the metabolism of hPSCs. To test this hypothesis, we separated the components in the MEF-conditioned medium by using size-based fractionation columns, and tested whether each fraction alters the reliance of feeder-free hPSCs on glucose.  We concluded that it was the protein fraction of the MEF-conditioned medium potentially responsible for reprogramming glycolytic metabolism in hPSCs.  To further understand which specific protein(s) could alter the metabolism of hPSCs, we here conduct mass spectrometry based proteomics experiment.

### Sample Protocol
The protein fractions of the medium samples, with or without MEF-conditioning for 24hrs, were enriched by using a Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-10 membrane (Millipore, UFC901024). Concentrated protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. The gels were processed for Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining (Thermo Scientific) using the manufacturer’s instructions.  Coomassie Blue-stained bands were cut from the gels, washed twice with 50% acetonitrile, and processed for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis at the mass spectrometry core facility at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (Boston, MA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra collected via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were searched against the concatenated target and decoy (reversed) Swiss-Prot protein databases using Sequest [Proteomics Browser Software (PBS), Thermo Fisher Scientific].

### Publication Abstract
Deisotoping, or the process of removing peaks in a mass spectrum resulting from the incorporation of naturally occurring heavy isotopes, has long been used to reduce complexity and improve the effectiveness of spectral annotation methods in proteomics. We have previously described MSFragger, an ultrafast search engine for proteomics, that did not utilize deisotoping in processing input spectra. Here, we present a new, high-speed parallelized deisotoping algorithm, based on elements of several existing methods, that we have incorporated into the MSFragger search engine. Applying deisotoping with MSFragger reveals substantial improvements to database search speed and performance, particularly for complex methods like open or nonspecific searches. Finally, we evaluate our deisotoping method on data from several instrument types and vendors, revealing a wide range in performance and offering an updated perspective on deisotoping in the modern proteomics environment.

### Keywords
Human pluripotent stem cell metabolism, Mouse embryonic fibroblast

### Affiliations
UT Southwestern Medical Center 
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Wen Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Gu
UT Southwestern Medical Center


