### Accession
PXD021947

### Title
Mechanism and function of DNA replication-independent DNA-protein crosslink repair via the SUMO pathway

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) obstruct essential DNA transactions, posing a serious threat to genome stability and functionality. DPCs are proteolytically processed in a ubiquitin- and DNA replication-dependent manner by SPRTN or the proteasome but can also be resolved via targeted SUMOylation. However, the mechanistic basis of SUMO-mediated DPC resolution and its interplay with replication-coupled DPC repair pathways remain unknown. Here, we show that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase RNF4 defines a major pathway for ubiquitylation and proteasomal clearance of SUMOylated DPCs in a DNA replication-independent manner. In addition, we provide evidence that a subset of DPCs can be SUMOylated and processed via transcription, independently of RNF4. SUMO modification of DPCs is mediated by PIAS4 and neither stimulates nor inhibits their rapid DNA replication-dependent proteolysis. Instead, SUMOylation provides a critical salvage mechanism to remove DPCs formed or persisting after replication, as we demonstrate that DPCs on duplex DNA do not activate interphase DNA damage checkpoints. Consequently, in the absence of the SUMO-RNF4 pathway cells can enter mitosis with a high load of unresolved DPCs, leading to defective chromosome segregation and cell death. Collectively, these findings provide mechanistic insights into SUMO-driven pathways underlying replication-independent DPC resolution and highlight their critical importance in maintaining chromosome stability and cellular fitness.

### Sample Protocol
CHROMASS experiments were performed as previously described (Räschle et al., 2015). Briefly, isolated sperm chromatin was treated with 2000 J/m2 of UV-C. Each reaction was performed in quadruplicate. The sperm chromatin was then incubated at a final concentration of 16 ng/µL in non-licensing extracts in the presence or absence of Talazoparib (10 µM) and SUMOi (50 µM). Reactions were stopped after 30 min. Specifically, 10 µL of replication reaction was stopped with 60 µL of ELB buffer supplemented with 0.2% Triton-X, and chromatin spin down performed as described above. The chromatin pellet was then resuspended in 50 µl denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), and transferred to a new low-binding tube. Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT for 15 min at RT) and alkylated (0.55 M chloroacetamide for 40 min at RT protected from light). Proteins were first digested with 0.5 µg Lys-C (2.5 hours at RT) and then with 0.5 µg trypsin at 30°C overnight. Peptides were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (pH <4), followed by addition of 400 mM NaCl, and purified by stage tipping (C18 material). For this, StageTips were first activated in 100% methanol, then equilibrated in 80% acetonitrile/10% formic acid, and finally washed twice in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded on the equilibrated StageTips and washed twice with 50 µL 0.1% formic acid. StageTip elution was performed with 80 μL of 25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, eluted samples were dried to completion in a SpeedVac at 60 °C, dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid, and stored at −20°C until MS analysis.  All CHROMASS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 µm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven (Sonation). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. Gradient length was 100 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 76 min ranging from 8% to 28% buffer B. Ionization of peptides was performed using a NanoSpray Flex™ ion source (Thermo), with spray voltage set to 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, and RF funnel level to 40%. All samples were measured as two technical replicates using 5 μL of the sample per injection, with differences outlined below. MS RAW data files with a “b” appended to the file name correspond to those analyzed using alternative settings. Measurements were performed with a full scan range of 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution of 60,000 (or alternatively 120,000), MS1 AGC target of 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 100 s. MS2 AGC target was set to 200,000, minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000, MS2 maximum injection time to 55 ms, MS2 resolution to 30,000, and loop count to 14 (or alternatively 12).

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.5.3.30. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 10th of February, 2018. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Maximum variable modifications per peptide were reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled (Cox et al., 2014), with “Fast LFQ” disabled, and “LFQ min. ratio count” set to 3. Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR was applied at the PSM- and protein-levels (default).

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) obstruct essential DNA transactions, posing a serious threat to genome stability and functionality. DPCs are proteolytically processed in a ubiquitin- and DNA replication-dependent manner by SPRTN and the proteasome but can also be resolved via targeted SUMOylation. However, the mechanistic basis of SUMO-mediated DPC resolution and its interplay with replication-coupled DPC repair remain unclear. Here, we show that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase RNF4 defines a major pathway for ubiquitylation and proteasomal clearance of SUMOylated DPCs in the absence of DNA replication. Importantly, SUMO modifications of DPCs neither stimulate nor inhibit their rapid DNA replication-coupled proteolysis. Instead, DPC SUMOylation provides a critical salvage mechanism to remove DPCs formed after DNA replication, as DPCs on duplex DNA do not activate interphase DNA damage checkpoints. Consequently, in the absence of the SUMO-RNF4 pathway cells are able to enter mitosis with a high load of unresolved DPCs, leading to defective chromosome segregation and cell death. Collectively, these findings provide mechanistic insights into SUMO-driven pathways underlying replication-independent DPC resolution and highlight their critical importance in maintaining chromosome stability and cellular fitness.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Pias4, Sumo, Dpc, Chromass, Dna damage, Replication, Rnf4

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


