### Accession
PXD019491

### Title
Reversible oxidative signaling in Chlamydomonas following nitrogen deprivation

### Description
As global temperatures climb to historic highs, the far-reaching effects of climate change have impacted agricultural nutrient availability. This has extended to low latitude oceans, where a deficit in both nitrogen and phosphorus stores has led to dramatic decreases in carbon sequestration in oceanic phytoplankton. Although Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a freshwater model green alga, has shown drastic systems-level alterations following nitrogen deprivation, the mechanism(s) through which these alterations are triggered and regulated are unclear. This study examined the role of reversible oxidative signaling in the nitrogen stress response of C. reinhardtii. Using oxidized cysteine resin-assisted capture enrichment coupled with label-free quantitative proteomics, 7,889 unique oxidized cysteine thiol identifiers were quantified, with 231 significantly changing peptides from 184 proteins following 2 h of nitrogen deprivation. These results demonstrate proteins affected by oxidation involved in nitrogen assimilation, amino acid metabolism, photosynthesis, and other metabolic processes. An enhanced role of non-damaging oxidative pathways is observed throughout the photosynthetic apparatus that provides a framework for further analysis in phototrophs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Frozen cell pellets were lysed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 6.8 with 0.5% SDS, 0.1% Triton-X-100, and cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Reduced cysteines were blocked using 100 mM NEM dissolved in 50% ethanol. Samples were incubated end-over-end for 2 h at RT, covered from light. Samples were then centrifuged at 3,220 x g s before incubating the supernatant in 40 mL cold acetone  for 1 h at -20 C. Proteins were separated following a 5 min centrifugation at 3,220 x g and 4 C before resuspending in 10 mL PBS pH 6.8 with 0.25% SDS and 4 M urea. Protein concentrations were quantified using the CB-X protein assay  according to the manufacturer’s protocols.  Global proteomics Aliquoted samples (100 µg) were incubated in constant darkness on a ThermoMixer at 25°C and 1000 rpm. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min before adding 30 mM NEM for 30 min. Samples were mixed with 1 mL of cold acetone before centrifuging for 5 min at 15,000 x g and 4 °C. Pellets were resuspended in 500 µL of 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 2 M urea and digested with 2.5 µg of Trypsin Gold overnight. The digestion was quenched using 20 µL of 5% TFA and desalted with solid-phase extraction (SPE). Oxidized cysteine enrichment Briefly, 1 mg of protein lysates were incubated with 10 mM DTT on a Thermomixer in constant darkness at 25 C and 1000 rpm for 1 h. DTT was then removed by precipitating proteins in 10 mL of cold acetone by incubating for 30 min at -20 C. Following centrifugation (5 min, 3,220 x g, 4 C), samples were resuspended in 1 mL of 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 0.5% SDS and 4 M urea.  Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B (TPS6B) resin was rehydrated in water and washed with 50 mM Tris, pH 8 before suspending to a 100 mg/mL slurry. Each 1 mg Chlamydomonas proteome sample was added to 50 mg of TPS6B resin before incubating end-over-end for 2 h in the dark. Samples were then transferred to a MobiSpin column and nonspecifically bound proteins were removed by washing the resin (400 µL each) in 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 2 M NaCl, and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. The column was then equilibrated with 50 mM Tris, pH 8 before performing on-resin digestion of bound proteins using 250 µL of 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 2.5 µg of Trypsin Gold. The digestion was incubated overnight on a covered Thermomixer at 25 C and 1000 rpm. Following digestion, unbound peptides were separated from the cysteine-bound peptides by briefly centrifuging the spin columns for 15 s and discarded. Bound peptides were then washed (400 µL) using 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8 with 2 M NaCl, and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. Bound cysteine-containing peptides were then eluted from the resin using 250 µL of 50 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris, pH 8 for 15 min in a Thermomixer at 25 C and 1000 rpm. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 1,000 x g before drying by vacuum centrifugation and desalting via SPE. Solid-phase extraction Samples were desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges held in an SPE 24-position vacuum manifold  with a maximum flow rate of 1 drop/s. The resin was pre-eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA before equilibrating with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Samples were acidified to pH 3 using 5% TFA and loaded onto the cartridges in two passes before washing with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analyzed using an Acquity M-class UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Injections were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm; Waters) with a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient to 35% mobile phase B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using a Nanospray Flex source in positive polarity mode with a spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. Data was acquired using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z. The survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). MS/MS scans were performed with a scan range of 200 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursors were subject to a dynamic exclusion of 10 s to avoid unnecessary repeated fragmentation of identical peptides.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and label-free quantification Acquired spectral files (.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters, version 2.0). Global and redox-enriched samples were analyzed separately. Peak picking sensitivity was set to maximum of 5 and a reference spectrum was automatically assigned. Total ion chromatograms were aligned to minimize run-to-run differences in peak retention time. Each sample received a unique factor to normalize all peak abundance values resulting from systematic experimental variation. Alignment was validated (> 80% score) and a combined peak list (.mgf) was exported for peptide sequence determination and protein inference by Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1, Boston, MA). Database searching was performed against the Joint Genome Institute’s Phytozome v.13 database (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov; accessed Jan. 2020; 19,523 entries) appended with the NCBI chloroplast and mitochondrial databases (chloroplastic- NCBI: BK000554;  mitochondrial- NCBI: NC_001638.1; 77 entries) and sequences for common laboratory contaminants (http://thegpm.org/cRAP/; 116 entries). Searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.1 Da, and variable modifications of acetylation at the protein N-terminus and oxidation at methionine. Cysteine alkylation with NEM (C6H7NO2, +125.0477) was included as a fixed modification for global analysis and a variable modification for oxidized cysteine enrichment experiments. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to less than 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm and uploaded to Progenesis for peak matching. Identifications with a Mascot. Identifications with a score less than 13 were removed from consideration in Progenesis. For global proteomics, relative quantification was performed using the Hi-N setting with up to 3 peptides and protein grouping employed. Results were then exported from the ‘Review Proteins’ stage with both ‘Peptide Measurements’ and ‘Protein Measurements’ for reversible oxidation and global proteomics, respectively.  Data were parsed using custom scripts written in R programming for pre-processing and statistical analysis (https://github.com/hickslab/QuantifyR), as previously described. To test for significantly changing oxidation and global abundance between the nitrogen deprived and replete conditions, a student’s t-test was performed. Only peptides with p < 0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction and at least a two-fold change in oxidation were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
As global temperatures climb to historic highs, the far-reaching effects of climate change have impacted agricultural nutrient availability. This has extended to low latitude oceans, where a deficit in both nitrogen and phosphorus stores has led to dramatic decreases in carbon sequestration in oceanic phytoplankton. Although <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i>, a freshwater model green alga, has shown drastic systems-level alterations following nitrogen deprivation, the mechanisms through which these alterations are triggered and regulated are not fully understood. This study examined the role of reversible oxidative signaling in the nitrogen stress response of <i>C. reinhardtii</i>. Using oxidized cysteine resin-assisted capture enrichment coupled with label-free quantitative proteomics, 7889 unique oxidized cysteine thiol identifiers were quantified, with 231 significantly changing peptides from 184 proteins following 2 h of nitrogen deprivation. These results demonstrate that the cellular response to nitrogen assimilation, photosynthesis, pigment biosynthesis, and lipid metabolism are regulated by reversible oxidation. An enhanced role of non-damaging oxidative pathways is observed throughout the photosynthetic apparatus that provides a framework for further analysis in phototrophs.

### Keywords
Signaling, Ptm, Lcms, Oxidation, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of Chemistry Chapel Hill, NC, USA
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of Chemistry Chapel Hill, NC, USA


