### Accession
PXD009502

### Title
Gingival exudatome dynamics implicates inhibition of the alternative complement pathway in the protective action of the C3 inhibitor Cp40 in non-human primate periodontitis

### Description
Complement inhibition has been successfully used to treat periodontitis in animal models. However, proteome studies that investigated the role of complement C3 were missing. The objective of this study was to characterize local tissue exudate (“gingival crevicular fluid”; GCF) changes after administration of a potent C3 inhibitor (Cp40, also known as AMY-101) to cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) with established periodontitis. Cp40 was administered locally in the maxillary gingival tissue either once per week (n=5 animals) or three times per week (n=10 animals), for six weeks followed by another six weeks of observation in the absence of treatment. The GCF were collected for liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
GCF samples were processed and digested in Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter unit (Millipore). Briefly, sample were diluted in 8M urea buffer (also contains 0.1 mM dithiothreitol and 100 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.2)), alkylated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide, and washed by 0.5 M NaCl. The GCF samples were then digested overnight by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in enzyme: protein ratio = 1:50 w/w at room temperature. The digested peptides were desalted with StageTips, C18 material, 200µL tip (Thermo Scientific), concentrated using a Speedvac (Thermo Savant SPD121P, Thermo Scientific) and reconstituted with 3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a randomized order.

### Data Protocol
All raw files from LC-MS/MS were aligned with ProgenesisQI for proteomics software package (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The details of the chosen ions were exported as a Mascot generic file (. mgf) and searched against a forward and reversed Macaca protein sequences (downloaded from uniprot on 10 August 2015) with 260-sequences known as MS contaminants (also reversed to evaluate false discovery rate using the target-decoy strategy). The following parameters were set for the database search: tryptic digests, max 2 missed cleavages for each peptide, semi-tryptic peptides, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modifications. The spectrum report from mascot was later reimported into ProgenesisQI software.

### Publication Abstract
Periodontitis is a prevalent chronic inflammatory disease associated with dysbiosis. Although complement inhibition has been successfully used to treat periodontitis in animal models, studies globally analyzing inflamed tissue proteins to glean insight into possible mechanisms of action are missing. Using quantitative shotgun proteomics, we aimed to investigate differences in composition of inflammatory gingival tissue exudate ("gingival crevicular fluid"; GCF), before and after local administration of an inhibitor of the central complement component, C3, in nonhuman primates. The C3 inhibitor, Cp40 (also known as AMY-101) was administered locally in the maxillary gingival tissue of cynomolgus monkeys with established periodontitis, either once a week (1&#xd7;-treatment; n = 5 animals) or three times per week (3&#xd7;-treatment; n = 10 animals), for 6 weeks followed by another 6 weeks of observation in the absence of treatment. 45 GCF samples were processed for FASP digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Data were processed using the ProgenesisQI software. The statistical significance of differences between the groups was determined by RM-ANOVA, and a protein expression change was considered as a true regulation at &gt;2-fold and p &lt; 0.05. The human orthologues were subjected to Gene Ontology analyses using PANTHER. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009502. 573 proteins with &gt;2 peptides were longitudinally quantified. Both 3&#xd7; and 1&#xd7; administration of Cp40 resulted in significant down-regulation of dozens of proteins during the 6-week course of treatment as compared to baseline. Following drug withdrawal at 6 weeks, more than 50% of the down-regulated proteins showed increased levels at week 12. The top scored pathway was "complement activation, alternative pathway", and several proteins involved in this pathway were down-regulated at 6 weeks. We mapped the proteomic fingerprint changes in local tissue exudate of cynomolgus monkey periodontitis in response to C3 inhibition and identified the alternative pathway of complement activation and leukocyte degranulation as main targets, which are thus likely to play significant roles in periodontal disease pathogenesis. Label-free quantitative proteomics strategies utilizing GCF are powerful tools for the identification of treatment targets and providing insights into disease mechanisms.

### Keywords
C3 inhibitor, Periodontitis, Macaca fascicularis, Gcf

### Affiliations
postdoctoral researcher
Professor, Institutionen för odontologi (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Professor, Institutionen för odontologi (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska Institutet


