### Accession
PXD006281

### Title
Meta-Proteomics profiling of a four species biofilm

### Description
Microbial biofilms are omnipresent and implicated in a wide spectrum of areas ranging from bioremediation, food production and biomedical applications. To date little is understood about how biofilm communities develop and function on a molecular level, due to the complexity of these biological systems. Here we ap-ply a meta-proteomics approach to investigate the mechanism driving biofilm formation in a microbial model consortium of four bacterial soil isolates of Steno-trophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and Paeni-bacillus amylolyticus. The protein abundances between community and the single species biofilms were compared to describe how different metabolic pathways were influenced by inter-species interactions. Our results indicate that community development is dependent on interactions between community members facilitat-ing surface attachment and cross-feeding on specific amino acids. Opposite regu-lation patterns of fermentation and nitrogen pathways in Paenibacillus amylolyticus and Xanthomonas retroflexus may, however, also indicate that competition for lim-ited resources affects community development. Overall our results demonstrate the multitude of pathways characterizing biofilm formation in mixed communities. In order to obtain full taxonomic resolution between closely related species and empower correct protein quantification, we developed a novel pipeline for removing peptide sequences shared between community members from the ref-erence proteomes used for spectral database searches. This pipeline can readily be applied to other microbial communities.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilm were grown in a Drip Flow Reactor (Biosurface Technologies, USA) for 48hrs with a steady supply of Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) from a peristaltic pump set to deliver 0.4 ml/min. Biofilm were scraped of the glass slides and cells were lysed with a Q500 sonicator (Qsonica, Newtown, USA) for 4 min at 30% amplitude in the protein extraction buffer. The sonicated samples were centrifuged at 10000g and soluble proteins in the supernatants were precipi-tated by adding ice-cold acetone to a final concentration of 80%. Samples were precipitated over night at -18°C. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in a urea solution (8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-buffer, pH 8), protein concen-tration was estimated via Bradford assay, and samples were diluted to 5 μg/μL, reduced with 5 mM DTT for 1 hrs, and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide for 1 hrs in the dark. The samples were four fold diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicar-bonate pH 8, and then incubated overnight by trypsin (1:100 trypsin-to-protein ratio) at room temperature with horizontal shaking at 500 rpm. Inactivation of trypsin was achieved by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 2% and debris was removed by centrifugation (10000g, 10 min). The tryptic peptides were fractionat-ed on SDB-RPS STAGE- tips. Acidified peptides were loaded on the filter discs by centrifuging at 1000g for 5min. and the filter unit was washed twice using 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted into three fractions using elution buffer 1: 100 mM ammonium formate, 40% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; elution buffer 2: 150 mM ammonium formate, 60% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; elution buffer 3: 5% am-monium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile. Volatile salts were evaporated from the eluted fractions in a speedvac and the desalted pellets were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.  The samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data were recorded in a data dependent manner, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition, on a Q-Exactive (Thermo scientific, Bremen, Germany). An EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo scientific, Odense, Denmark) was coupled to the mass spectrometer through an EASY spray source and peptide separation was performed on 50 cm EASY-spray columns (Thermo scientific) with 2 µm size C18 particles and inner diameter of 75 µm. Mobile phase consisted of solvents A (0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetoni-trile in 0.1% formic acid). The initial concentration of solvent B was 6% and hereaf-ter gradients were applied to reach the following concentrations: 14% B in 37min, 25%B in 42min, 38%B in 21min, 60%B in 20min, 95%B in 3min and 95%B for 7min. The total length of the gradient was 130min. The full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70000 and a maximum injection time of 20ms was applied. For the full scans the range was adjusted to 350-1500 m/z. The top 10 most abundant ions from the full scan were sequentially selected for fragmenta-tion with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z54, and excluded from re-selection for a 30 sec. time period. For the MS/MS scans the resolution was adjusted to 17500 and maximum injection time of 60ms. The ions were fragmented in a higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%.

### Data Protocol
Reference genomes have been prepared as part of an earlier investigation and are available online; PRJEB18431 (Xanthomonas retroflexus), PRJEB15265 (Microbacte-rium oxydans), PRJEB15263 (Stenotrophomonas rhizophila), PRJEB15262 (Paenibacillus amylolyticus). Reference proteomes were based on the genomes which were anno-tated with the RAST database. Each proteome was loaded into the statistical software environment R with SeqinR v3.3-155, and in silico trypsin digested using the Cleaver v1.10.2 package. Resulting peptides were filtered for a minimum length of 7 amino acids, and were compared between all four reference proteomes for identical string matches. Any peptide found in two or more species was re-moved from all reference proteomes, by deleting the amino acid strings and con-catenating the adjacent fragments. This resulted in trimmed reference proteomes with protein sequences containing only the trypsin-digested peptides unique to each species." The acquired raw data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 with the inbuilt Andromeda search engine57. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm (parent ions) and 20ppm (fragment ions); a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted.  Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were select-ed as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was se-lected as a fixed modification. A target decoy search that allowed for a maximum of 1% FDR on both peptide and protein level and a minimum length of 7 amino acids per peptide was performed. Quantification was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant with a minimum ratio count of 2 and applying the match between runs function.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial biofilms are omnipresent in nature and relevant to a broad spectrum of industries ranging from bioremediation&#xa0;and food production to biomedical applications. To date little is understood about how multi-species biofilm communities develop and function on a molecular level, due to the complexity of these biological systems. Here we apply a meta-proteomics approach to investigate the mechanisms influencing biofilm formation in a model consortium of four bacterial soil isolates; Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and Paenibacillus amylolyticus. Protein abundances in community and single species biofilms were compared to describe occurring inter-species interactions and the resulting changes in active metabolic pathways. To obtain full taxonomic resolution between closely related species and empower correct protein quantification, we developed a novel pipeline for generating reduced reference proteomes for spectral database searches. Meta-proteomics profiling indicated that community development is dependent on cooperative interactions between community members facilitating cross-feeding on specific amino acids. Opposite regulation patterns of fermentation and nitrogen pathways in Paenibacillus amylolyticus and Xanthomonas retroflexus may, however, indicate that competition for limited resources also affects community development. Overall our results demonstrate the multitude of pathways involved in biofilm formation in mixed communities.

### Keywords
Soil isolates, Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Biofilm, Drip flow reactor

### Affiliations
University of Copenhangen, Section of Microbiology
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Jakob Herschend

### Lab Head
Dr Mette Burmølle
University of Copenhangen, Section of Microbiology


