### Accession
PXD006898

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of a human fetal ovary development timecourse

### Description
A quantitative proteomics approach was used to assess protein expression from a time course of human fetal ovarian tissue in comparison to reproductive-aged tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Human fetal ovarian tissue between 56 and 137 days of gestation or from reproductive-aged healthy females was snap frozen and lysed in RIPA buffer with sonication. 35ug per tissue lysate was gel-digested and samples were injected in technical triplicate. A Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used for detection.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4) prior to searching with Mascot Server (Version 2.5) against the Uniprot database.  Search results were loaded into the Scaffold Viewer (Proteome Sofware, Inc, Version 4.8.2) for assessment of protein identification probabilities and label-free quantitation. iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) values were used to detect fold change in expression between tissue samples.

### Publication Abstract
The in vivo gene networks involved in coordinating human fetal ovarian development remain obscure. In this study, quantitative mass spectrometry was conducted on ovarian tissue collected at key stages during the first two trimesters of human gestational development, confirming the expression profiling data using immunofluorescence, as well as in vitro modeling with human oogonial stem cells (OSCs) and human embryonic stem cells (ESCs). A total of 3,837 proteins were identified in samples spanning developmental days 47-137. Bioinformatics clustering and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified DNA mismatch repair and base excision repair as major pathways upregulated during this time. In addition, MAEL and TEX11, two key meiosis-related proteins, were identified as highly expressed during the developmental window associated with fetal oogenesis. These findings were confirmed and extended using in vitro differentiation of OSCs into in vitro derived oocytes and of ESCs into primordial germ cell-like cells and oocyte-like cells, as models. In conclusion, the global protein expression profiling data generated by this study have provided novel insights into human fetal ovarian development in vivo and will serve as a valuable new resource for future studies of the signaling pathways used to orchestrate human oogenesis and folliculogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Ovary, Organogenesis

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Aging and Infertility Research, Department of Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Alisha Bothun

### Lab Head
Dr Dori C Woods
Laboratory for Aging and Infertility Research, Department of Biology, Northeastern University


