### Accession
PXD012628

### Title
Genetically Variant Peptide Biomarkers from Fingermarks

### Description
This dataset results from the discovery, characterization and validation of 74 genetically variant peptides from fingermark protein. These peptides contain single amino acid polymorphisms, the result of non-synonymous SNPs. Detection of these peptide markers in fingermark proteomic datasets allows inferences to be made about the genotype status of corresponding SNP alleles. These inferences provide an individual genetic profile that may be used to calculate random match probabilities and provide information about potential genetic background. Epidermal corneocytes from five European and four South Asian subjects were isolated, processed, proteolytically digested with trypsin and 0.75 µg applied to a Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The resulting datasets were used for discovery of genetically variant peptides by a “bottom-up” analysis of potential variants identified in X!Tandem datasets (thegpm.org) or by a “top-down” proteomic confirmation of non-synonymous SNP variants shown to be present in corresponding subject exome datasets. The later method resulted in discovery of a rare allele that was not observed in the 1000 Genome Project.  The cumulative profiles of detected genetically variant peptides were obtained for each subject. Candidate genetically variant peptides were then validated by comparing proteomically inferred SNP alleles with matching genotypes in exome datasets. An average of 28.8 ± 4.4 genetically variant peptides were detected from each subject. Across the 9 subjects a total of 264 SNP allele inferences were made resulting in 260 true positives and 4 false positives, a false positive rate of 1.5%. Random match probabilities were calculated using the genotype frequencies of common genetically variant peptides from the matching major populations in the 1000 genome project. Estimates ranged up to a value of 1 in 1.7 x 108, with a median probability of 1 in 2.4 x 106. When probabilities were recalculated using values from other major genetic population groups African values were considerably less conservative, with resulting likelihood ratios (AFR/other populations) ranging up to 6 orders of magnitude. Conversely there was no resolution among estimates obtained from all non-African population groups, where resulting random match probabilities were within an order of magnitude. These genetically variant peptides are a starting point for the development of targeted mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses that will increase the sensitivity of peptide detection. This project represents a novel mode of genetic information that can be obtained from fingermarks and has the potential to complement or confirm other methods of human identification including analysis of ridge patterns or touch DNA.

### Sample Protocol
Two chemistries were utilized to isolate and process epidermal corneocytes. Most samples were processed based on previous work (Method 1). A second method (Method 2) fractionated proteins that were soluble (S) and insoluble (P) in the presence of 50 mM dithioerythritol (DTE). Briefly, epidermal corneocytes were eluted from tape circles by soaking them overnight in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate – 0.1 M sodium phosphate solution (SDS-NaHPO4) (pH 7.8). The cells settled at the bottom of the tubes were transferred to clean microfuge tubes by the help of Pasteur pipettes and washed twice with 2% sodium dodecanoate (SD) – 0.1 M NH4HCO3, each wash was followed by centrifuging and discarding of the supernatants. The pellets were resuspended in 0.4 ml of the SD – NH4HCO3 solution followed by the addition of 50mM dithioerythritol. To enhance the reduction, the samples were initially incubated at 95ºC for 15 minutes and then transferred to an incubator preset at 37ºC for one hour. Afterwards, iodoacetamide (to a concentration of 100mM) was added and the samples were gently stirred for 45 minutes in the dark. The pH was adjusted to ~3 with trifluoroacetic acid and SD was extracted in the supernatants after the addition of 700 μL ethyl acetate followed by centrifugation. The pH was adjusted to ~8 with 2.5 μL of concentrated ammonium hydroxide and 20 μL of 1M NH4HCO3. Reductively methylated trypsin (20μg) was added for protein digestion. The samples were placed on a magnetic stirrer at room temperature for three days with daily addition of a batch of trypsin. The samples were then centrifuged and the supernatants, containing the digested peptides, were transferred to Lo-Bind microfuge tubes and kept frozen until analysis. In Method 2 samples were collected and process as described above, however at the end of the reduction step the tubes were centrifuged, and the supernatant collected. The pellets were re-subjected to reduction and the process was repeated 4 times. The first two supernatants comprise the supernatant (SUP) fraction. The supernatant collected after the final reduction was labeled as the pellet (PEL) sample. Both samples were alkylated, digested and otherwise processed as described in Method 1. All resulting peptide samples were assayed for peptide concentration using a fluorescent peptide assay. ThermoScientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer with inbuilt Proxeon nanospray and Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC was used for the mass spectrometric analysis. The digested samples (750 ng) were loaded on 100 μm × 25 mm Magic C18 100 Å 5 U reverse phase trap, desalted online and separated over 120-minute gradient via 75 μm × 150 mm Magic C18 200 Å 3 U reverse phase column at 300nl/minute flow rate. MS survey was conducted at the m/z range of 350-1600, and the 15 most abundant ions from the spectra were selected and exposed to HCD to get MS/MS spectra. Precursor ions selected in a 1.6 m/z isolation mass window and fragmentation via 27% normalized collision energy. 15seconds duration was used for dynamic exclusion. The following nomenclature was used to describe the RAW and processed datasets (csv). UCD#XX* where subjects (UCD#) were described as UCD1-9. Locations (XX) were labeled as FH (forehead), A (arm), L (leg), P (palm and fingers), AS (arm DTT soluble), AP (arm DTT insoluble), and BLK (blank). The following number was the replicate number (*). RAW files are indicated (.RAW) and result peptides and proteins files are indicated as PEPT.csv or PROT.csv respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files (.RAW) were converted to MzML format using MSConvertGUI (Proteowizard 2.1, http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net) and submitted to the X!Tandem peptide spectra matching algorithm (Global Proteome Machine Fury, X!Tandem Alanine (2016.10.15.2)). Default search parameters were used except that no prokaryote and viruses reference libraries were used and the point mutation function was activated. Peptide and protein log(e) scores were set to -1, and fragment mass errors of 20 ppm, and parent mass error of 100 ppm were used. Variable post-translational modifications were expanded to include N-terminal ammonia loss, oxidation or dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan, deamidation of glutamine and aspargine, and N-terminal acetylation.  The peptides identified in the Global Proteome Machine to carry single amino acid variants (SAV) were analyzed based on the following inclusion and criteria: a matching (log(e)) score of < -2, a matching dbSNP accession number with a minor allelic frequency greater than 0.5% in the 1000 Genome Project (ensembl.org). Exclusion criteria included: the presence of unexpected chemical or genetic modifications (i.e., other than methionine oxidation, deamidation, N-terminal acetylation, and carboxymethylation), the presence of fragmentation masses consistent with the alternative reference allele, and non-tryptic proteolysis. Polymorphisms that resulted in identical masses (such as I to L, or Q to K) or identical to common modifications (such as deamidation (N/Q to D/E), or oxidation (M to F) were also excluded. In order to prevent the inclusion of peptide with more than one genomic address, all peptide sequences were submitted to PROWL (prowl.rockefeller.edu/prowl/proteininfo) and searched against IPI human (2010-02-01) database. Peptides with no match or represented by a single point in a gene were considered unique and included in the study. Peptides identified in this manner were considered candidate genetically variant peptides. An alternative “top-down” discovery process was also incorporated into this study. Exome genotypes of South Asian subjects were examined for the presence of non-synonymous SNPs that were expressed in the epidermal corneocyte proteome. Proteomic data was then analyzed to confirm if there were genetically variant peptides that corresponded to either allele of the SNP locus. No filtering for genotype frequency was applied in this approach.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic genotyping detects single amino acid polymorphisms to infer the genotype of corresponding non-synonymous SNPs. Like any DNA genotype, these inferences can be used to estimate random match probability. Fingermarks are a common source of biological evidence that is sample limited and a highly variable source of identifying DNA. Genetically variant peptides from fingermarks, that contain single amino acid polymorphisms, are an additional source of identifying genetic information. To discover these peptide biomarkers epidermal corneocytes from 9 subjects were isolated, processed, digested with trypsin and applied to mass spectrometry. The resulting proteomic and matching exome datasets were used to discover, characterize and validate 60 genetically variant peptides. An average of 28.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.4 genetically variant peptides were detected from each subject resulting in a total of 264 SNP allele inferences with 260 true and 4 false positives, a false discovery rate of 1.5%. Random match probabilities were estimated using the genotype frequencies from the matching major populations in the 1000 Genomes Project. Estimates ranged up to a value of 1 in 1.7&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>8</sup>, with a median probability of 1 in 2.4&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>6</sup>. Furthermore, the proteomically-inferred genotypes are likely to be compatible with the STR-based random match probability estimates since the closest STR locus was 2.2 Mb from the nearest GVP-inferred SNP. This project represents a novel mode of genetic information that can be obtained from fingermarks and has the potential to complement other methods of human identification including analysis of ridge patterns or touch DNA.

### Keywords
Epidermal corneocytes, Forensic science, Genetically variant peptides, Proteomics, Fingermarks

### Affiliations
University of California Davis, College of Agricultural and Envirnmental Sciences, Environmental Toxicology
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon John Parker
University of California Davis, College of Agricultural and Envirnmental Sciences, Environmental Toxicology


