### Accession
PXD018917

### Title
A Quantitative Yeast Aging Proteomics Analysis Reveals Novel Aging Regulators

### Description
Extending lifespan from yeast to mammals, calorie restriction (CR) is the most conserved longevity intervention. Numerous conserved pathways regulating aging and mediating CR have been identified; however, the overall proteomic changes during these conditions remain largely unexplored. We compared proteomes between young and replicatively aged yeast cells under normal and CR conditions using SILAC quantitative proteomics and discovered distinct signatures in the aging proteome. We found remarkable similarities between aged and CR cells, including induction of stress response pathways, providing evidence that CR pathways are engaged in aged cells. These observations also uncovered aberrant changes in mitochondria membrane proteins as well as a proteolytic cellular state in old cells. These proteomics analyses also help identify potential genes and pathways that have causal effects on longevity.

### Sample Protocol
Young and old isolation and whole-cell extract preparation were carried out  with the following modifications: SC media containing 2% (NR) or 0.05% (CR) dextrose were used; 3.2×10^9 cells for NR or 2.8×10^9 for CR were labeled by biotin; cell density was always kept within the logarithmic phase in all culturing periods (OD600 <2.0 for NR and <0.2 for CR cultures); only old cells from the last (fourth) sort, about 4×10^8 cells, were saved; young cells were collected only from unbound fraction of the first sort; bud scars were stained with WGA Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen); whole-cell extracts were prepared for the saved young and old cell fractions, as well as aliquots of SILAC labeled reference cells, at the same time.  SILAC labeled common reference cells were prepared by were continuously culturing BY4741 cells in the SC medium containing 13C-labeled lysine (heavy medium) for about 60 hours, a total of about 40 doublings. The culture was maintained within the logarithmic phase by successive dilutions with fresh heavy media in the mornings and evenings. Cells containing unlabeled lysine should have been diluted 1012 times; hence no unlabeled cells should remain in the final SILAC labeled culture. Cells were collected, aliquoted, and stored at -80 °C. Incorporation of 13C-labeled lysine is verified by mass spectrometry.  Whole-cell extracts from non-SILAC labeled (light, containing regular lysine) young and old yeast cells grown in either NR or CR medium were mixed in 1:1 ratio with whole-cell extracts from the SILAC labeled (heavy, containing 13C-labeled lysine) common reference cells and loaded on a 4-12% gradient NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). Approximately 200 µg of protein was loaded per lane. Gel lanes were cut into 18 slices, which were independently further sliced into smaller pieces and then subjected to in gel digestion using the lysC protease (Wako Biochemicals) essentially as described. Extracted proteolytic peptides were desalted using StageTips  and then loaded on an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon) connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated according to their hydrophobicity using a 5%–30% acetonitrile gradient in two hours on a 25 cm reverse phase column (New Objective) with an inner diameter of 75 μm packed in house with C18 material (Dr. Maisch; Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). This column was maintained at 50 °C in a column oven (Sonation, PRSO-V1). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, and for every full scan the 15 most intense ions were fragmented in the dual pressure linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software  version 1.1.1.25 and searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against a decoy yeast database. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and data was fixed at a maximum false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and protein level. Mass spectrometry data were outputted in the form of Heavy/Light ratios for each detected protein.

### Publication Abstract
Calorie restriction (CR) is the most robust longevity intervention, extending lifespan from yeast to mammals. Numerous conserved pathways regulating aging and mediating CR have been identified; however, the overall proteomic changes during these conditions remain largely unexplored. We compared proteomes between young and replicatively aged yeast cells under normal and CR conditions using the Stable-Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) quantitative proteomics and discovered distinct signatures in the aging proteome. We found remarkable proteomic similarities between aged and CR cells, including induction of stress response pathways, providing evidence that CR pathways are engaged in aged cells. These observations also uncovered aberrant changes in mitochondria membrane proteins as well as a proteolytic cellular state in old cells. These proteomics analyses help identify potential genes and pathways that have causal effects on longevity.

### Keywords
Replicative aging, Yeast, Aging, Proteome, Caloric restriction

### Affiliations
Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Ruofan Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Weiwei Dang
Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States


