### Accession
PXD008321

### Title
Two independent proteomic approaches provide the most comprehensive analysis of the synovial fluid proteome in responders and non-responders to Autologous Chondrocyte Implantation

### Description
Background: Results obtained from our previous study using a label-free quantitation (LF) proteomic approach in which dynamic range compression was used to profile lower abundance proteins, demonstrated few proteins that were differentially abundant within the synovial fluid (SF) when comparing Autologous Chondrocyte Implantation (ACI) responders and non-responders at baseline (1). This study builds upon our previous findings by assessing higher abundance proteins within these SFs; providing a more global proteome analysis from which we can understand more fully the biology underlying ACI success or failure. Methods: Isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomics was used to assess SFs from ACI responders (mean Lysholm improvement of 33; n=14) and non-responders (mean Lysholm decrease of 14; n=13) at the two stages of surgery (cartilage harvest and chondrocyte implantation). Differentially abundant proteins were investigated using pathway analyses and the iTRAQ proteomic dataset was combined with our published proteomic dataset of dynamically compressed SFs, from which an interactome network model of systemic protein interactions was generated.  Results: iTRAQ proteomics has confirmed our previous finding that there is a marked proteome shift in response to cartilage harvest (70 and 54 proteins demonstrating ≥2.0 fold change between Stages I and II in responders and non-responders, respectively) and has highlighted 28 proteins that were differentially abundant between responders and non-responders to ACI, that were not found in the LF study; 16 of which were altered at baseline. Two protein abundance changes (Complement C1S subcomponent and Matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3), have been biochemically validated. Combination of the iTRAQ and LF proteomic datasets has generated in-depth SF proteome information that has been used to generate interactome networks representing ACI success or failure, from which functional pathways that are dysregulated in ACI non-responders have been identified.  Conclusions: Several candidate biomarkers for baseline prediction of ACI outcome have been identified. A holistic overview of the SF proteome in responders and non-responders to ACI has been profiled providing a better understanding of the biological pathways underlying clinical outcome, particularly the differential response to cartilage harvest in non-responders.

### Sample Protocol
Synovial fluid collection and storage: SF was collected, as described previously from the knee joints of patients’, with informed consent and following local research ethical approval. Immediately prior to both ACI surgeries, Stage I (cartilage harvest) and Stage II (chondrocyte implantation), 20 mL of saline was injected into the joint and 20 rounds of leg flexion and extension carried out to allow aspiration of as much SF as possible. SF was then centrifuged at 6,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C and split into aliquots for long-term storage in liquid nitrogen. The dilution factor of the SF samples was calculated by comparing urea content in SF to matched blood plasma using a QuantiChromTM Urea Assay kit (BioAssay Systems, Hayward, USA) according to manufacturers’ instructions, as described previously and SF samples with a dilution factor greater than 10 were excluded from the study. Clinical responders to ACI were defined as individuals who demonstrated an increase of at least 10 points in the Lysholm score at 12 months post-treatment compared to their baseline score, as has been used previously. The Lysholm score is a validated, patient-self assessment score, encompassing knee pain and joint function that ranges from 0-100, with 100 representing ‘perfect’ knee function. Thirteen patients were considered as non-responders to ACI, demonstrating a mean decrease in Lysholm score of 14 points (range 4-46) and 14 SF donors were considered responders with a mean improvement of 33 points (range 17-54). Sample preparation and analysis using iTRAQ proteomics (iTRAQ LC-MS/MS). Total protein was quantified using a PierceTM 660nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK )and a total of 200 µg of SF protein was pooled equally from the donors in each of the following experimental groups: Stage I, responders (n=8); Stage I, non-responders (n=7); Stage II responders (n=12) and Stage II, non-responders (n=12). The pooled samples were then precipitated in six volumes of ice-cold acetone overnight at -20˚C. The precipitates were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 mins at 4˚C before being re-suspended in 200 µl Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Eighty five micrograms of protein for each experimental sample was then subjected to reduction and  alkylation(as instructed in the iTRAQ labelling kit (Applied Biosystems, Bleiswijk, Netherlands)). Trypsin was then added to the samples for overnight digestion at 37˚C. Tryptic digests were labelled with the iTRAQ tags, according to manufacturers’ instructions: 114- Stage II, responders; 115- Stage II, non-responders; 116- Stage I, responders; 117- Stage I, non-responders, before being pooled to one microcentrifuge tube prior to being dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. iTRAQ- labelled peptides were resuspended in 0.6 mL of loading Buffer Ascx (10 mM monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4), 20% acetonitrile (MeCN), pH 3.0), followed by sonication. The pH was adjusted to 3.0 with 0.5 M orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4). The peptides were separated by strong cation exchange chromatography as described previously (ref). Each SCX fraction was analysed by nanoLC ESI MSMS using a TripleTOF 5600 tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Foster City, CA).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data file was subsequently analysed using ProteinPilot 4.5 software with the Paragon™ and ProGroup™ algorithms (ABSciex) against the human sequences in the Swiss-Prot database Nov2012. Searches were performed using the pre-set iTRAQ settings in ProteinPilot. Trypsin was selected as the cleavage enzyme and MMTS modification of cysteines with a “Thorough ID” search effort. ProteinPilot’s Bias correction assumes that most proteins do not change in expression. Finally, detected proteins were reported with a Protein Threshold [Unused ProtScore (confidence)] >0.05 and used in the quantitative analysis if they were identified with two or more peptides with 95% confidence or above. P-values for the iTRAQ ratios were calculated by the ProteinPilot software. Proteins with iTRAQ ratios with p-values ≤0.05 and with differential abundances of ≥±2.0 fold change (FC) were used in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autologous chondrocyte implantation (aci); itraq proteomics; label-free quantification proteomics; synovial fluid; cartilage repair; osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele Univeristy, Keele, Staffordshire, UK Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, Shropshire, UK

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Wright
Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele Univeristy, Keele, Staffordshire, UK Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, Shropshire, UK


