### Accession
PXD023341

### Title
Proteomic identification of recombinant nucleocapsid N protein 40 kDa fragment from SARS-CoV-2

### Description
Serological   testing is   important   methodfor   diagnosis   of   severe   acute   respiratory   syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. Nucleocapsid (N) protein is the most abundant virus derived protein and strong immunogen. We aimed to find its efficient, low-cost production. SARS-CoV-2  recombinant  fragment  of  nucleocapsid  protein  (rfNP;  58-419  aa)  was  expressed  in E. coli in soluble form, purified and characterized biochemically and immunologically. Purified rfNP has secondary structure of full-length recombinant N protein, with high percentage of disordered structure (34.2 %) and of β-sheet (40.7 %). rfNP was tested in immunoblot using sera of COVID-19  convalescent  patients.  ELISA  was  optimized  with  sera  of  RT-PCR  confirmed  positive symptomatic  patients  and  healthy  individuals.  IgG  detection  sensitivity  was  96%  (47/50)  and specificity 97% (67/68), while IgM detection was slightly lower (94% and 96.5%, respectively). Cost-effective approach for soluble recombinant N protein fragment production was developed, with reliable IgG and IgM antibodies detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Preparative SDS-PAGE was carried out on 14 % polyacrylamide gel under reducing conditions. A 20 ug  of  purified  ewcombinant N protein/cm  of  well  was  loaded.  After  SDS-PAGE  gel  staining,  protein  bands  were excised, washed, reduced with dithiothreitol, and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by in gel trypsin-digestion, trypsin/sample ratio of 1:30 (w/w), as already described (Ivana Prodic. Katarina Smiljanic, Ana Simovic, 2019; Shevchenko et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides from in-gel digestions, were chromatographically separated using an liquid chromatographic system of a quaternary Accela 600 pump, Accela auto sampler  (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) and analytical Hypersil GOLD column (50x2.1 mm, 1.9 um particle size). The mobile phases were (A) water (MS-grade) with 0.1% formic acid and (B) acetonitrile (MS-grade) with 0.1% formic acid. The gradient program was as follows: 0-2min 95% A, 2-18min 95%-50% A, 18-23min 50%-30% A, 23-26min 30%-5% A, 26-28min 5% A, 28-28.1min 5%-95% A, 28.1-30min 95% A , with flow rate of 0.3mL/min. Injection volumes were between 10-30uL (0.7-3μg of protein). This UHPLC system was coupled with LTQ Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) equipped with heated electrospray ionization source (HESI). Analysis was performed in positive ion mode. Parameters of the ion source was as follows: Capillary voltage 35V, spray voltage 4.5kV, tube lens 110V, capillary temperature 275 °C sheath and auxiliary gas flow (N2) 32 and 8 (arbitrary units), range 100–2000 m/z, resolving power 60 000, 1 micro scan) was acquired using Xcalibur (version 2.1) software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The identification of proteins was performed by PEAKS Suite X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Signature MS/MS spectra were searched using the PEAKS database (DB) and post-translational modification (PTM) algorithms against a hybridized database consisting of (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (2019-nCoV) (SARS-CoV-2) [2697049] and Escherichia coli [562]) UniProtKB reviewed sequences, downloaded on 01/06/2020 from http://www.uniprot.org/, and the Max Quant contaminant database (downloaded on 01/03/2019 from http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id). In the PEAKS DB algorithm, the following modifications were taken into account as variables: oxidation (Met), deamidation (Gln, Asn), and hydroxylation (Pro), while carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. Up to four missed trypsin cleavages were allowed per peptide. A non-specific mode of trypsin cleavage was chosen at both ends of the peptides, enabling tryptic, semi-tryptic, and atryptic peptide detection. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Protein filters were set to protein -10 log P≥20, proteins’ unique peptides ≥1, and an AScore for confident PTM identification of at least 20. The peptide filter was set to the false discovery rate <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Serological testing is important method for diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. Nucleocapsid (N) protein is the most abundant virus derived protein and strong immunogen. We aimed to find its efficient, low-cost production. SARS-CoV-2 recombinant fragment of nucleocapsid protein (rfNP; 58-419 aa) was expressed in E. coli in soluble form, purified and characterized biochemically and immunologically. Purified rfNP has secondary structure of full-length recombinant N protein, with high percentage of disordered structure (34.2%) and of &#x3b2;-sheet (40.7%). rfNP was tested in immunoblot using sera of COVID-19 convalescent patients. ELISA was optimized with sera of RT-PCR confirmed positive symptomatic patients and healthy individuals. IgG detection sensitivity was 96% (47/50) and specificity 97% (67/68), while IgM detection was slightly lower (94% and 96.5%, respectively). Cost-effective approach for soluble recombinant N protein fragment production was developed, with reliable IgG and IgM antibodies detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Prokaryotic expression;serological assay, Covid-19, Recombinant nucleocapsid protein, N protein fragment

### Affiliations
Tanja Ćirković Velicković, PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member of Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea
Senior Research Associate at University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences

### Submitter
Katarina Smiljanic

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja D. Ćirković Velicković
Tanja Ćirković Velicković, PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member of Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea


