### Accession
PXD002342

### Title
The dynamic regulatory genome of Capsaspora owczarzaki and the origin of animal multicellularity

### Description
Recent evidence that the unicellular ancestor of animals had a complex repertoire of genes linked to multicellular processes suggests that changes in the regulatory genome, rather than gene innovation, were key to the origin of animals. Here, we carry out multiple functional genomic assays in Capsaspora owczarzaki, the unicellular relative of animals with the largest known gene repertoire for transcriptional regulation. We show that changing chromatin states, differential lincRNA expression and dynamic cis-regulatory sites are associated with life cycle transitions in Capsaspora. Moreover, we demonstrate conservation of animal developmental transcription factor networks and extensive network interconnection in this premetazoan organism. In contrast, however, Capsaspora lacks animal promoter types and its regulatory sites are small, proximal and lack signatures of animal enhancers. Overall, our results indicate that the emergence of animal multicellularity was linked to a major shift in genome regulatory complexity, most notably the appearance of distal enhancer regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Histones samples were quantified by the BCA method and 10 micrograms of each sample were derivatized with propionic anhydride, digested with trypsin and derivatized again with propionic anhydride as described before . Briefly, samples were dissolved in 30 microliters of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 microloters of ammonium hydroxide was added to bring the pH between 7 and 9. The propionic anhydride was prepared by adding 25 L of propionic anhydride to 75 L of anhydrous isopropanol. 15 l of propionic anhydride was added to the samples and immediately 8 microliters of ammonium hydroxide were added to maintain the pH at around 8 and samples were incubated at 37ºC for 15 minutes. Samples were vacuum dried and the propionylation procedure repeated. Dried samples were dissolved in 100 microliters of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested 6h at 37ºC with 0.5 micrograms of trypsin. The digestion was quenched adding 10 microliters of glacial acetic acid, vacuum centrifuged and pH adjusted again between 7 and 9. The propionylation procedure was repeated twice. Samples were vacuum dried and desalted with C18 ultramicrospin columns (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA). A 2-μg aliquot of the peptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 12 cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos, Japan) with both collision induced dissociation (CID) and high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Chromatographic gradients started at 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and gradually increased to 10% buffer B in 1 min and to 35% buffer B in 30 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 90% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 300 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. The background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and full MS scans with 1 microscan at resolution of 60 000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350−2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s, and the charge-state filter disqualifying singly charged peptides for fragmentation was activated. Following each survey scan, the 20 (CID) or the 10 (HCD) most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 (CID) or 10000 (HCD) were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via CID were acquired in the linear ion trap and the produced via HCD were acquired in the Orbitrap, AGC was set to 1e4 (CID) or 4e4 (HCD) and isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 10 ms (CID) or 0.1ms (HCD), and maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the Mascot search engine (v2.3, Matrix Science ) was used for peptide identification. Data were searched against a Capsaspora Owczarzaki protein database derived from the Broad Institute plus the most common contaminants (total of 9407 sequences). A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da (CID) or 20 mmu (HCD). Dimethyl lysine, trimethyl lysine, propionyl lysine and propionyl + methyl lysine were defined as variable modification. Propionylation on N-terminal was set as a fix modification. The identified peptides were filtered by mascot ion score higher than 20.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular ancestor of animals had a complex repertoire of genes linked to multicellular processes. This suggests that changes in the regulatory genome, rather than in gene innovation, were key to the origin of animals. Here, we carry out multiple functional genomic assays in Capsaspora owczarzaki, the unicellular relative of animals with the largest known gene repertoire for transcriptional regulation. We show that changing chromatin states, differential lincRNA expression, and dynamic cis-regulatory sites are associated with life cycle transitions in Capsaspora. Moreover, we demonstrate conservation of animal developmental transcription-factor networks and extensive network interconnection in this premetazoan organism. In contrast, however, Capsaspora lacks animal promoter types, and its regulatory sites are small, proximal, and lack signatures of animal enhancers. Overall, our results indicate that the emergence of animal multicellularity was linked to a&#xa0;major shift in genome cis-regulatory complexity, most notably the appearance of distal enhancer regulation.

### Keywords
Histone acetylation methylation dimethilation trimethylation capsaspora owczarzaki

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, IBE
Center of genomic regulation

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Iñaki Ruiz
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, IBE


