### Accession
PXD014882

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals the protective effects of Huangqi decoction against intrahepatic cholestasis by inhibiting NF-κB/IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathwa

### Description
Intrahepatic cholestasis (IC) is a common symptom of liver diseases but with limited treatment. Huangqi decoction (HQD), a classic herbal medicine, has shown protective effects against IC. In this study, the iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics was performed to investigate the potential mechanism of HQD on alpha-naphthylisothiocyanate (ANIT) induced IC, resulting in 2,796 quantified proteins across all the samples, including 270 differentially expressed proteins under HQD treatment. Fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering analysis of these 270 proteins revealed that the pro-inflammatory proteins, such as LCN2, SAA1, FGG, FGA, and FGB, were assigned in the Cluster 1 (up-regulated by ANIT, and down-regulated by HQD). Following functional bioinformatics analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis represented that these pro-inflammatory proteins were involved in the STAT3 signaling pathway. Further real-time PCR and Western blot experiments confirmed that the expression of these proteins was consistent with the proteomic results. Moreover, HQD treatment decreased the phosphorylation of STAT3 that induced by ANIT. And Western blot experiments also revealed that HQD could decrease phosphorylation of NF-κB and down-regulate the expression inflammatory genes IL-6, and therefore inhibit IL-6/STATA3 signaling pathway. In summary, the present study suggested that HQD treatment may ameliorate intrahepatic cholestasis via inhibiting the NF-κB/IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver tissues were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), pH 7.6). The lysates were homogenized, denatured and reduced at 95 °C for 5 min, and then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min. The supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined using tryptophan fluorescence emission assay and further confirmed by Coomassie-stained gel. Peptides were prepared following the Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) method. Proteins were digested overnight with 1:50 (protein: enzyme, w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C. The peptides concentration was determined by BCA protein quantification kit. Peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA). Four sets of iTRAQ8-plex experiments were conducted to quantify 24 liver tissue samples, with a mixture from combination of 24 pooled liver protein samples in each set (Sample in control group labeled with 114, 115; sample in ANTI group labeled with 116, 117; samples in HQD group labeled with 118,119; “Mix” sample labeled with 121). The iTRAQ reagents were dissolved in 50 μL isopropanol, and peptides were dissolved in 15 μL 0.5 M TEAB (pH 8.5). Then the iTRAQ reagents solution were added to the peptide solution, mixed by vortex, and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. After quenching with 50 μL H2O, differentially labeled peptides were mixed and subsequently desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction column (3M Empore). Each set of iTRAQ-labeled peptides mixture was fractionated on an Agilent 1260 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min using a C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 beads). Solvent A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and a nonlinear increasing concentration of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) were used to separate peptides. 28 fractions were collected in a 66 min gradient, which were further combined by a concatenation strategy into 14 fractions (1&15, 2&16, …, 14&28). The fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA for nano LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometry(Thermo Fisher Scientific) platform combined to an online nano flow EASY-nLC1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr.Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase A of RP-HPLC was0.1% formic acid in water, and the mobile phase B was0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using Xcalibur software in positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 2.30 kV. The MS1 full scan was set at a resolution of 60,000 by orbitrap mass analyzer (300-1500 m/z) followed by ‘top 12’ MS2 scan generated by HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000. The normalized collision energy (NCE) was 38.0% and the isolation window was set at 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) against the Uniprot Mouse database (downloaded in November 2017). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, oxidized methionine and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Intrahepatic cholestasis (IC) is a common syndrome that affects the liver, with treatment options being limited. Huangqi decoction (HQD), a classic herbal medicine, has shown protective effects against IC. In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification-based quantitative proteomics was performed to investigate the potential mechanism of action of HQD on &#x3b1;-naphthylisothiocyanate (ANIT)-induced IC, resulting in 2796 quantified proteins across all samples, including 270 differentially expressed proteins under HQD treatment. Fuzzy <i>c</i>-means clustering analysis of these 270 proteins assigned the proinflammatory proteins, such as LCN2, SAA1, FGG, FGA, and FGB, to Cluster 1 (upregulated by ANIT, and downregulated by HQD). Functional bioinformatics and protein-protein interaction network analyses indicated that these proinflammatory proteins were involved in the STAT3 signaling pathway. Further real-time PCR and Western blot experiments confirmed that the expression of these proteins was consistent with the proteomic results. Moreover, HQD treatment decreased the phosphorylation of STAT3, induced by ANIT. Western blot experiments revealed that HQD treatment decreased phosphorylation of NF-&#x3ba;B and downregulated the expression of the inflammatory gene IL-6 and therefore inhibited the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway. In summary, the present study suggested that HQD may ameliorate acute cholestatic liver injury via inhibition of the NF-&#x3ba;B/IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Intrahepatic cholestasis; huangqi decoction; proteomics; nf-κb; il-6; stat3

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory for Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory for Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


