### Accession
PXD005971

### Title
Proteomic landscape of the primary somatosensory cortex upon sensory deprivation

### Description
We employed label free quantitative mass spectrometry to address experience-dependent changes in the proteome after sensory deprivation in the primary somatosensory cortex. Cortical column- and layer-specific tissue samples were collected from control animals, with all whiskers intact, and animals whose C-row whiskers were bilaterally plucked for 11-14 days.

### Sample Protocol
Pups were bilaterally spared or deprived off of their C-row whiskers between P12 and P23-P26.  The whisker deprivation was repeated every third day to ensure that there was no regrowth of the whiskers. 400 µm thalamocortical slices were prepared. L4 and L2/3 were isolated from barrel cortical columns A-E under a microscope using a pulled patch pipette; tissue from columns A and B were pooled with tissue from columns E and D, respectively. Proteins were isolated in a SDS buffer, denatured with high urea and purified on a 30 kDa filter according to the so called FASP protocol. Digestion was done with trypsin and tryptic peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips. Peptides were seperated with an 25 cm C18 HPLC column and sequenced on a Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0. with match-between-runs, label-free quantification and intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) enabled. The RefSeq protein sequence database downloaded at 28-06-2016 was used to identify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Experience-dependent plasticity (EDP) powerfully shapes neural circuits by inducing long-lasting molecular changes in the brain. Molecular mechanisms of EDP have been traditionally studied by identifying single or small subsets of targets along the biochemical pathways that link synaptic receptors to nuclear processes. Recent technological advances in large-scale analysis of gene transcription and translation now allow systematic observation of thousands of molecules simultaneously. Here we employed label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to address experience-dependent changes in the proteome after sensory deprivation of the primary somatosensory cortex. Cortical column- and layer-specific tissue samples were collected from control animals, with all whiskers intact, and animals whose C-row whiskers were bilaterally plucked for 11-14 days. Thirty-three samples from cortical layers (L) 2/3 and L4 spanning across control, deprived, and first- and second-order spared columns yielded at least 10&#xa0;000 peptides mapping to &#x223c;5000 protein groups. Of these, 4676 were identified with high confidence, and &gt;3000 were found in all samples. This comprehensive database provides a snapshot of the proteome after whisker deprivation, a protocol that has been widely used to unravel the synaptic, cellular, and network mechanisms of EDP. Complementing the recently made available transcriptome for identical experimental conditions (see the accompanying article by Kole et al.), the database can be used to (i) mine novel targets whose translation is modulated by sensory organ use, (ii) cross-validate experimental protocols from the same developmental time point, and (iii) statistically map the molecular pathways of cortical plasticity at a columnar and laminar resolution.

### Keywords
Barrel cortex, Whisker plucking, Juvenile mice, Mass-spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen - the Netherlands

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen - the Netherlands


