### Accession
PXD029243

### Title
The proteomic response of Clostridioides difficile to the Chlorotonil A derivative ChtB1-Epo2

### Description
The anaerobic, spore-forming pathogen Clostridioides difficile infects the gastrointestinal tract of higher mammals, including humans, and is the major causative agent of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Moreover, recurrence and re-infection rates after a first successful antibiotic therapy are substantially high. To overcome the problem of recurrence and re-infection new antibiotics are urgently required that are more selective for the pathogen but spare other members of the microbiota. In turn, the microbial community inside the intestine is allowed to recover and to re-establish colonization resistance to protect against recurrence. The data presented here aim at analyzing the ability of the macrolide compound chlorotonil A to meet the requirements of C. difficile specific drug.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630 was grown in CDMM medium (Neumann-Schaal et al., 2015), was stressed with a sublethal concentration of the chlorotonil A derivative ChtB1-Epo2 and was grown in the presence of the antibiotic for further 90 minutes. Afterwards treated, untreated and DMSO-treated cells were harvested by centrifugation and proteins were extracted by mechanical disruption in a FastPrep-25 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, California, USA; three cycles at 6.5 m/s à 30 s). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by two centrifugation steps at 15,000 rpm and 4 °C. Afterwards, protein concentrations were determined using Roti®-Nanoquant (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, 50 µg of each protein extract were first reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA (IAA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and acidification with phosphoric acid (Carl Roth®, Karlsruhe, Germany). S-traps (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) were used for protein digestion using trypsin according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. For purification and subsequent fractionation of peptides, a high pH reversed-phase workflow using self-packed C18 columns (Mücke et al., 2020) was applied. Finally, peptide samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer equipped an EASY nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) and self-packed analytical columns with integrated emitter (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 reverse phase material (3 µm, Dr. Maisch). A 85 min gradient from 5 to 50 % of acetonitrile, 0.1 % acetic acid at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides from the column. Full survey scans were performed with a resolution of 60,000 in the range of 333 – 1650 m/z. MS/MS scans were performed for the fifteen most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 s. Internal lock mass calibration was applied (lock mass 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against a strain specific protein database containing 3560 entries (obtained from NCBI on August 3rd, 2021 (NC_009089)) as well as common contaminants and reverse sequences using the Andromeda based search engine MaxQuant ((Cox et al., 2011); version 2.0.1.0). A maximum of two missed cleavages was assumed and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. For protein identification, default parameters were used. Unique and razor peptides were considered for label-free protein quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Match between runs was enabled with default settings within each sample group. Proteins were considered as identified if they were identified with at least two unique peptides in at least two out of three biological replicates and log2 fold changes were calculated from averaged LFQ intensities. Finally, the R package DEqMS (Zhu et al., 2020) was used to test for statistical significantly changed protein intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colonization resistance, Chlorotonil a, Antibiotic resistance, Antibiotic therapy, Clostridioides difficile, Selectivity

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


