### Accession
PXD020203

### Title
Forensic proteomics to identify an unknown snake venom in blood

### Description
Although forensic proteomics is an emerging field, it remains underutilized as a tool for criminal investigations. Here we present its use in providing key evidence in an involuntary manslaughter case. The defendant was known to be a keeper of exotic snakes, including several venomous species, which led to a probe of potential snake venom components in the blood of the deceased. One major challenge of the investigation was the overwhelming presence of several blood proteins, such as albumin and immunoglobulins, which obscures the detection of less abundant ones. To mitigate this problem, proteins from the blood were processed in four different ways involving a combination of immunodepletion and fractionation methods, then prepared for peptide identification by mass spectrometry. We were able to sequence ~15,000 peptides, but another challenge was to differentiate between human and snake proteins, given the genetic similarities that are shared by the two species. After a thorough bioinformatics search and manual inspection, we found that <1% of the sequenced peptides were matched unequivocally to snake proteins, including a well-known venom component, phospholipase A2. This led to a court-issued search warrant of the defendant’s home, followed by his arrest and an eventual guilty plea with formal sentencing to 18 months in prison. The work outlined here is an example of proteomics technology that can help to expand the scope of forensic genetics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from blood were immunodepleted or left undepleted, then were fractionated by gel electrophoresis and tryptically digested to generate peptides, or fractionated by basic reversed phase chromatography post-digestion. Peptides were desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Bruker Impact II QTOF.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed by MaxQuant using default parameters against a FASTA database containing human, snake, and common contaminant proteins along with a reverse data for false discovery calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics is the global analysis of proteins in a sample, and its methodologies are commonly applied in life science research. Despite its wide applicability however, proteomics is rarely used as a tool in criminal investigations. Here we present a case where the technique provided key evidence in a case that involved the death of a two-year old girl. The defendant was known to keep exotic snakes, including several venomous species, which led the coroner to probe whether there could be snake venom in the blood of the deceased. One major challenge of the investigation was the overwhelming presence of several blood proteins, such as apolipoprotein and complement proteins, which hinders the detection of less abundant analytes. In a counter-acting strategy, a combination of immunodepletion and fractionation methods was used; the sample was then submitted to tandem mass spectrometry for peptide identification. Using this strategy, 15,000 peptides could be sequenced. However, the subsequent challenge was to differentiate between human and snake proteins, given the genetic similarities that are shared by the two vertebrate species. After a thorough bioinformatics search and manual inspection, we found that&lt;1% of the sequenced peptides could be matched unequivocally to snake proteins, including a well-known venom component, phospholipase A2. This evidence, in part, led to a court-issued search warrant of the defendant's home, followed by his arrest and an eventual guilty plea with formal sentencing to 18 months in prison. The work outlined here is an example of how proteomics technology can help to expand the toolkit for molecular forensics.

### Keywords
Forensic proteomics, Snake venom, Forensic serology

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Michael Smith Laboratories University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Queenie Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard James Foster
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Michael Smith Laboratories University of British Columbia


