### Accession
PXD026046

### Title
A peptide CORO1C-47aa encoded by circ-0000437 functions as a negative regulator in endometrium tumor angiogenesis

### Description
Circular RNAs (circRNA) are a novel class of widespread non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that regulate gene expression in mammals. Recent studies demonstrate that functional peptides can be encoded by short open reading frames (sORFs) in ncRNAs, including circRNAs. In this study, through deep RNA sequencing on human endometrial cancer (EC) samples and their paired adjacent normal tissues, we uncovered that the circRNA hsa-circ-0000437 is significantly reduced in EC compared to matched paracancerous tissue. The hsa-circ-0000437 contains a sORF encoding a functional peptide termed as CORO1C-47aa. Overexpression of CORO1C-47aa is capable of inhibiting angiogenesis at the initiation stage by suppressing endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation through competing with TACC3 to bind to ARNT and suppress VEGF. The anti-tumor effects of CORO1C-47aa on EC progression suggest that CORO1C-47aa has a potential value in anti-carcinoma therapies and deserves further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide samples were analyzed on Thermo Fisher LTQ Obitrap ETD mass spectrometry, Briefly, loaded sample onto an HPLC chromatography system named Thermo Fisher Easy-nLC 1000 equipped with a C18 colume (1.8mm，0.15×1,00mm). Solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile. The elution gradient was from 4% to 18% in 182 min, 18% to 90% in 13 min solvent B at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Mass spectrometry analysis were carried out at the AIMSMASS Co.,Ltd.(Shanghai, China) in the positive-ion mode with an automated data-dependent MS/MS analysis with full scans (350-1600 m/z) acquired using FTMS at a mass resolution of 30,000 and the ten most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The MS/MS was acquired using higher-energy collision dissociation at 35% collision energy at a mass resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo), the parameter used for data analysis included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.05D, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The

### Publication Abstract
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a novel class of widespread noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression in mammals. Recent studies demonstrate that functional peptides can be encoded by short open reading frames in noncoding RNAs, including circRNAs. However, the role of circRNAs in various physiological and pathological states, such as cancer, is not well understood. In this study, through deep RNA sequencing on human endometrial cancer (EC) samples and their paired adjacent normal tissues, we uncovered that the circRNA hsa-circ-0000437 is significantly reduced in EC compared with matched paracancerous tissue. The hsa-circ-0000437 contains a short open reading frame encoding a functional peptide termed CORO1C-47aa. Overexpression of CORO1C-47aa is capable of inhibiting angiogenesis at the initiation stage by suppressing endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation through competition with transcription factor TACC3 to bind to ARNT and suppress VEGF. CORO1C-47aa directly bound to ARNT through the PAS-B domain, and blocking the association between ARNT and TACC3, which led to reduced expression of VEGF, ultimately lead to reduced angiogenesis. The antitumor effects of CORO1C-47aa on EC progression suggest that CORO1C-47aa has potential value in anticarcinoma therapies and warrants further investigation.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Endometrial cancer, Vegf, Functional peptide, Hsa-circ-0000437

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.
suchoow university

### Submitter
fang li

### Lab Head
Dr fang li
Department of Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.


