### Accession
PXD014667

### Title
Listeria monocytogenes exploits the MICOS complex subunit Mic10 to promote mitochondrial fragmentation and cellular infection

### Description
Mitochondrial function adapts to cellular demands and is affected by the ability of the organelle to undergo fusion and fission in response to physiological and non-physiological cues. We previously showed that infection with the human bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes elicits transient mitochondrial fission and a drop in mitochondrial -dependent energy production through a mechanism requiring the bacterial pore-forming toxin listeriolysin O (LLO). Here, we performed quantitative mitochondrial proteomics to search for host factors involved in L. monocytogenes-induced mitochondrial fission. We found that Mic10, a critical component of the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) complex, is significantly enriched in mitochondria isolated from cells infected with wild-type but not with LLO-deficient L. monocytogenes. Increased mitochondrial Mic10 levels did not correlate with upregulated transcription, suggesting a post-transcriptional regulation. We showed that Mic10 is necessary for L. monocytogenes-induced mitochondrial network fragmentation, and that it contributes to L. monocytogenes cellular infection independently of MICOS proteins Mic13, Mic26 and Mic27. Together, L. monocytogenes infection allowed us to uncover a role for Mic10 in mitochondrial fission.

### Sample Protocol
Sample proteins were reduced for 30 min at 55 °C in the presence of 25 mM DTT, and then alkylated for 15 min in the dark in the presence of 50 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted two-fold with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and proteins digested with Lys-C (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 4 h at 37 ºC. Samples were diluted two-fold again and incubated overnight at 37 ºC with trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Promega) at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio. Formic acid (FA) was added at 1% (v/v), and after 10 min on ice, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000×g to pellet any insoluble material. Peptides in the supernatant were purified in Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (100 mg; Waters), lyophilized, dissolved in solvent A [0.1% (v/v) FA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)] and quantified by absorbance at 280 nm (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  LC-MS/MS analysis of purified peptides (~2 μg) was conducted in an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded at 250 nL/min on a home-made analytical column [50 cm × 75 μm, 1.9-μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 beads (Dr. Maisch)] and eluted with a non-linear gradient of solvent B [0.1% (v/v) FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)] from 3% to 7% for 7 min, 7% to 34% for 100 min, 34% to 62% for 40 min, and 62% to 75% for 10 min. Full run time was 185 min, including column wash and regeneration (100% and 2% solvent B, respectively) each for 15 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, changing automatically between MS and MS/MS scans for the top 10 most abundant ion species. Full-scan MS spectra (scan range: 300–1700 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 400), with a target value of 3×106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The 10 most intense precursor ions above an intensity threshold value of 1.7×105 and with charge states between +2 and +6 were isolated (1.6 Th window; dynamic exclusion of 45 s) for HCD fragmentation at a 28% normalized collision energy, after reaching a target value of 1×106 in a maximum of 60 ms. MS/MS spectra (scan range: 200–2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 400).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a database of 20,198 human proteins (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, released on 12 April 2017) using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) (Jürgen Cox and Mann 2008) with its Andromeda search engine (Jürgen Cox et al. 2011). Trypsin was selected as protease, allowing cleavage before proline residues and up to three missed cleavages. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively; maximum peptide charge was set to +7, and minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set at both protein and peptide levels. A match-between-runs feature was enabled between biological replicates with a matching time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins identified by at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, and a minimum ratio count of two unique/razor peptides was necessary for quantification via the MaxLFQ algorithm (Jürgen Cox et al. 2014). MaxQuant output data (ProteinGroups.txt file) was further analyzed using Perseus software (version 1.6.1.2) (Tyanova et al. 2016). Proteins identified as contaminants, only by site or reverse database hits were filtered out, and LFQ intensity values were log2-transformed. Proteins not detected in all three biological replicates in at least one condition were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. A multiple-sample test (ANOVA) was performed (FDR=0.05, S0=1) to determine which proteins showed a statistically significant change of their levels (fold change > 2) across all conditions. ANOVA significant hits were then subjected to Tukey’s post hoc testing (FDR=0.05) to identify the conditions where there are statistically significant protein level changes.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial function adapts to cellular demands and is affected by the ability of the organelle to undergo fusion and fission in response to physiological and nonphysiological cues. We previously showed that infection with the human bacterial pathogen <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> elicits transient mitochondrial fission and a drop in mitochondrion-dependent energy production through a mechanism requiring the bacterial pore-forming toxin listeriolysin O (LLO). Here, we performed quantitative mitochondrial proteomics to search for host factors involved in <i>L. monocytogenes</i>-induced mitochondrial fission. We found that Mic10, a critical component of the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) complex, is significantly enriched in mitochondria isolated from cells infected with wild-type but not with LLO-deficient <i>L. monocytogenes</i> Increased mitochondrial Mic10 levels did not correlate with upregulated transcription, suggesting a posttranscriptional mechanism. We then showed that Mic10 is necessary for <i>L. monocytogenes</i>-induced mitochondrial network fragmentation and that it contributes to <i>L. monocytogenes</i> cellular infection independently of MICOS proteins Mic13, Mic26, and Mic27. In conclusion, investigation of <i>L. monocytogenes</i> infection allowed us to uncover a role for Mic10 in mitochondrial fission.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Pathogenic bacteria can target host cell organelles to take control of key cellular processes and promote their intracellular survival, growth, and persistence. Mitochondria are essential, highly dynamic organelles with pivotal roles in a wide variety of cell functions. Mitochondrial dynamics and function are intimately linked. Our previous research showed that <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> infection impairs mitochondrial function and triggers fission of the mitochondrial network at an early infection stage, in a process that is independent of the presence of the main mitochondrial fission protein Drp1. Here, we analyzed how mitochondrial proteins change in response to <i>L. monocytogenes</i> infection and found that infection raises the levels of Mic10, a mitochondrial inner membrane protein involved in formation of cristae. We show that Mic10 is important for <i>L. monocytogenes</i>-dependent mitochondrial fission and infection of host cells. Our findings thus offer new insight into the mechanisms used by <i>L. monocytogenes</i> to hijack mitochondria to optimize host infection.

### Keywords
Human, Micos complex, Mitochondria, Listeria monocytogenes, Mic10

### Affiliations
Bacteria-Cell Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Pascale Cossart
Bacteria-Cell Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris


