### Accession
PXD016461

### Title
Data Set2: Extensive Rewiring of the EGFR Network in Colorectal Cancer Cells Expressing Transforming Levels of KRASG13D

### Description
RAW files of corresponding Baits used in Extensive Rewiring of the EGFR Network in Colorectal Cancer Cells Expressing Transforming Levels of KRASG13D

### Sample Protocol
Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides were automatically loaded onto a nanotrap column (75μm i.d. × 2cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3μm, 100Å; Dionex) at a flow rate of 6μl/minute in 98% buffer C (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water) and 2% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water). After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Dionex) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/min over 85 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B over 10 minutes. The eluted peptides were injected online into the MS. From the MS1 scan (resolution: 30 000, two miroscans per spectrum) with a mass range of 300–1,500 the 10 most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 200 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for collision-induced dissociation was set to a value of 35, and the resulting fragments were detected with normal resolution in the linear ion trap. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded from re-selection for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion. On-bead tryptic digests were analyzed on an Ultimate Ultra 3000 chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were automatically injected on a homemade column (100mm length, 75mm inside diameter) packed with 1.8μm Reprosil AQC18 (Dr Maisch), using an increasing linear acetonitrile gradient from 2 to 40% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 250nl/minute over 40 minutes. Full scan resolution was set to 70,000 and mass range was set to 350-1,600 selecting the 12 most intense ions for MS/MS. The lock mass option was activated for calibration using a background mass of 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of AP-MS data. The resulting mass spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite 25 (v 1.3.0.5) containing the in-built Andromeda search engine to identify the proteins from the UniProt HUMAN database (release 2014_02) containing 20,242 entries. The following MaxQuant parameters were used: trypsin was selected as enzyme, with two missed cleavages per peptide allowed; fixed amino acids modification was carboamidomethylation of cysteines; variable amino acids modifications were oxidation in methionine and acetylation in protein N-terminus; first search 20ppm and main search 6ppm with fragment ion mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da; 0.01 False Discovery Rate for analyses at both peptide and protein levels. To perform protein quantification the following criteria needed to be met: a minimum of one unique peptide with a minimum length of six amino acids, and a minimum ratio count of two. Contaminants were automatically excluded by enabling the MaxQuant contaminant database search. In summary, we performed 1,710 immuno-purifications and 1,140 MS analyses consisting of 3 biological and 2 technical replicates with forward and reverse SILAC labelling of 95 baits and empty vector controls in 2 cell lines. The discrepancy between sample numbers and the number of MS analyses originates from the fact that SILAC triplets (light, medium, heavy) were pooled before MS analyses, and because the MS analyses include 2 technical replicates for each sample (i.e. the same sample was analyzed twice by MS).

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein-interaction networks (PPINs) organize fundamental biological processes, but how oncogenic mutations impact these interactions and their functions at a network-level scale is poorly understood. Here, we analyze how a common oncogenic KRAS mutation (KRAS<sup>G13D</sup>) affects PPIN structure and function of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) network in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Mapping &gt;6000 PPIs shows that this network is extensively rewired in cells expressing transforming levels of KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> (mtKRAS). The factors driving PPIN rewiring are multifactorial including changes in protein expression and phosphorylation. Mathematical modelling also suggests that the binding dynamics of low and high affinity KRAS interactors contribute to rewiring. PPIN rewiring substantially alters the composition of protein complexes, signal flow, transcriptional regulation, and cellular phenotype. These changes are validated by targeted and global experimental analysis. Importantly, genetic alterations in the most extensively rewired PPIN nodes occur frequently in CRC and are prognostic of poor patient outcomes.

### Keywords
Hke-3, Interactomic, Egfr pathway, Proteins network, Silac, Hct-116

### Affiliations
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed ali Jarboui
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.


