### Accession
PXD024351

### Title
Morphine-treated Primary Brain Endothelial Cells LC-MS/MS DIA

### Description
This project aimed at investigating the impact of morphine exposure on brain endothelial cells via an in vitro monoculture of primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) and state of the art mass spectrometry-based proteomics, using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) MS-based quantitative approach. HBMECS were exposed to morphine at three different concentrations (1, 10, 100 uM) and for two different time points (24h and 48h) to explore dose- and time-dependent effects.

### Sample Protocol
The equivalent of 20ug of proteins were taken from cells pellets suspended in 0.1% Rapigest and volume was adjusted with TEAB 0.1M. TCEP 0.1M was added (5mM final concentration9 and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. TCEP 0.1M (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample to reach a 5mM final concentration and they were incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. Afterwards, iodoacetamide 150mM (Sigma-Aldrich) was added in each sample to reach a 15mM final concentration. The samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, protected from dark and on rotation (450 rpm). After addition of trypsin (w/w ratio 1:50) (Promega), the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. The following morning, trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample with a final concentration of 0.5%. After a pH below 1 was confirmed, a 45 minutes incubation was performed. Samples were desalted on C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Appartus) and remaining peptides were dried in Savant SPD111V SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fischer). The were stored at -80°C and prior to MS injection, they were resuspended in 5% CAN 0.1% FA with addition of iRT peptides (ratio 1:20) (Biognosys). The equivalent of 2μg of peptides were injected and analyzed via LC-ESI-MS/MS on Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo EASY-nLC. Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 precolumn packed with 3 μm particles and 100 Å pore size. Separation was performed using a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 column packed with 2 μm and 100 Å particles and heated at 50 °C. Peptides were separated using a 125-min segmented gradient of 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 80% ACN 0.1% FA (solvent B), at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. A full-scan MS was acquired with a resolution of 60’000 FWHM at m/z 200, a scan range from 400 to 1250 m/z, a maximum injection time of 100ms and a AGC target of 106. For MS/MS scan, 30 DIA variable windows were used with a resolution of 30’000 FWHM at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 80 ms and AGC target of 2x106.

### Data Protocol
DIA data acquisition was done using the software SpectronautTM Pulsar 13 (Biognosys). The DDA library used was generated using Spectronaut TM Pulsar 11 as explained in (Dozio V et al., 2018) by merging DDA raw data analyzed via Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot search engine. Specific settings are described in (Dozio V et al., 2018). Then, DIA MS data was matched against the spectral library, with some modifications from defaults settings: proteotypicity filer was set to “only protein group-specific” and data filtering to “q value”. Peptide intensities were exported to mapDIA software according to settings in [28]. Differentially expressed proteins were selected for a local false discovery rate (LFDR) lower than 5% and an absolute fold change (FC) of 1.2, versus untreated control. Venn diagrams were performed using Venny 2.1 (BioinfoGP, CNB-CSIC).

### Publication Abstract
Morphine is one of the most potent opioid analgesic used for pain treatment. Morphine action in the central nervous system requires crossing the blood-brain barrier. Due to the controversial relationship between morphine and oxidative stress, the potential pro- or antioxidant effects of morphine in the blood-brain barrier is important to be understood, as oxidative stress could cause its disruption and predispose to neurodegenerative diseases. However, investigation is scarce in human brain endothelial cells. Therefore, the present study evaluated the impact of morphine exposure at three different concentrations (1, 10 and 100&#xa0;&#xb5;M) for 24&#xa0;h and 48&#xa0;h on primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells. A quantitative data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry strategy was used to analyze proteome modulations. Almost 3000 proteins were quantified of which 217 were reported to be significantly regulated in at least one condition versus untreated control. Pathway enrichment analysis unveiled dysregulation of the Nrf2 pathway involved in oxidative stress response. Seahorse assay underlined mitochondria dysfunctions, which were supported by significant expression modulations of relevant mitochondrial proteins. In conclusion, our study revealed the dysregulation of the Nrf2 pathway and mitochondria dysfunctions after morphine exposure, highlighting a potential redox imbalance in human brain endothelial cells.

### Keywords
Brain, Endothelial, Lc-ms/ms, Morphine, Dia

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarker Group, Department of Medicine, University of Geneva
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Sandrine Reymond

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, Department of Medicine, University of Geneva


