### Accession
PXD011753

### Title
Hfq is involved in global protein expression and stress response in Bordetella pertussis

### Description
In this study, we used gel-free nanoLC-MS/MS-based proteomics to compare the protein profile of B. pertussis wild type and an isogenic hfq defective mutant strain under control an iron limited conditions. We found that Hfq affects the abundance of 302 proteins, which represents 8% of the total B. pertussis coding sequence. The absence of Hfq induced changes in the abundance of proteins involved in metabolic pathways, stress response and virulence. Hfq was also found involved in B. pertussis adaptation to iron starvation, one of the main stresses this pathogen faces inside the host. Altogether, these results indicate that B. pertussis Hfq is involved in bacterial physiological processes as well as bacterial pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
B. pertussis Tohama I and its isogenic ∆hfq strain were cultured in iron-replete Steiner-Scholte medium (SS) (36 μM FeSO4.7H2O) or iron-depleted SS (SS-Fe) (without addition of FeSO4.7H2O) at 37°C under shaking conditions (150 rpm) for 20 h, sub cultured twice in the respective culture media, and grown until late exponential phase.  Cells from 10 mL culture were harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min, washed twice with water, and resuspended in 300 µl of aqueous urea/thiourea (8M/2M) (UT) and incubated shaking (Eppendorf, Germany) for 30 min at 25°C and 1400 rpm. The protein extraction was enhanced by five cycles of freezing in liquid N2 and subsequent thawing of the sample at 30°C and 1400 rpm. After 5 min treatment in an ultrasonication bath, samples were centrifuged for 1 h at 17,000 x g. The supernatant was collected and subjected to DNA removal using QIAshredder (Qiagen, The Netherlands) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After repeated centrifugation (1 h, 17,000 x g) the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using a Bradford assay (Biorad, Germany). Per sample each 4 µg of proteins solved in UT were diluted in ammonium bicarbonate 20 mM and proteolytically digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) in a protein : trypsin ratio of 25 : 1 for 18 h at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by addition of acetic acid to a ﬁnal concentration of 1% v/v. Peptides were puriﬁed and desalted using C18-ZipTip columns (Merck Millipore, Germany). The solvent was removed by lyophillization and replaced with buffer consisting of 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % acetic acid in HPLC grad water (J. T. Baker, Center Valley, PA, USA). Four independent replicates of each strain cultivated under iron-depleted and iron-replete conditions were used for proteomic studies.

### Data Protocol
The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was accomplished on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corporation, Germany) equipped with a nano-ESI source and a Picotip Emmitter (New Objective, USA).  First, the peptides were enriched on a pre-column and separated using an analytical column and forming a of gradient of 92 minutes containing buffer A (0.5% DMSO in water with 0.1% acetic acid) and buffer B (5% DMSO in acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid). The eluted peptides were analysed first in the FTMS operated in positive and profile mode. The second scan event was an MS/MS scan performed in data-dependent mode to fragment peptides and acquired data in positive and centroid mode. The MS automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition to carry out the MS and MS/MS events. Details are provided as Supporting Information Table S1 along with the manuscript.  MS raw data were processed using Genedata Refiner v10.0 (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). Peak lists were searched against a B. pertussis Tohama I database (GeneBank accession NC_002929, release 06/2015, 3258 entries). Only 2+ and 3+ charged ions were considered without any modification. Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with no missed cleavages allowed applying 10 ppm MS1 ion tolerance and 0.6 Da MS2 tolerance. Proteins were considered for further analysis if they were identified with at least two unique peptides and a false discovery rate < 1 %. Protein intensities were calculated by summing up the intensities of the two or three highest abundant peptides. Afterwards, protein intensities were median normalized over all samples and averages per protein and condition were used to calculate ratios to compare the conditions.

### Publication Abstract
B. pertussis is the etiological agent of whooping cough, a highly contagious respiratory disease which remains uncontrolled worldwide. Understanding how this pathogen responds to the environmental changes and adapts to different niches found inside the host might contribute to gain insight into bacterial pathogenesis. Comparative analyses of previous transcriptomic and proteomic data suggested that post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms modulate B. pertussis virulence in response to iron availability. Iron scarcity represents one of the major stresses faced by bacterial pathogens inside the host. In this study, we used gel-free nanoLC-MS/MS-based proteomics to investigate whether Hfq, a highly conserved post-transcriptional regulatory protein, is involved in B. pertussis adaptation to low iron environment. To this end, we compared the protein profiles of wild type B. pertussis and its isogenic hfq deletion mutant strain under iron-replete and iron-depleted conditions. Almost of 33% of the proteins identified under iron starvation was found to be Hfq-dependent. Among them, proteins involved in oxidative stress tolerance and virulence factors that play a key role in the early steps of host colonization and bacterial persistence inside the host cells. Altogether these results suggest that Hfq shapes the infective phenotype of B. pertussis. SIGNIFICANCE: In the last years, it became evident that post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in ba cteria plays a central role in host-pathogen interactions. Hfq is a bacterial protein that regulates gene expression at post-transcriptional level found pivotal in the establishment of successful infections. In this study, we investigated the role of Hfq in Bordetella pertussis response to iron starvation, one of the main stresses imposed by the host. The data demonstrate that Hfq regulates the abundance of a significant number of B. pertussis proteins in response to iron starvation. Among them, virulence factors and proteins involved in oxidative stress tolerance, key players in host colonization and intracellular bacterial survival. Altogether, our results suggest a relevant role of Hfq in B. pertussis adaptation to the different niches found inside the host eventually granting bacterial pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Hfq, Proteomics, Iron limitation, Stress response, B. pertussis

### Affiliations
Department of Functional Genomics, Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Uwe Völker
Department of Functional Genomics, Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany


