### Accession
PXD012593

### Title
TranslationalLandscape_HumanHeart

### Description
Here, we analyze the expression of predicted microproteins in human heart tissue and iPSC cardiomyocytes, using shot-gun proteomics and SRM. 4 identified candidates were functionally validated by interactome studies using AP-MS (affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry). In addition, the impact of disease-causing protein-truncating variants on translation was studied in rat heart tissue by performing shot-gun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (from tissue and cells) and enriched protein fractions from affinity purification experiments were digested using in solution digest protocol and LysC and trypsin as proteases. For iPSC cardiomyocytes peptides were SCX fractionated before measurement. Desalted and cleaned up peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry (QExactive Plus and/or Fusion, Quantiva, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
RAW files from shot-gun measurements were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1, 1.6.1.3.). SRM RAW files were analyzed with Skyline software package.

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression in human tissue has primarily been studied on the transcriptional level, largely neglecting translational regulation. Here, we analyze the translatomes of 80 human hearts to identify new translation events and quantify the effect of translational regulation. We show extensive translational control of cardiac gene expression, which is orchestrated in a process-specific manner. Translation downstream of predicted disease-causing protein-truncating variants appears to be frequent, suggesting inefficient translation termination. We identify hundreds of previously undetected microproteins, expressed from lncRNAs and circRNAs, for which we validate the protein products in&#xa0;vivo. The translation of microproteins is not restricted to the heart and prominent in the translatomes of human kidney and liver. We associate these microproteins with diverse cellular processes and compartments and find that&#xa0;many locate to the mitochondria. Importantly, dozens of microproteins are translated from lncRNAs with well-characterized noncoding functions, indicating previously unrecognized biology.

### Keywords
Heart tissue, Targeted proteomics, Shot gun

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), 13125 Berlin, Germany
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Hubner
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), 13125 Berlin, Germany


