### Accession
PXD009725

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis plda1 mutants

### Description
PLDa1 is a phospholipid hydrolyzing enzyme playing multiple regulatory roles in stress response in plants. Its signaling activity is mediated via the PLDa1 dependent phosphatidic acid production, by its capacity to bind and modulate the G-protein complex or by interaction with other proteins. Relative quantitative proteomic analysis of two tDNA insertion Arabidopsis plda1 mutants has been performed. Remarkably, PLDa1 deficiency caused differential regulation of many proteins which form protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was homogenized using liquid nitrogen in mortar and pestle and subjected to phenol protein extraction followed by methanol precipitation. Protein tryptic digest was analyzed using nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000) linked to LTQ ORBITRAP VELOS mass spectrometer (THERMO).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were matched to NCBI Arabidopsis protein Ref database, using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software. Results were filtered by FDR<1.0%. Label-free relative quantitative analysis was based on precursor spectral intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Phospholipase D alpha 1 (PLD&#x3b1;1) is a phospholipid hydrolyzing enzyme playing multiple regulatory roles in stress responses of plants. Its signaling activity is mediated by phosphatidic acid (PA) production, capacity to bind, and modulate G-protein complexes or by interaction with other proteins. This work presents a quantitative proteomic analysis of two T-DNA insertion <i>pld</i>&#x3b1;<i>1</i> mutants of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Remarkably, <i>PLD</i>&#x3b1;<i>1</i> knockouts caused differential regulation of many proteins forming protein complexes, while PLD&#x3b1;1 might be required for their stability. Almost one third of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in <i>pld</i>&#x3b1;<i>1</i> mutants are implicated in metabolism and RNA binding. Latter functional class comprises proteins involved in translation, RNA editing, processing, stability, and decay. Many of these proteins, including those regulating chloroplast protein import and protein folding, share common functions in chloroplast biogenesis and leaf variegation. Consistently, <i>pld</i>&#x3b1;<i>1</i> mutants showed altered level of TIC40 (a major regulator of protein import into chloroplast), differential accumulation of photosynthetic protein complexes and changed chloroplast sizes as revealed by immunoblotting, blue-native electrophoresis, and microscopic analyses, respectively. Our proteomic analysis also revealed that genetic depletion of PLD&#x3b1;1 also affected proteins involved in cell wall architecture, redox homeostasis, and abscisic acid signaling. Taking together, PLD&#x3b1;1 appears as a protein integrating cytosolic and plastidic protein translations, plastid protein degradation, and protein import into chloroplast in order to regulate chloroplast biogenesis in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis plda1 mutants

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Tibor Pechan

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Pechan
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University


