### Accession
PXD025561

### Title
Slowing prion disease via M1 muscarinic receptors is associated with reduced neuroinflammation and down-regulation of neurodegenerative disease markers

### Description
Currently there are no treatments that can slow or halt the progression of dementia’s including Alzheimer’s disease. Here we investigate the possibility that activation of the M1-muscarinic receptor (M1-receptor), which is highly expressed in the brain and that shows pro-cognitive properties, might present a novel disease modifying target. We demonstrate that the progression of murine prion disease, which shows many of the pathological hallmarks of human neurodegenerative disease, is slowed and normal behaviour maintained by the activation of the M1-receptor with a highly tolerated positive allosteric modulator (VU846). This correlates with a reduction in both neuroinflammation and indicators of mitochondrial dysregulated as well as a normalisation in the expression of markers associated neurodegeneration and Alzheimer’s disease. Furthermore, synaptic proteins and post-synaptic signalling components disrupted in disease are maintained by VU846. We conclude that allosteric regulation of M1-receptors have the potential to reduce the severity of neurodegenerative diseases caused by the prion-like propagation of misfolded protein in a manner that extends life span and maintains normal behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal preparation for TMT LC-MS/MS. Mice were killed by cervical displacement and the brain was removed from the skull and dissected immediately. The hippocampi and cortices were flash-frozen on dry ice. The frozen hippocampi (from one hemisphere of the brain) were transferred into microcentrifuge tubes containing SDS lysis buffer (50 mM TEAB, 10% SDS, pH 7.55) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and homogenised using a motorised pellet pestle for 60 seconds. 20% CHAPS (w/v) and 10% NP-40 (v/v) were added to final concentrations of 2% and 1% respectively and the lysate was sonicated three times for 15 seconds each at 3-5 µM amplitude and then centrifuged at 15000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred into new microcentrifuge tubes and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit, according to manufacturer’s instruction (ThermoFisher). The lysates were normalised to the same protein concentrations (0.8 mg) with SDS lysis buffer to a final volume 500 µL. The proteins were reduced using 20 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hour followed by   29   alkylation in the dark for 30 minutes with 100 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were then acidified with 12% phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% v/v and then digested overnight at 37 °C with sequence grade trypsin at a trypsin-to-protein ration of 1:20 (w/w) using the ProtiFi S-trap midi digestion columns (ProtiFi, Huntington). Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Pierce peptide desalting columns (ThermoFisher). The eluted peptides were dried, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5) and labelled with TMTSixplex (ThermoFisher) at 25 °C for 2 hours with orbital shaking at 500 rpm. The TMT to peptide ratio was 2.5:1. The labelling reaction was quenched with 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine at final concentration of 0.4% at 25 °C for 30 minutes with orbital shaking at 500 rpm. The peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and separated into ten fractions using the Pierce high-pH reverse-phase fractionation columns (ThermoFisher). The eluted fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. For the VU0486846 cohort, hippocampi from mice in each of the four experimental groups (control + vehicle, control + VU846, prion + vehicle and prion + VU846) were processed, labelled with respective TMT, combined and analysed by LC-MS/MS to give one experimental run. This process was repeated with the other three mice in each experimental group to give four independent runs and datasets (Fig 1G). For the BQCA cohort, hippocampi from three mice in each of the experimental groups were pooled together, processed and labelled with respective TMT, combined and analysed by LC-MS/MS to give one experimental run (supplementary FigS4). TMT LC-MS/MS and data processing.   Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000-RSLCnano system (Dionex) and an Orbitrap-Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific). 10 µL of each fraction was loaded on an Acclaim-PepMap µ-precolumn (Thermo-Scientific, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) equilibrated in 2 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA, for 6 min at 10 µl/min with an analytical column Acclaim PepMap RSLC (Thermo-Scientific, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å). Mobile phase A was of 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase B was ACN containing 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were eluted at 250 nl/min by increasing the mobile phase B from 5 % B to 22 % over 129 min, then 35 % B over 27 min followed by  80 % B for 3 min and a 15 min re-equilibration at 4 % B. Electrospray used a static Nanospray-Flex with a stainless steel emitter OD 1/32’ in positive mode at 1.8 kV (Thermo-Scientific). MS survey scans from 375 to 1,500 m/z, with a 8x105 ion count target, maximum injection time of 150 ms and resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, acquired in profile mode were performed in the Orbitrap analyser. Data dependent mode selected the most abundant precursor ions possible in 3 s cycle time followed by 60 s exclusion and ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1 m/z window when their intensity was above 40,000. MS/MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap with a 4x104 ion count target, maximum injection time of 500 ms and resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, acquired in centroid mode. Precursor ions were fragmented with higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD), normalised collision energy of 38 % and fixed first mass of 120 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0, www.maxquant.org) against the Mus musculus UniProtKB reference proteome. The resulting data was further analyzed using Microsoft Excel (version 2016), Perseus (version 1.6.12.0) and Scaffold (version 4.11.0) analytical suites for downstream analysis. For ease of data handling, all data entries were transformed into log2 scale and normalised. For a protein to be included in the analysis, the peptides corresponding to the protein must be present in at least three of the four independent datasets. Contaminants, reverse hits and proteins ‘only identified by site’ were excluded from the analysis. All statistical tests were performed using Perseus and GraphPad prism, and graphs were plotted using Perseus, Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Many dementias are propagated through the spread of "prion-like" misfolded proteins. This includes prion diseases themselves (such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) and Alzheimer's disease (AD), for which no treatments are available to slow or stop progression. The M<sub>1</sub> acetylcholine muscarinic receptor (M<sub>1</sub> receptor) is abundant in the brain, and its activity promotes cognitive function in preclinical models and in patients with AD. Here, we investigated whether activation of the M<sub>1</sub> receptor might slow the progression of neurodegeneration associated with prion-like misfolded protein in a mouse model of prion disease. Proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of the hippocampus revealed that this model had a molecular profile that was similar to that of human neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. Chronic enhancement of the activity of the M<sub>1</sub> receptor with the positive allosteric modulator (PAM) VU0486846 reduced the abundance of prion-induced molecular markers of neuroinflammation and mitochondrial dysregulation in the hippocampus and normalized the abundance of those associated with neurotransmission, including synaptic and postsynaptic signaling components. PAM treatment of prion-infected mice prolonged survival and maintained cognitive function. Thus, allosteric activation of M<sub>1</sub> receptors may reduce the severity of neurodegenerative diseases caused by the prion-like propagation of misfolded protein.

### Keywords
G protein-coupled receptor, Warwick_rtp, Prion disease, Alzheimer’s disease, Positive allosteric modulators, Neurodegeneration, Proteomic, M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, Neuroinflammation, Neurodegenerative disease, Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Andrew B. Tobin
Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK


