### Accession
PXD016672

### Title
Bioplatforms Australia: Antibiotic Resistant Sepsis Pathogens Framework Initiative - Klebsiella pneumoniae complex

### Description
The Antibiotic Resistant Sepsis Pathogens Framework Initiative aims to develop a framework dataset of 5 sepsis pathogens (5 strains each) using an integrated application of genomic, transcriptomic, metabolomic and proteomic technologies. The pathogens included in this initiative are: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae complex, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.  This submission pertains to Klebsiella pneumoniae complex strains AJ055, AJ218, AJ292, KPC2, 03-311-0071 and 04153260899A.

### Sample Protocol
Complete information about the bacterial cultures is available from the Bioplatforms Australia Antibiotic Resistant Sepsis Pathogens Initiative website. https://data.bioplatforms.com/organization/pages/bpa-sepsis/methods Part 1: Workflow for preparing bacterial cultures for omics analyses (Jonathan Wilksch) Dilution used 1:1; Day 1: Streak isolates from glycerol stock to agar plates; Incubate at 37C overnight. Day 2: Pick single colony from Luria agar plate and inoculate into a 500 ml flask containing 60 ml Luria broth; Grow shaking (200 rpm) at 37C overnight;  Day 3: 1. Thaw pooled human sera 2. Pipet out 25 ml of overnight culture into falcon tube 3. Pellet bacterial cells by spinning at 14,000 x g at 4C for 15 min and remove supernatant with a serological pipette (do not pour off supernatant because the cell pellet is soft and will be lost);  Sera - Resuspend pellet in 25 ml and incubate at 37C shaking (200 rpm) for 2 hrs; RPMI - Resuspend pellet in 25 ml and incubate at 37C shaking (200 rpm) for 1 hr 4. Transfer culture into falcon tubes for the following protocols at their respective volume: Proteomics – 10ml (50 ml tube) 5. Follow protocol Proteomic cell pellet wash protocol;  Proteomic cell pellet wash protocol:  1. Pellet cultures by centrifugation (14,000 g at 4oC for 15 m) 2. Remove culture supernatants and resuspend cell pellets by vortexing in 1mL ice-cold 1× PBS 3. Repeat centrifuge/wash steps twice more before removing the supernatant and storing the washed cell pellets at -80oC. Part 2: Proteomics sample preparation (William Klare and Stuart Cordwell) Gram negative protocol (Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae) 1. Freeze-dried bacteria were resuspended in 600µL of bead-beating buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, 145mM NaCl) containing 400µL of 0.1mm acid-washed glass beads. 2. These were then subjected to bead beating (4 cycles of 1 min, 5m/s) with 1 minute rest on ice between cycles. 3. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 30 m at 4oC. 4. 250 μL of protein sample was mixed with ice cold water : methanol : chloroform in a ratio of 3 : 4 : 1 to precipitate proteins. 5. Precipitate was resuspended in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea, and protein quantitation was performed using a QubitTM kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA). 6. The solutions were reduced for 1 h with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by alkylation using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark. 7. Samples were diluted to 1mL in 100mM TEAB, pH adjusted to 7.5 and digested with 1/25 (w/w) of porcine sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) for 24 h at 37oC. 8. Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) to precipitate lipids, and centrifuged at 14, 000 RPM at 25oC for 15 m to pellet lipids. 9. The supernatant was removed and subjected to purification using Oasis® HLB columns (Waters Corporation, Milford MA). 10. Cartridges were prepared by washing in succession: 1 mL 100% methanol, 1 mL 100% acetonitrile (MeCN), 1 mL 70% (v/v) MeCN / 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroaceitc acid (TFA). 11. Samples were washed through cartridges 5 times and finally washed with 5 mL 0.1% TFA. 12. Peptides were eluted with 50% MeCN / 0.1% TFA, and lypophilised by vacuum centrifugation. 13. The peptides were split into two aliquots. One aliquot was shipped to Monash Biomedical Proteomics Facility (MBPF) for MS1 quantification and spectral library generation. The second aliquot was shipped to Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF) for MS2 quantification (SWATH). Part 3: Sample preparation (SWATH)  1. Take all 72 samples out from the freezer.  2. Added required amount of loading buffer to each sample so that the concentration is 1 µg/µL.  3. Spun at 10,000 ×g for 5 min.  4. Transfer 2 µL of each sample for each growth medium per strain + 48 µL of loading buffer to HPLC vials for 1D-IDA analysis.  5. Transfer 2 µL/sample + 8 µL of loading buffer to HPLC vials for SWATH analysis.  6. Keep all the tubes back in freezer.

### Data Protocol
1D Information dependent acquisition (IDA) 1D IDA MS/MS data were acquired before SWATH data acquisitions for each strain samples. 10 µL was injected onto a peptide trap for pre-concentration and desalted with 0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN, at 4 µL/min for 10 minutes. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient, from mobile phase A: mobile phase B (98:2) to mobile phase A: mobile phase B (67:33) for 120 minutes at 600 nL/min. After peptide elution, the column was cleaned with 95% buffer B for 6 minutes and then equilibrated with 98% buffer A for 10 minutes before next sample injection. The reverse phase nanoLC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in an information dependant acquisition mode (IDA).  In the IDA mode a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/z 350 - 1500, 0.25 second), with the 20 most intense multiply charged ions (2+ - 5+; counts >200) in the survey scan sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 100 milliseconds in the mass range m/z 100 – 1800 with rolling collision energy. Data independent acquisition (SWATH) 10 µL was injected onto a peptide trap for pre-concentration and desalted with 0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN, at 4 µL/min for 10 minutes. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient, from mobile phase A: mobile phase B (98:2) to mobile phase A: mobile phase B (67:33) for 120 minutes at 600 nL/min. After peptide elution, the column was cleaned with 95% buffer B for 6 minutes and then equilibrated with 98% buffer A for 10 minutes before next sample injection. The reverse phase nanoLC eluent was subject to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in a data independent acquisition mode (SWATH). In SWATH mode, first a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/z 350-1500, 0.05 sec) then the 100 predefined m/z ranges were sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 30 milliseconds in the mass range m/z 350-1500 with rolling collision energy optimised for lowed m/z in m/z window +10%. Protein identification for local SWATH library All the raw data files for each strain generated by 1D-IDA-MS analysis of the sample were searched with ProteinPilot (v5.0) (Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm in thorough mode. The genomic sequences were submitted to ENA database as study PRJEB29928, and the protein databases are in NCBI GenBank under the accessions listed below. Strain AJ055: NZ_LR130539.1; NZ_LR130540.1 Strain AJ218: NZ_LR130541.1; NZ_LR130542.1 Strain AJ292: NZ_LR130538.1 Strain KPC2: NZ_LR130548.1; NZ_LR130549.1; NZ_LR130550.1; NZ_LR130551.1 Strain 03-311-0071: NZ_LR130544.1 Strain 04153260899A: NZ_LR130543.1 Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as a fixed modification. An Unused Score cut-off was set to 1.3 (95% confidence for identification). The IDA search result group file was imported into PeakView (v2.2) (Sciex). SWATH library extension with MBPF spectra library APAF strain-specific local libraries were merged with 2D libraries generated by MBPF to generate extended strain-specific SWATH libraries.  Strain and medium specific MBPF 2D libraries were downloaded in Spectronaut format. Each of these 2D libraries was preprocessed and converted into PeakView library format before merging with APAF local libraries. Modifications were consolidated with PeakView format; fragment ions with ExcludeFromAssay==TRUE were removed; inversed value of IsProteotypic was set as the shared column value; confidence was set as 1; mods values were extracted from ModifiedPeptide. The preprocessed MBPF libraries were saved as PeakView library format.  Match quality between local seed library and the two medium 2D MBPF libraries were checked for each strain.  One extended library was created for each strain by merging the APAF local seed library and the two preprocessed MBFP 2D libraries using SwathXtend (v2.4). Human and contamination proteins were removed from each extended library to form the final extended strain-specific SWATH library and subject to be used for SWATH quantification.  SWATH peak extraction Using the merged library, SWATH data were extracted using PeakView (v2.2) with the following parameters: Top 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data sets (75 ppm mass tolerance, 10min retention time window). Shared and modified peptides were excluded. After data processing, peptides (max 100 peptides per protein) with confidence > 99% and FDR < 1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sera, Proteomics, Antibiotic resistance, Swath, Sepsis, Rpmi, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Bioplatforms Australia
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility

### Submitter
Dana Pascovici

### Lab Head
Dr Mabel Lum, Bioplatforms Australia (project manager)
Bioplatforms Australia


