### Accession
PXD027434

### Title
Cloning and Decoding of Chimpanzee Cytomegalovirus - A Resource for Comparative Functional Genomics

### Description
The chimpanzee cytomegalovirus (CCMV) is the closest relative of human CMV (HCMV). Because of the high conservation between these two species and the ability of human cells to fully support CCMV replication, CCMV holds great potential as a model system for HCMV. To make the CCMV genome available for precise and rapid gene manipulation techniques, we captured the genomic DNA of CCMV strain Heberling as a bacterial artificial chromosome(BAC). Selected BAC clones were reconstituted to infectious viruses, growing to similar high titers as parental CCMV. DNA sequencing confirmed the integrity of our clones and led to the identification of two polymorphic loci within the CCMV genome. To re-evaluate the CCMV coding potential, we analyzed the transcriptome and proteome of infected cells and identified several novel ORFs, splice variants, and regulatory RNAs. We further characterized the dynamics of viral gene expression and found that in strong parallel to HCMV, CCMV proteins cluster into five distinct temporal classes. In addition, our datasets revealed that the host response to CCMV infection and the de-regulation of cellular pathways are in line with known hallmarks of HCMV infection. In a first functional experiment, we investigated a proposed frameshift mutation in UL128 that was suspected to restrict CCMV’s cell tropism. In fact, repair of this frameshift re-established productive CCMV infection in endothelial and epithelial cells, expanding the options of CCMV as an infection model. Thus, BAC-cloned CCMV can serve as a powerful tool for systematic approaches in comparative functional genomics, exploiting the close phylogenetic relationship between CCMV and HCMV.

### Sample Protocol
Infected cells were harvested by removing the medium and scraping off the cell layer in 1 ml PBS. For lysis, the cell pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of lysis buffer: 7 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5), 1% Triton-X-100, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 30 mM chloroacetamide, complete mini EDTA free protease inhibitors (Roche), 2 µl Benzonase (Merck-Millipore) and sonicated for 45 min (intervals: 20 s on, 40 s off) using a Bioruptor (Diagenode). After clearing the lysates, protein was isolated using methanol/ chloroform precipitation, according to standard protocols (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). The precipitates were resuspended in digestion buffer, consisting of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5), 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 30 mM chloroacetamide, Trypsin (1:25, w/w), Lysyl Endopeptidase (1:100, w/w), and digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted using two disks of C18 material embedded in Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and stored at 4°C until LC-MS/MS measurement. The LC/MS analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 system connected to a µPACTM Trapping column (PharmaFluidics). The mobile phase A contained 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water and the mobile phase B contained 0.05% TFA in acetonitrile. For peptide separation a 200 cm µPACTM micro pillar array column at 180 min gradient length was employed, with mobile phase A containing 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was set to 750 nL/min from 4 % B to 20% B and 350 nL/min from 20 % B to 80 % B. The MS1 scans were performed in the orbitrap using 120,000 resolution. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 30 % HCD collision energy. The MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap with standard AGC target settings, an intensity threshold of 5e3 and maximum injection time of 40 ms. A 1 s cycle time was set between master scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw-files were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and the variable modifications methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as well as asparagine–glutamine deamidation. The “match between runs”, “iBAQ” (intensity-based absolute quantification), “second peptide” and “LFQ (label-free quantification)” options were enabled (Cox et al., 2014). Database search was performed using Andromeda, the integrated MaxQuant search engine, against a Uniprot database of homo sapiens proteins (downloaded 2020), the predicted amino acid sequences of the CCMV BAC and the proteins from a six frame translation of the CCMV genome (minimum sequence length: 15 amino acids) with common contaminants. False discovery rate was estimated based on target-decoy competition using a reverted database and was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match, protein and modification site level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytomegalovirus, Chimpanzee, Evolution, Decoding

### Affiliations
Department of Structural Biology, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Boris Bogdanow

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Department of Structural Biology, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


