### Accession
PXD011314

### Title
Profiling of Methylglyoxal Blood Metabolism and Advanced Glycation End-Product Proteome using a Chemical Probe

### Description
Methylglyoxal (MG) is a toxic byproduct of the glycolytic pathway and is quantitatively the most important precursor to advanced glycation end-products (AGEs). Insight into which proteins and in particular their individual modification sites are central to understand the involvement of MG and AGE in diabetes and aging related diseases. Here, we present a method to simultaneously monitor protein AGE formation in biological samples by employing an alkyne-labeled methylglyoxal probe. We apply the method to blood and plasma to demonstrate the impact of blood cell glyoxalase activity on plasma protein AGE formation. We move on to isolate proteins modified by the MG probe and accordingly can present the first general inventory of more than 100 proteins and 300 binding sites of the methylglyoxal probe on plasma as well as erythrocytic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts, from either plasma or erythrocytes, were treated by the Alk-methylgyoxal (AlkMG) probe, acetal of 1,1-dimethoxyhex-5-yn-2-one (alkMG), as an initial step of the pull-down. Freshly prepared alkMG at a final concentration of 0 (control), 0.1, 0.5, or 1 mM were added and the samples were subsequently incubated for 2, 8, or 24 h at 37 ℃ with shaking. The samples were added a pre-mixed aliquot consisting of 10 µL 5 mM azido-azo-biotin, 100 µL of a 3:7 mixture of 50 mM CuSO4 and 100 mM THPTA, and 50 µL 100 mM α-aminoguanidine. After vortexing, the click reaction was initiated by addition of 50 µL freshly prepared 100 mM sodium ascorbate to add the , to add the biotin linker. The proteins were precipitated by MeOH/CHCl3. The pellets were air dried and redissolved in 6 M urea, and diluted in digestion buffer. The samples were reduced by 1 M DTT and  alkylated by  iodoacetamide.   All samples were diluted with 800 μL digestion buffer (~2 M urea final concentration). Trypsin (1:40) and 2 μL CaCl2 (200 mM) were added, followed by incubation at 37 ℃ for 16 h with shaking. 100 µL of a 50% suspension of streptavidin agarose resin was added and the samples were incubated for 1 h on a rotating mixer. The resin was collected by centrifugation (2,000 g, 2 min, rt) and the supernatants were carefully removed. The resin was washed with 2 x 1% SDS in PBS (1 mL), 2 x 0.5% SDS in PBS (1 mL), 2 x digestion buffer (1 mL). The binding site peptides were then eluted twice by incubation with 75 µL elution buffer (50 mM Na2S2O4/digestion buffer) for 30 min each at rt with shaking. The resin was washed with 50 µL digestion buffer, which was combined with the elutions. The samples were acidified with 15 µL 10 % formic acid to pH ~2 and purified using mixed-cation exchange chromatography columns (Waters) and concentrated using vacuum centrifugation before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  The purified peptides were analyzed by nanoLC tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS), on an EASY 1000 nanoLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were trapped on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, Nanoviper, Thermo Scientific), separated on a C-18 reverse phase column (PepMap from Thermo Scientific with 25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, and 2 μm particle size), and a 70 min (plasma samples), 102 min (erythrocyte samples), linear gradient of acetonitrile (4–40%) containing 0.1% formic acid was used. All spectra were collected in positive mode using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for peptide fragmentation. Data dependent analysis (DDA) was applied to fragment up to 10 of the most intense peaks in full scan MS1, automatically switching between MS1 and fragment scan MS2 acquisition, with mass resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. In MS1, automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1x106 ions and scan range between 380-1800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set at 18 sec and unassigned and +1 charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the Q Exactive nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30, searching against the Uniprot human database (20,129 Homo sapiens sequences downloaded December 2016). Carbamidomethylation (CAM) of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were set as as variable modifications. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of identification were both set at 0.01 for tryptic peptides tryptic peptides with an added mass on arginine corresponding to the probe analogue of the MG-H1 modification (C14H14N4O2,+270.1117 Da), CEA (C14H16N4O3, +288.1222 Da) and CEL modification (C14H16N4O3, +288.1222 Da) which were also searched as variable modifications. Additionally, a search was included for the same modifications with an added sulfonation (SO3, +79.9568 Da), since we have observed this modification as a side reaction during elution of binding site peptides. A maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. Following database search, the identified peptides were sorted according to the following criteria: To be included in the results, the peptide must be identified in all replicates at all concentrations and not in the control (no treatment) sample. Furthermore, the modified peptide must be identified with a posterior error probability (PEP) of < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Methylglyoxal (MG) is quantitatively the most important precursor to advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), and evidence is accumulating that it is also a causally linked to diabetes and aging related diseases. Living systems primarily reside on the glyoxalase system to detoxify MG into benign d-lactate. The flux to either glycation or detoxification, accordingly, is a key parameter for how well a system handles the ubiquitous glyoxal burden. Furthermore, insight into proteins and in particular their individual modification sites are central to understanding the involvement of MG and AGE in diabetes and aging related diseases. Here, we present a simple method to simultaneously monitor the flux of MG both to d-lactate and to protein AGE formation in a biological sample by employing an alkyne-labeled methylglyoxal probe. We apply the method to blood and plasma to demonstrate the impact of blood cell glyoxalase activity on plasma protein AGE formation. We move on to isolate proteins modified by the MG probe and accordingly can present the first general inventory of more than 100 proteins and 300 binding sites of the methylglyoxal probe on plasma as well as erythrocytic proteins. Some of the data could be validated against a number of in vivo and in vitro targets for advanced glycation previously known from the literature; the majority of proteins and specific sites however were previously unknown and may guide future research into MG and AGE to elucidate how these are functionally linked to diabetic disease and aging.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Methylglyoxal, Erythrocytes

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Aarhus University, Denmark


