### Accession
PXD010086

### Title
N-glycan profiling of Pseudomyxoma peritonei

### Description
Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a subtype of mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix, We compared N-linked glycan profiles of PMP tissues to those of normal appendix. N-glycosidase F liberated N-glycan profiles of eight normal appendix samples and eight low-grade and eight high-grade PMP specimens were analyzed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The most prominent alteration was increased and complex fucosylation in high-grade carcinoma. Authors: Lilli Saarinen, Pirjo Nummela, Hannele Leinonen, Annamari Heiskanen, Alexandra Thiel, Caj Haglund, Anna Lepistö, Tero Satomaa, Sampsa Hautaniemi, and Ari Ristimäki; from Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki; Glykos Finland Ltd, Helsinki; Department of Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital; Translational Cancer Biology, Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki; and Department of Pathology, HUSLAB, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from eight normal appendices, and eight LG and eight HG PMP specimens originating from the appendix, were selected. Areas containing the highest percentages of epithelial cells were first marked on HE slides and macrodissection was used to cut 30 µm thick flakes from the most representative areas, after which a new HE slide was stained to confirm the representativeness of the flakes. The tissue flakes were deparaffinized and disrupted in microcentrifuge tubes using a fitting plastic micro pestle, and N-linked glycans were detached by N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) digestion (Glyko; ProZyme Inc., Hayward, CA) and purified as follows: (Satomaa et al. 2009. BMC Cell Biol 10:42): the detached glycans were passed in water through C18 silica and absorbed to graphitized carbon material, both in 96-well format. The carbon wells were washed with water, and neutral glycans were eluted with 25% acetonitrile and acidic glycans with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 25% acetonitrile in water. The acidic glycans were further purified by hydrophilic interaction solid-phase extraction, also in 96-well format, after which both glycan fractions were additionally passed in water through strong cation-exchange resin. Matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry was then performed with a Bruker Ultraflex TOF/TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics Inc, Bremen, Germany) with neutral N-glycans detected in positive ion reflector mode as [M+Na]+ ions and acidic N-glycans in negative ion reflector mode as [M-H]- ions.

### Data Protocol
Relative molar abundances of neutral and acidic glycan components were assigned based on their relative signal intensities in the mass spectra when analyzed separately as neutral and acidic N-glycan fractions, and the raw data were processed into the present glycan profiles as previously (Satomaa et al. 2009). The resulting glycan signals in the presented glycan profiles were normalized to 100% to allow comparison between samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human appendix cancer n-glycan fucosylation

### Affiliations
Glykos Finland Ltd., Helsinki, Finland
Glykos Finland Ltd.

### Submitter
Tero Satomaa

### Lab Head
Dr Tero Satomaa
Glykos Finland Ltd., Helsinki, Finland


