### Accession
PXD035726

### Title
Human serum samples - Acute and chronic blood serum proteome changes in patients with methanol poisoning

### Description
We carried out a prospective, longitudinal, single-center, observational cohort study of patients with confirmed acute methanol poisoning that were treated in hospitals during a mass methanol poisoning outbreak in the Czech Republic in 2012. Venous blood for proteomic analysis was obtained from 24 patients with confirmed acute methanol poisoning upon admission to the hospital (group M (“Methanol”)) with heparin administration for hemodialysis and ethanol or fomepizole administration as the antidote to block ADH. In the follow-up group of survivors of methanol poisoning (group S (“Survivors”)), venous blood samples for proteomic analysis were obtained from 46 patients during the examination, which took place 4 years after discharge from the hospital. For the control group not exposed to methanol, 24 healthy subjects were recruited (group C, “Controls”). Blood samples were spun, the serum was separated, and the samples were frozen to −80 °C until the analyses.  Blood serum samples were depleted of most abundant serum proteins using Agilent MARS 14 column, samples fractionated and fractions containing proteins of interest precipitated. Samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (UHPLC-ESI-Q-OT-qIT) and identified proteins with differential expression.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were spun, the serum was separated, and the samples were frozen to −80 °C until the analyses. Blood serum samples were depleted of 14 most abundant serum proteins using an Agilent MARS 14 column pn: 5188-6557 with buffers pn: 5185-5987, pn: 5185-5988 and spin columns pn: 5185-5990 was used. 20 µL of serum was loaded on to the column. Depletion of samples was done on a DIONEX Ultimate 3000 HPLC with UV detection of eluted proteins. Fractions were collected with an in-house manufactured fraction collector. Fractions containing the proteins of interest were precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB.  Nano reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4 min at 18 μL/min. The loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.S.A.). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed using the orbitrap at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104, and the max injection time was 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in the raw spectra were identified and quantified by MaxQuant label-free quantification software (version 1.6.17 for Windows) (Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016) using UniProt proteome protein database for Homo sapiens (UP000005640 including isoforms, assembly 2021/02). Default tolerances by the Orbitrap instrument setting were used, i.e., 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main peptide search at the MS level. Reverse sequences were selected for a target-decoy database strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2010), and a 1% false discovery rate was applied to both the peptide spectrum match and the protein group levels. Trypsin was chosen as a proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The fixed modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable protein modifications were set to methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and methanol metabolism specific modifications – N-terminal protein Schiff base (shift by one atom of C), N-terminal protein formylation (shift by one atom of C and one atom of O). The formation of the imidazolidone group on N-terminal valine shows the same shift as for the N-terminal protein Schiff base, and thus, this modification was studied only through the analysis of found modified peptides. A maximum of five modifications per peptide was allowed. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids for the successful identification, and only unique peptides were used for quantification. MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) without the FastLFQ option was used for initial protein and peptide intensity normalization. Match between runs was switched on and Dependent peptides search was also switched on using a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Twenty-four blood serum samples from patients with acute methanol poisoning (M) from the mass methanol poisoning outbreak in the Czech Republic in 2012 were compared with 46 patient samples taken four years after poisoning (S) (overlap of 10 people with group M) and with a control group (C) of 24 samples of patients with a similar proportion of chronic alcohol abuse. When comparing any two groups, tens to hundreds of proteins with a significant change in concentration were identified. Fifteen proteins showed significant changes when compared between any two groups. The group with acute methanol poisoning showed significant changes in protein concentrations for at least 64 proteins compared to the other groups. Among the most important identified proteins closely related to intoxication are mainly those involved in blood coagulation, metabolism of vitamin A (increased retinol-binding protein), immune response (e.g., increased complement factor I, complement factors C3 and C5), and lipid transport (increased apolipoprotein A I, apolipoprotein A II, adiponectin). For blood coagulation, the most affected proteins with significant changes in the methanol poisoning group were von Willebrand factor, carboxypeptidase N, alpha-2-antiplasmin (all increased), inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H4, kininogen-1, plasma serine protease inhibitor, plasminogen (all decreased). However, heparin administration used for the methanol poisoning group could have interfered with some of the changes in their concentrations. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD035726.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Acute poisoning, Methanol

### Affiliations
Department of Computing and Control Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology in Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Praha 6, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Cejnar

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Cejnar
Department of Computing and Control Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology in Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Praha 6, Czech Republic


