### Accession
PXD036468

### Title
Differentially Expressed Glycoproteins in Pre- and Post-Digital Rectal Examination Urine Samples for Detecting Aggressive Prostate Cancer

### Description
Nonaggressive prostate cancer (NAG-PCa) with Gleason score of 6 is considered as a low-risk disease and does not require clinical interventions. However, current assessment of aggressiveness of PCa is invasive using needle biopsies. Urine is an appealing biospecimen for noninvasive detection of aggressive PCa. Using urine, particularly from easily obtainable from pre-DRE urine specimens, to identify AG-PCa-associated molecular markers is critical for clinical risk stratification. Herein, we acquired quantitative mass spectrometry data for glycoproteins from pre-DRE and post-DRE urine specimens from patients underwent PCa diagnosis with biopsies. Compared with urinary glycoproteins identified from post-DRE urine samples, we confirmed that three previously reported AG-PCa-associated glycoproteins identified in post-DRE urine specimens were also found to be significantly associated with AG disease in pre-DRE urine samples. In addition, new AG-PCa-associated glycoproteins were identified in pre-DRE urine specimens. Our study provides a foundation for further studies of AG-PCa biomarkers using pre-DRE urine specimens.

### Sample Protocol
For pre-DRE samples, we used an automated strategy to enrich intact glycopeptides in the digested urine samples and PNGase F to remove N-glycans, as recently described by our group [28,29,30]. The N-linked glycosite-containing peptides after PNGase F treatment were used for DIA-MS analysis together with iRT peptides in a Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Considering the low level of proteins in the pre-DRE samples, half of the total glycopeptides enriched from 500 μL urine was used for DIA-MS analysis. The synthetic heavy peptides (100 fmol for each) were spiked into each sample. The pre-DRE urine samples were analyzed using DIA-MS on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific™) connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 system nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific™). PicoFrit® LC-MS Columns (New Objective, MA, USA) were packed at 28 cm long with 1.9 μm/120Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) for reversed phase peptide analyses. The N-linked glycosite-containing peptides were separated over a running time of 85 min using a gradient of 6–30 % buffer B (90 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The MS parameters were as follows: MS1, AGC target 1 × 106, resolution 120,000, maximum injection time 60 ms, isolation window 12.0 m/z, scan range 400−1200 m/z; MS2, AGC target 1 × 106, resolution 30,000, maximum injection time 50 ms, and collision energy (%) 30. The method and data for evaluating the post-DRE samples were described in our published works.

### Data Protocol
All raw DIA data of glycosite-containing peptides from both the pre- and post-DRE samples were analyzed via directDIA, a library-free approach embedded in Spectronaut (version 15) with a precursor and protein q-value cutoff of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary glycoproteins associated with aggressive prostate cancer (AG-PCa) were previously reported using post-digital rectal examination (DRE) urine specimens. To explore the potential of using pre-DRE urine specimens for detecting AG-PCa, we compared glycoproteins between pre- and post-DRE urine specimens, verified the previously identified post-DRE AG-PCa-associated urinary glycoproteins in pre-DRE urine specimens, and explored potential new glycoproteins for AG-PCa detection in pre-DRE urine specimens. Quantitative glycoproteomic data were acquired for 154 pre-DRE urine specimens from 41 patients with no cancer at biopsy, 48 patients with non-AG-PCa (Gleason score&#xa0;=&#xa0;6), and 65 patients with AG-PCa (Gleason score 7 or above). Compared to glycopeptides from the post-DRE urine data, humoral immunity-related proteins were enriched in pre-DRE urine samples, whereas cell mediated immune response proteins were enriched in post-DRE urine samples. Analyses of AG-PCa-associated glycoproteins from pre-DRE urine revealed that the three urinary glycoproteins, prostate-specific antigen (PSA), prostatic acid phosphatase (ACPP), and CD97 antigen (CD97) that were previously identified in post-DRE urine samples, were also observed as AG-PCa associated glycoproteins in pre-DRE urine. In addition, we identified three new glycoproteins, fibrillin 1 (FBN1), vitronectin (VTN), and hemicentin 2 (HMCN2), to be potentially associated with AG-PCa in pre-DRE urine specimens. In summary, glycoprotein profiles differ between pre- and post-DRE urine specimens. The identified AG-PCa-associated glycoproteins may be further evaluated in large cohort of pre-DRE urine specimens for detecting clinically significant PCa.

### Keywords
Urinary glycoproteins, Glycoproteomics, Digital rectal examination, Mass spectrometry, Aggressive prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Yingwei HU

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Johns Hopkins University


