### Accession
PXD019114

### Title
Tandem mass tags (TMT)–based quantitative proteomics approach quantified in 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation site of rice spikelets and Ustilaginoidea virens by mass spectrometry.

### Description
Rice false smut, caused by the pathogenic ascomycete fungus Ustilaginoidea virens (teleomorph: Villosiclava virens), is one of the most devastating grain diseases in the majority of rice-growing areas of the world. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel post-translational modification (PTM), which plays an important role in active gene transcription and cellular proliferation in eukaryotes. However, its function remains unknown in phytopathogens and plant. Here, we report a comprehensive identification of Khib in rice false smut fungus Ustilaginoidea virens and rice. By using a tandem mass tags (TMT)–based quantitative proteomics approach, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites were identified in U. virens and rice.

### Sample Protocol
The U. virens strain HWD-2 was cultured in potato sucrose broth (PSB) medium at 28 °C, after shaking at 180 rpm for 7 days, the cultures were homogenized in a blender, and rice plants (rice cultivar Wanxian-98) were inoculated with 2 mL of mycelial and spore suspensions using a syringe in the middle section of distal internodes at the eight stage of panicle development. The treated rice plants were placed in a greenhouse with conditions set at relative humidity of 95 ± 5% and a temperature of 28 ± 2 °C. Six days after inoculation, we collected rice spikelets infected by U. virens. These rice spikelets and seven-day-old mycelia collected from PSB were used to identify the modification sites of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation.  Proteins were extracted by lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). Proteins were redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Before enrichment, anti-Khib antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) were washed twice with ice-cold PBS. After that, 5 mg of tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with prewashed antibody beads in a ratio of 15 μl beads/mg protein at 4 °C overnight. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O after the incubation. Finally, the bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA for LC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were first redissolved in solvent A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN, 98% H2O). After that, peptide solution was loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (homemade, 100 μm ID × 15 mm long, 2 μm particle, 100 Å). Then the peptides were separated with a gradient of 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 24 min, 22% to 36% for 10 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The flow rate was set at 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The solution of full MS was set at 70000, while the resolution of MS/MS were set as 17500. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans were applied for the top 20 precursor ions. The threshold ion count was set at 1.5×104 and the dynamic exclusion was set at 15 s. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5×104 ions for generation of MS/MS spectra. The m/z scan range for MS scans was 350 to 1600. The resulting MS/MS data was searched using MaxQuant (v.1.5.5.1) against the UniProt_U. virens Uv8b protein database. False discovery rate thresholds for peptides, protein and modification site were less than 1%, the minimal peptide length was set at 7. 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylated peptides with a score of >40 and a localization probability was set as >0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (K<sub>hib</sub> ) is a newly identified post-translational modification (PTM) that plays important roles in transcription and cell proliferation in eukaryotes. However, its function remains unknown in phytopathogenic fungi. Here, we performed a comprehensive assessment of K<sub>hib</sub> in the rice false smut fungus Ustilaginoidea virens, using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics approach. A total of 3 426 K<sub>hib</sub> sites were identified in 977 proteins, suggesting that K<sub>hib</sub> is a common and complex PTM in U. virens. Our data demonstrated that the 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated proteins are involved in diverse biological processes. Network analysis of the modified proteins revealed a highly interconnected protein network that included many well-studied virulence factors. We confirmed that the Zn-binding reduced potassium dependency3-type histone deacetylase (UvRpd3) is a major enzyme that removes 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation and acetylation in U. virens. Notably, mutations of K<sub>hib</sub> sites in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) UvSlt2 significantly reduced fungal virulence and decreased the enzymatic activity of UvSlt2. Molecular dynamics simulations demonstrated that 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in UvSlt2 increased the hydrophobic solvent-accessible surface area and thereby affected binding between the UvSlt2 enzyme and its substrates. Our findings thus establish K<sub>hib</sub> as a major post-translational modification in U. virens and point to an important role for K<sub>hib</sub> in the virulence of this phytopathogenic fungus.

### Keywords
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; tmt; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Key Lab of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xiaoyang  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lu zheng
Huazhong Agricultural University


