### Accession
PXD004079

### Title
Exosomal phosphoproteome of SW620 cell

### Description
Phosphoproteome analysis on SW620 cells and exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample were lysed with SDS lysis buffer with PI and PPI supplied. After trypsin digestion, phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed with the Mascot software. Phosphorylation information was analysed with the Scaffold PTM.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of all phosphorylation forms of known proteins is a major goal of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Recent studies have found that certain phosphoproteins can be encapsulated in exosomes and function as key regulators in tumor microenvironment, but no deep coverage phosphoproteome of human exosomes has been reported to date, which makes the exosome a potential source for the new phosphosite discovery. In this study, we performed highly optimized MS analyses on the exosomal and cellular proteins isolated from human colorectal cancer SW620 cells. With stringent data quality control, 313 phosphoproteins with 1091 phosphosites were confidently identified from the SW620 exosome, from which 202 new phosphosites were detected. Exosomal phosphoproteins were significantly enriched in the 11q12.1-13.5 region of chromosome 11 and had a remarkably high level of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins (6.4%), which were functionally relevant to ephrin signaling pathway-directed cytoskeleton remodeling. In conclusion, we here report the first high-coverage phosphoproteome of human cell-secreted exosomes, which leads to the identification of new phosphosites for C-HPP. Our findings provide insights into the exosomal phosphoprotein systems that help to understand the signaling language being delivered by exosomes in cell-cell communications. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium with the data set identifier PXD004079, and iProX database (accession number: IPX00076800).

### Keywords
Exosome; phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University

### Submitter
Yizhi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Tong Wang
Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University


