### Accession
PXD002943

### Title
Quantitative analysis of SUMO1 and SUMO2 proteomes in human lung A549 cells during influenza A virus infection or heat-shock

### Description
Dynamic nuclear SUMO modifications play essential roles in orchestrating cellular responses to proteotoxic stress, DNA damageand DNA virus infections. Here, we describe the host SUMOylation response to the nuclear-replicating RNA pathogen, influenz A virus. Using quantitative proteomics to compare SUMOylation responses to various stresses (including heat-shock), we reveal that influenza A virus infection causes unique re-targeting of SUMO1 and SUMO2 to a diverse range of host proteins involved in transcription, mRNA processing, RNA quality control and DNA damage repair. This global characterization of influenza virus-triggered SUMO remodeling provides a proteomic resource to understand host nuclear SUMOylation responses to infection.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic experiments were performed using the SILAC technique that allows for quantitative data analysis. The modified denaturing TAP procedure has been described previously (Golebiowski et al., 2010). Briefly, cells were grown in DMEM (supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal calf serum) with L-lysine and L-arginine replaced with stable isotope forms in various combinations depending on treatment. Each experiment consisted of three SILAC conditions: L (light), where A549/TAP cells were grown in DMEM containing isotopically 'normal' amino acids (L-lysine, L-arginine); M (medium), where A549/TAP-SUMO1 (or SUMO2) cells were grown in DMEM containing 4,4,5,5-D4 lysine and 13C6 arginine; and H (heavy), where A549/TAP-SUMO1 (or SUMO2) cells were grown in DMEM containing 13C6 15N2 lysine and 13C6 15N4 arginine. Cells were grown in 15cm Petri dishes, with 20 dishes per SILAC condition. In both SUMO1 and SUMO2 influenza A virus (IAV) experiments, cells in condition L and H were infected with IAV for 10h at an MOI of 2 PFU/cell, and cells in condition M were mock-infected. In the SUMO2 heat-shock experiment, cells in condition L and M were maintained at 37°C, while cells in condition H were subjected to heat-shock (43°C) for 30 minutes. After treatment, cells were washed with PBS and lysed with denaturing buffer containing 2% SDS. For large-scale mass spectrometry experiments with three conditions all resulting lysates were mixed 1:1:1 (based on total protein), and a crude sample (~1% of total) was analyzed separately from the remaining ~99% of material, which was subjected to TAP purification. Lysates were diluted 25x in order to dilute out the denaturing 2% SDS and passed over IgG sepharose, which was followed by enzymatic removal of the Protein A portion of the TAP-tag, using TEV protease. The resulting eluate was then affinity purified on calmodulin sepharose, followed by protein elution with buffer containing 10 mM EGTA, and protein recovery by precipitation with 100% TCA (w/v) and acetone washing. Purification resulted in ~25μg of protein sample that was resuspended in 30μl of 2x LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Crude sample (~50μg) was also mixed 1:1 with 2x LDS sample buffer. Both purified and crude samples were resolved on NuPAGE Novex 10% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels using MOPS buffer (Invitrogen). Gel-fractionated proteins were stained with Coommassie blue and the gel was sliced into 13 sections. Protein slices were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin essentially as described previously. The resulting peptide mixtures were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 30μl of 1% formic acid prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running at 75 µm x 500 mm at 45ºC on an EASY-Spray column. An elution gradient duration of 240 min was used. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. Full scan spectra (m/z 300-1800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 with maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a target value of 500,000, maximum injection time of 60 ms and intensity threshold of 1.7e3. A 40 second dynamic exclusion list was applied.  Reference: Golebiowski, F., Tatham, M.H., Nakamura, A., and Hay, R.T. (2010). High-stringency tandem affinity purification of proteins conjugated to ubiquitin-like moieties. Nature protocols 5, 873-882.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant Analyses. All raw files generated by MS analysis were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against a FASTA database consisting of UniProtKB human and influenza A virus (A/WSN/1933(H1N1)) reference proteomes (both current as of June 2013).   Manual Data Processing. Unfiltered datasets resulting from MaxQuant analyses were handled in the form of Excel spreadsheets, and included three SILAC ratios (M/L, H/L and H/M) reflecting the relative abundance of proteins in the three different experimental conditions. As detailed below, data were manually filtered in order to remove contaminants, normalize SILAC ratios, and to define SUMO substrates as well as changes in substrate SUMOylation in response to treatment. First, all MaxQuant-defined unwanted hits (e.g. ‘reverse’ (peptide sequences that would match other sequences if reversed), ‘contaminants’, and ‘identified by site’ (only identified by modification site)) as well as any remaining suspected internal contaminants (e.g. keratins, immunoglobulins, non-human origin proteins) were removed. All such pre-filtered content was copied into 2 identical tabs and named 'Crude' and 'Purified'. In the ‘Crude’ list, all hits with 0 unique crude peptides and/or no crude ratios reported were removed. In the ‘Purified’ list, all hits with 0 unique purified peptides and/or no purified ratios reported were removed. Although MaxQuant uses built-in normalization algorithms to account for variable isotope purity/incorporation or error in lysate mixing, it is only applicable to values distributed in a unimodal Gaussian manner. We therefore applied an alternative method of normalization for our ‘purified’ data, which due to their highly purified nature and substantial changes in SUMOylation means they are not unimodal. Given that the majority of proteins from our crude samples were unaffected by any treatment, the median of the raw M/L, H/L, and H/M ratios for proteins was calculated and applied to normalize the raw ratios from crude samples as well as from corresponding TAP-purified samples. Next, log2 values of normalized ratios were calculated to facilitate further graphical representation of data in the form of tsMAPs (triple SILAC maps). We assumed that total abundance of the majority of the ~5000 proteins identified in crude lysates does not change significantly with treatment. Thus, the variable distribution of SILAC ratios in the ‘crude’ samples was deemed representative of the distribution of 'contaminants' in the ‘purified’ samples. We calculated the total abundance change of the 99% of all proteins closest to zero (log2 values) for all three SILAC ratios in our crude samples, and used the maximum abundance change for these 99% of proteins as ‘cut-off values’ for filtering the data from the ‘purified’ dataset. Further filtering of ‘purified’ ratios was divided into two phases. Firstly, putative SUMO substrates were defined by filtering ratios of TAP-SUMO over TAP and thus applying appropriate cut-off values to M/L and H/L ratios. All ‘hits’ with ratios above certain values for either M/L or H/L were called SUMO substrates, and the remainder classified as contaminants. Secondly, changes in substrate SUMO modification by particular treatments were defined by filtering ratios of TAP-SUMO (treatment) over TAP-SUMO (no treatment) and applying appropriate cut-off values to the H/M ratios. All hits with ratios above a certain value (on the positive part of the axis) were defined as substrates with increased SUMOylation in response to treatment, while ‘hits’ below a certain value (on the negative part of the axis) were defined as substrates with decreased SUMOylation.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic nuclear SUMO modifications play essential roles in orchestrating cellular responses to proteotoxic stress, DNA damage, and DNA virus infection. Here, we describe a non-canonical host SUMOylation response to the nuclear-replicating RNA pathogen, influenza virus, and identify viral RNA polymerase activity as a major contributor to SUMO proteome remodeling. Using quantitative proteomics to compare stress-induced SUMOylation responses, we reveal that influenza virus infection triggers unique re-targeting of SUMO to 63 host proteins involved in transcription, mRNA processing, RNA quality control, and DNA damage repair. This is paralleled by widespread host deSUMOylation. Depletion screening identified ten virus-induced SUMO targets as potential antiviral factors, including C18orf25 and the SMC5/6 and PAF1 complexes. Mechanistic studies further uncovered a role for SUMOylation of the PAF1 complex component, parafibromin (CDC73), in potentiating antiviral gene expression. Our global characterization of influenza virus-triggered SUMO redistribution provides a proteomic resource to understand host nuclear SUMOylation responses to infection.

### Keywords
Virus, Infection, Ubiquitin, Sumo, Influenza, Heat-shock, Stress

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Virology University of Zürich Winterthurerstrasse 190 8057 Zürich Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Filip Golebiowski

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Geoffrey Hale
Institute of Medical Virology University of Zürich Winterthurerstrasse 190 8057 Zürich Switzerland


