### Accession
PXD017457

### Title
Active AKT Signaling triggers CLL towards Richter's transformation via over-activation of Notch1

### Description
Richter's syndrome (RS) is an aggressive transformation of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) frequently due to TP53, CDKN2, MYC or NOTCH1 mutations. whereas a significant proportion displays no specifically acquired driver mutation. We observe constitutive AKT phosphorylation not only in high-risk CLL patients harbouring p53 and NOTCH mutations but also in numerous RS patients. Consistently, genetic over-activation of AKT within the Eµ-TCL1 CLL mouse model results in a high-grade lymphoma phenotype of Richters syndrome. Multiomics assessment of our novel mouse model revealed a S100 defined subcluster of highly proliferative lymphoma cells developing from indolent CLL-like B-cells as a consequence of sudden NOTCH activation being fueled by enhanced NOTCH ligand exposure from T-cells in the microenvironment. Our data link AKT and NOTCH signaling in patient samples, genomic alterations, phosphoproteome and single-cell transcriptome profiles. Collectively, we have identified active AKT as a causative transforming pathway of indolent CLL towards aggressive RS thus providing novel mechanistic insights into the molecular understanding of RS.

### Sample Protocol
CD19+ purified B cells were lysed in 6M Urea/2M Thiourea Buffer. 0.5 mg total protein were reduced with DTT, carbamidomethylated with IAA and subsequently digested with LysC overnight at room temperature. Samples were desaltedon SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) and 20 µg peptides were used for whole proteome analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the remaining sample using the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica columns (internal diameter (I.D.) 75 μm, C18 2.7 μm Poroshell beads (Agilent)) at a flow rate of 0.75 µL/min. A 90 min segmented gradient (phospho) and a 240 min segmented gradient (whole proteome) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min was used to elute peptides. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan, the 10 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell. The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 25%. MS/MS scans were acquired with R = 17,500.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software and its implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox. et al., 2011). Parameters were set to default values and Phospho (STY) was added as variable modification. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cll, Notch1, S100, Akt, Richter syndrome

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)
Max Planck Institute for Metabolism Research Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Wunderlich
Max Planck Institute for Metabolism Research Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


