### Accession
PXD020542

### Title
Proximal proteome and ubiquitination landscape of E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Mindbomb 1

### Description
To characterize the proximal proteome of Mindbomb 1 (MIB1) during adenovirus (AdV) infection ?we performed proximity labeling. MIB1 KO cell lines generated in the Hap1 cell line were stably reconstituted with either WT MIB1-APEX2, the MIB1 ubiquitination-defective mutant C985S-APEX2 or APEX2-mKate. Cell lines were infected with ?replication-competent (rep-comp) AdV5-GFP followed by pulse-labeling with H202 at 1.25 ?hours post infection (hpi), streptavidin isolation of biotinylated proteins and LC-MS/MS analysis of the proximal proteomes.  To determine possible u?biquit?ination targets of MIB1 during AdV infection, Tandem-Ubiquitin-Binding-Entities (TUBEs) were used to isolate endogenous ubiquitinated proteins. MIB1 KO Hap1 cells, and KO cells reconstituted with either WT MIB1 or the ubiquitination-dead mutant C985S MIB1 were infected with rep-comp AdV5-GFP  and collected at 1 hpi.  Lysates were incubated with TUBE Dynabeads, and the isolated proteins were submitted for LC-MS/M

### Sample Protocol
TUBEs-Dynabeads were incubated with 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC, Fluka Chemicals) for 1 h at room temperature (RT). The supernatant was awithdrawn and the process was repeated. The two supernatants were pooled and disulfide bonds were reduced by additon of dithiothreitol (DTT, EMD Chemicals) to 10mM final concentration and incubation for 1 h at RT with vigorous shaking. Iodoaceamide (IAA, Sigma) was added to 20mM and alkylation proceeded for 1 h at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted to reduce urea concentration to 3.5M and digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase  (Lys-C, Wako Chemicals) overnight at RT. The following day samples were further diluted to 1.5M urea and digested with 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digestion was stopped by acidification using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, ThermoFisher Scientific), and peptides were purified by in-house constructed reversed-phase micropurification tips.  Decanted APEX2-agarose beads were subjected to on-bead digestion by the addition of 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). The supernatant was withdrawn, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 50 mM AMBIC (Fluka Chemicals), 10mM DTT (EMD Chemicals) in water, and disulfide bonds were reduced for 1 hour at room temperature with vigorous shaking. IAA (Sigma) was added to 20mM and alkylation proceeded for 1 h at RT in the dark. Samples were further digested for 6 h at RT using trypsin. Digestion was stopped by acidification using TFA (ThermoFisher Scientific), and peptides were purified by in-house constructed reversed-phase micropurification tips.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.6.0 (62). Spectra were queried against the human proteome (downloaded from uniprot.org on Feb 12th 2019) concatenated with a custom adenovirus database and common contaminants. A false discovery rate of 1% at both peptide and protein level was applied. Further statistical analysis was performed within the Perseus framework (63). Significant changes were determined using the Student’s t-test (p=0.05).   Gene Ontology (GO) terms enrichment analysis was performed using STRING protein-protein interaction networks functional enrichment analysis (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
The journey from plasma membrane to nuclear pore is a critical step in the lifecycle of DNA viruses, many of which must successfully deposit their genomes into the nucleus for replication. Viral capsids navigate this vast distance through the coordinated hijacking of a number of cellular host factors, many of which remain unknown. We performed a gene-trap screen in haploid cells to identify host factors for adenovirus (AdV), a DNA virus that can cause severe respiratory illness in immune-compromised individuals. This work identified Mindbomb 1 (MIB1), an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in neurodevelopment, as critical for AdV infectivity. In the absence of MIB1, we observed that viral capsids successfully traffic to the proximity of the nucleus but ultimately fail to deposit their genomes within. The capacity of MIB1 to promote AdV infection was dependent on its ubiquitination activity, suggesting that MIB1 may mediate proteasomal degradation of one or more negative regulators of AdV infection. Employing complementary proteomic approaches to characterize proteins proximal to MIB1 upon AdV infection and differentially ubiquitinated in the presence or absence of MIB1, we observed an intersection between MIB1 and ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) largely unexplored in mammalian cells. This work uncovers yet another way that viruses utilize host cell machinery for their own replication, highlighting a potential target for therapeutic interventions that counter AdV infection.

### Keywords
Adenovirus, Mindbomb 1, Lfq, Apex2, Tubes

### Affiliations
Research Support Specialist
Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Charles M. Rice
Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA


