### Accession
PXD001529

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the role of Snail1 in the differentiation of 3T3-L1 fibroblasts

### Description
Snail1 is a transcriptional repressor required for a correct embryonic development. In cancer, Snail1 promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition in tumorigenic epithelial cells. In this work, we have analyzed the control of Snail1 in the differentiation of the 3T3-L1 cell line derived from murine embryo cells. The activation by snail of 3T3-L1 induced typical markers of cancer-activated fibroblasts as S100A4 or CD44. We generated 3T3-L1 cells stably over expressing Snail1 (3T3L1/Snail1) and control (3T3-L1/control) cells. We used SILAC quantitative approach to identify and characterize protein alterations induced by Snail1. Cells were fractionated in 5 subcellular fractions.  The nuclear fraction of the cells was separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. Gels with forward and reverse experiments were stained with Coomassie Blue and cut into 18 slices prior to reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were scanned and fragmented with a linear ion trap-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoScientific). We identified a total of 3108 proteins, with 2572 quantified proteins, and 565 proteins modulated >1.5-fold by Snail1 overexpression. Among them, we found interesting up-regulated proteins associated to early differentiation of adipogenesis (C/EBPβ) and down-regulated proteins implicated in the final stages of differentiation to adipocytes (Fatty acid-binding protein or Fatty acid synthase). We also observed as down-regulated proteins important mediators of PPARγ pathway.  We also observed downregulation of proteins implicated in mTOR, SRC and JAK/STAT pathway. We validated these proteomics data by western blot and qPCR in 3T3-L1 cells and other types of fibroblasts with capable to differentiate to terminal mesenchymal phenotypes, as well as in mesenchymal stem cells (MSC).  This work provided insight into novel proteins with potential roles in the regulation of differentiation of the 3T3-L1 and MSCs as Nr2F6, ASC-1, Prrx1 or Cbx6. These candidates are down regulated due to the overexpression of Snail1 in 3T3-L1 cells. We next investigated the potential binding of Snail1 to promoter of these candidates. In silico analysis with MatInspector program revealed various putative E-box consensus motifs for Snail1. We performed ChIP and Luciferase assay to validate Snail1 binds to different E-box motifs of our candidates. Additionally, we analyzed the ability to prevent the differentiation to adipocytes of the 3T3-L1 cells using siRNAs.  This work provided insight into novel proteins with potential roles in the regulation of differentiation to adipocytes of the 3T3-L1 and mMSC cells as Nr2F6, ASC-1, Prrx1 or Cbx6 controlled by Snail1.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cell culture and nuclear protein extracts preparation - For metabolic labeling, 3T3-L1 Snail1 or control cells were grown and maintained in DMEM containing either light L-lysine and L-arginine or heavy [13C6]-L-lysine and [13C6]-L-arginine (Dundee Cell Products) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, 100 units/mL of penicillin/streptomycin at 37ºC in 5% CO2. Eight duplications were necessary to achieve >98% incorporation of the heavy amino acids (14).  We carried out forward and reverse experiments to get a biological replicate and avoid labeling bias in the study.  For nuclear protein extraction, cells were washed twice with chilled PBS, resuspended with PBS containing 4 mM EDTA, and harvested by centrifugation at 500g for 5 min. Then, we used the subcellular protein fractionation kit (Thermo). Protein quantification was performed using the tryptophan method (referencia ). Then, 25 μg of protein from nuclear cell extracts were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and run at 25 mA per gel in 12.5% SDS-PAGE.  Gels were stained with colloidal coomassie blue and lanes were cut into 18 slices. Excised bands were cut into small pieces and destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile (ACN), dehydrated with ACN and dried. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 12.5 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 30ºC. Peptides were extracted at 37ºC using ACN and, then 0.5% TFA, dried, cleaned using ZipTip with 0.6 µl C18 resin (Millipore) and reconstituted in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid/2% ACN, prior to MS analysis, which was performed as previously described (15).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were trapped onto a C18-A1 ASY-Column 2 cm precolumn (Thermo-Scientific), and then eluted onto a Biosphere C18 column (C18, inner diameter 75 μm, 10 cm long, 3 μm particle size) (NanoSeparations) and separated using a 170 min gradient from 0-35% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid/2% ACN; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min on a nanoEasy HPLC (Proxeon) coupled to a nanoelectrospay ion source (Proxeon). Mass spectra were acquired on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific) in the positive ion mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1200) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a target value of 1,000,000 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and the 15 most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap with a target value of 10,000 and normalized collision energy of 35%. Precursor ion charge state screening and monoisotopic precursor selection were enabled. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30s. Mass spectra (*.raw) files were searched against the SwissProt mouse database 57.15 (16230 sequences) using MASCOT search engine v. 2.3 (Matrix Science) through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo). Search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and 13C-Arg, 13C-Lys as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01. Relative quantification of identified peptides was performed using Proteome Discoverer. For each SILAC pair, Proteome Discoverer determines the area of the extracted ion chromatogram and computes the “heavy/light” ratio. Protein ratios are then calculated as the median of all the unique quantified peptides belonging to a certain protein. The ratios among proteins in their heavy and light versions were used as fold-change. Proteins were quantified with at least one peptide hit in forward and reverse experiments. Proteins with quantification variability >20% were manually inspected by checking the isotopic envelope of both heavy and light forms and how many peaks of the envelope were used to determine the area of the envelope of all PSMs corresponding to the peptides used to identify the protein. A multipoint normalization strategy was applied to normalize the data sets against the 5% trimmed mean values, which is a robust statistical measure of central tendency that normalize most of the log2 protein ratios to 0. Briefly, the 5% of the most extreme outliers –values- were removed and the mean of the 95% remaining data was determined, and used to normalize the ratio values, and thus, minimizing the effect of these extreme outliers and centering the log2 ratio distribution to zero. Since metabolic conversion arginine/proline can affect quantification accuracy in some cell types, we investigated arginine to proline conversion in 3T3-L1 cells. Using heavy proline as a variable modification, less than 1% of proline-containing peptides were heavy labeled in 3T3-L1 cells.

### Publication Abstract
Adipogenesis requires a differentiation program driven by multiple transcription factors, where PPAR&#x3b3; and C/EBP&#x3b1; play a central role. Recent findings indicate that Snail inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 and murine mesenchymal stem cells (mMSC). An in-depth quantitative SILAC analysis of the nuclear fraction of Snail-induced alterations of 3T3-L1 cells was carried out. In total, 2251 overlapping proteins were simultaneously quantified in forward and reverse experiments. We observed 574 proteins deregulated by Snail1 using a fold-change &#x2265;1.5, with 111 up- and 463 down-regulated proteins, respectively. Among other proteins, multiple transcription factors such as Trip4, OsmR, Nr2f6, Cbx6, and Prrx1 were down-regulated. Results were validated in 3T3-L1 cells and mMSC cells by Western blot and quantitative PCR. Knock-down experiments in 3T3-L1 cells demonstrated that only Nr2f6 (and Trip4 at minor extent) was required for adipocyte differentiation. Ectopic expression of Nr2f6 reversed the effects of Snail1 and promoted adipogenesis. Because Nr2f6 inhibits the expression of IL-17, we tested the effect of Snail on IL-17 expression. IL-17 and TNF&#x3b1; were among the most up-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines in Snail-transfected 3T3-L1 and mMSC cells. Furthermore, the blocking of IL-17 activity in Snail-transfected cells promoted adipocyte differentiation, reverting Snail inhibition. In summary, Snail inhibits adipogenesis through a down-regulation of Nr2f6, which in turn facilitates the expression of IL-17, an anti-adipogenic cytokine. These results would support a novel and important role for Snail and Nr2f6 in obesity control.

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Obesity, Nr2f6, Il-17, Silac, Snail, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
CIB-CSIC (Spanish Research Council)
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH (IDIPAZ)

### Submitter
Alberto Pelaez García

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Casal
CIB-CSIC (Spanish Research Council)


