### Accession
PXD005014

### Title
Proteome of Young and Old Murine Diaphragm and Associaated Changes in Contractile Properties

### Description
Proteomic analysis of young and old murine diaphragm and associated changed in contractile aproperties. Redox sensitive Cysteine residues from both adult and old diaphragm tissues examined.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenised in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM N-ethylmalemide. Samples were desalted using Zeba desalting coloumns. 100ug of protein in 160ul of 25 mM Ammonium Bicaronate, 10ul of 1% (w/v) rapigest added for 10min at 80'C, 10 ul of 100mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride added and samples heated at 60 'C for 10min, 10ul of 100mM d(5) N-ethylmaleimide added and incbated in dark for 30 min. 10ul of 200 ug/ul solution of trypsin added and samples incubated overnight at 37'C. Sample was diluted 1:10 in 97% H2O, 3% MeCN and 0.1% Formic acid.  5ul of sample corresponding to 250ng was loaded onto Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystme coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Sample was resolved on the analytical coloumn over 120min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Data dependent acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full scan MS scan and the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan with an ion selection window of 3m/z and normailised collision energy of 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discovery and resulting files were searched against UniProt mouse sequence database using in house Mascot server. Search parameters used were peptide mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01Da, +1,+2,+3 ions, missed cleavages 1, instrument type ESI-TRAP. Variable modifications included were d(0) NEM, d(5) NEM of Cysteine, Arginine and Lysine, mono-, di-, tri- oxidation of Cys residues. Label free quantification was performed using PEAKS& studio software, significantly changed proteins had -10LogP>20, at least 3 unique peptides and fold change > 1.5. Peptides identified by Proteome Discoverer with d(0) NEM and separately d(5) NEM were considered as redox sensitive peptides, a list of these target peptides was searched againist the results library using Skyline to relatively quantify peptides d(0)NEM vs d(5)NEM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Redox, Diaphragm

### Affiliations
Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, University of Liverpool
NUI Galway

### Submitter
Brian McDonagh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian McDonagh
Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, University of Liverpool


