### Accession
PXD009244

### Title
Quantitative Label Free Ultra Definition Mass-Spectrometry Provides Novel Data on the Proteomic Signature of Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma

### Description
There are no early detection biomarkers or prognostic markers for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) thus many are detected late, with unpredictable disease course. Using systems level analysis on shotgun proteomics with quantitative label-free ultra-definition mass spectrometry, our study aims to find novel proteins involved in both low and high grade OSCC tissue, and to further understand pathways involved in cancer development and progression, using proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Paired tissue samples of healthy and oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma were taken from the same patient. The samples were homogenised using the FastPrep-24 Instrument (MP Biomedicals), centrifuged, the supernatant filtered. After acetone precipitation, the pellet was dissolved in 6M urea. The total proteins, after protein estimation, were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested. Then peptides were cleaned with Pierce C18 (Thermofisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol, dried and dissolved to 0.1% formic acid in water. The tryptic peptide mixture, totalling 1.4 µg peptide, was analysed by Waters Synapt G2-S, coupled to the nano-Acquity UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v3, Nonlinear Dynamics), and matched against the Uniprot FASTA sequences. Search parameters variations (from default settings) were: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation), trypsin cleavage with 2 missed cleavages. False discovery rate was set to 4%. Protein identification required 2 unique peptides, and the parsimony principle was used to group peptides into protein categories.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oscc, Tissue proteomics, Tongue cancer, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki  and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00130, Finland and  Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 11382, Sweden

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Suvi Renkonen
Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki  and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00130, Finland and  Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 11382, Sweden


