### Accession
PXD031025

### Title
Human serum glycoproteome - Glyco-Decipher

### Description
Identification results of peptide-spectrum matches supporting Glyco-Decipher manuscript (Glyco-Decipher: Glycan database-independent peptide matching enables discovery of new glycans and in-depth characterization of site-specific N-glycosylation). Recently, several elegant bioinformatics tools have been developed to identify glycopeptides from tandem mass spectra for site-specific glycoproteomics studies. These glycan database-dependent tools have substantially improved glycoproteomics analysis but fail to identify glycopeptides with unexpected glycans. We present a platform called Glyco-Decipher to interpret the glycoproteomics data of N-linked glycopeptides. It adopts a glycan database-independent peptide matching scheme that allows the unbiased profiling of glycans and the discovery of new glycans linked with modifications. Reanalysis of several large-scale datasets showed that Glyco-Decipher outperformed the open search method in glycan blind searching and the popular glycan database-dependent software tools in glycopeptide identification. Our glycan database-independent search also revealed that modified glycans are responsible for a large fraction of unassigned glycopeptide spectra in shotgun glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Samples. Acetonitrile (ACN) was provided by Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), urea, dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and trypsin (bovine, TPCK-treated) were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Formic acid (FA) was purchased from Fluka (Buches, Germany). Other chemicals and reagents were of or above analytical grade. High-purity water used in all experiments was obtained from a Milli-Q purification system (Millipore, Milford, MA). Protein Digestion of Human Serum. Human serum sample was a pooled serum collected from 48 gastric cancer patients under informed consent in Xijing Hospital of Digestive Disease and used according to the ethical guidelines. The sample was pooled and stored at -80 °C. The proteins were denatured in 8 M Urea /100 mM NH4HCO3, reduced by dithiothreitol followed by alkylated with iodoacetamide. Next, tryptic digestion was carried out at 37 °C for 18 h and terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters, MA), dried down and stored at -20 °C for further use. Enrichment of Intact Glycopeptides. Isolation of intact glycopeptides was conducted on a Waters Acuity UPLC system (Waters, USA) equipped with a home-made HILIC (hydrophilic-interaction chromatography) column (click maltose, 5µm, 100 Å) according to our recently established automated method. Briefly, peptides digested from 5 µL serum were dissolved in 35 µL 80% ACN/1% TFA and loaded onto HILIC column. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% TFA in H2O and 98% ACN/0.1% TFA, respectively. The gradient was kept at 80% mobile phase B for 11 min and then dropped directly to 30% mobile phase B and maintained for 5 min. Intact glycopeptides were collected during 12-13 min of the gradient. The sample was dried for LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The analytical column (75 µm i.d.) was packed with C18-AQ beads (1.9 µm, 120 Å) to 35 cm length. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% FA in H2O and 0.1% FA in ACN respectively. Peptides were separated under three different gradients, i.e., 80 min, 160 min and 210 min. For the 80 min gradient, mobile phase B was increased linearly from 9% to 45% in 68 min, followed by 45% to 90% for 2 min and maintained at 90% for another 10 min. For the 160 min and 210 min gradients, linear increase of mobile phase B from 9% to 45% in 138 min and 188 min were executed, respectively. Intact glycopeptide were dissolved in 0.1% FA and loaded onto the analytical column for LC-MS/MS analysis. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full mass scan MS spectra (m/z 400-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a 60,000 resolution. Intact glycopeptides were analyzed with a 300% normalized AGC target with a maximum injection time of 40 ms. RF lens was set as 45%. MS/MS scans were also acquired by the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a 30,000 resolution, and the normalized AGC target was set to 500% with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Isolation window was set as 1.4 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed with 20-30-40% stepped NCE.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were converted to the open source format mzML by using ProteoWizard (version: 3.0.21105) with 32-bit precision and the “1-” peak picking option. Glyco-Decipher, StrucGP (v1.0.0) and pGlyco 3.0 (build20210615) were searched with the following parameters: precursor tolerance: 5 ppm; fragmentation tolerance: 20 ppm; enzyme: full trypsin digestion with 3 maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at C was set as fixed modification; and oxidation at M was set as variable modification. The Homo Sapiens protein database (containing 20,417 entries) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics; glycopeptide; glycosylation; n-glycosylation

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Zheng Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingliang Ye
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China


