### Accession
PXD031790

### Title
Double-stranded RNA viruses are released from Trichomonas vaginalis inside exosomes and modulate the exosomal cargo.

### Description
Trichomonas vaginalis is a parasitic protist that infects the human urogenital tract. During the infection, trichomonads adhere to the host mucosa, acquire nutrients from the vaginal/prostate environment, and release small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) that contribute to the trichomonad adherenceand modulate the host-parasite communication. Approximately 40% - 70% of T. vaginalis strains harbor double-stranded RNA virus called Trichomonasvirus (TVV). Naked TVV particles have the potential to stimulate a proinflammatory response in human cells, however, the mode of TVV release from trichomonads to the environment is not clear. In this report, we showed for the first time that TVV particles are released from T. vaginalis cells within sEVs. The sEVs loaded with TVV stimulated a higher proinflammatory response of human HaCaT cells in comparison to sEVs from TVV negative parasites. Moreover, a comparison of T. vaginalis isogenic TVV plus and TVV minus clones revealed a significant impact of TVV infection on the sEV proteome and RNA cargo. Small EVs from TVV positive trichomonads contained 12 enriched and 8 unique proteins including membrane-associated BspA adhesine, and about a 2.5-fold increase in the content of small regulatory tsRNA.  As T. vaginalis isolates are frequently infected with TVV, the release of TVV via sEVs to the environment represents an important factor with the potential to enhance inflammation-related pathogenesis during trichomoniasis.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) was performed as described previously (Zimmann et al. 2021). The samples were digested with trypsin and the peptides obtained were subjected to nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the T. vaginalis database (TrichDB, www.trichdb.org, release 2020-05-27, 60,330 entries), and 92 TVV protein sequences available in NCBI non-redundant protein database. The quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms using MaxQuant LFQ version 1.6.2.0 (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany)(Cox et al. 2014).  The MS data were obtained from three independent sEV isolations and deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al. 2019).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant output file was processed using RStudio (Boston, USA). To filter the initial dataset we used three criteria: we removed all single peptide identifications, all proteins identified in less than two independent experiments, and soluble proteins that were enriched in the supernatant after separation of sEVs with at least 1.5 fold change (P value 0.02) in comparison to proteins in sEV fraction. To compare TVV plus and TVV minus sEV proteomes we conducted imputation of all missing values (NA) with normal distribution of the spectrometer limit and the final dataset was used to construct a volcano plot with significance treshold P=0.01 in RStudio

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Rna virus

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic
Charles University

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic


