### Accession
PXD031485

### Title
Proteome of fluid from human ovarian small antral follicles reveals insights in folliculogenesis and oocyte maturation.

### Description
Follicles of polycystic ovaries (PCO) often become arrested in early antral stages at around 3 to 11 mm in diameter. The condition disturbs dominant follicle selection and may result in altered ovulation and anovulation. During the growth and development of human follicles, the follicular fluid (FF) constitutes the avascular microenvironment in which the oocyte develops and acts as a vehicle for hormone signaling between cues from circulation and follicular cells. Previous proteomics studies performed on FF from women with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) have revealed information on the protein changes associated with the pathophysiology of this disorder. However, these studies have been conducted on FF samples obtained in connection with oocyte pick-up during ovarian stimulation right at the time of ovulation and are limited to follicular conditions during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. This study aimed to detect proteomic alterations in FF from human small antral follicles (hSAF) obtained from women with PCO as compared to normal women.

### Sample Protocol
The quantitation of total proteins from FF was performed using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Smith et al., 1985). FF samples were dissolved in 1.6 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10mM (37°C for 1 h) and iodoacetamide (25mM, 30 min in the dark at room temperature) respectively. Tryptic digestion was performed after diluting the SDC to 0.5 % at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h at 37 °C.  To precipitate the SDC, we added 20 % formic acid to a polypropylene filter plate with a hydrophilic polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm, Porvair Filtration Group, Fareham, United Kingdom)(Pla et al., 2020, PMID: 33313811).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition.  An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled with the high-resolution Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) was used. The full MS scans were set with an acquisition range of m/z 375-1500, resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), target AGC value as 3 × 106, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and normalized collision energy of 28. The top 20 precursors were selected for fragmentation. For the MS2 acquisition, we used a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200), target AGC value of 1 × 106, maximum injection time of 50ms, isolation window of 1.2 m/z and fixed first mass at 110 m/z.  Peptide elution was performed with a nonlinear gradient (flow of 0.300 µL/min during 160 min) using 2% of 80%acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Solvent B and 98% of 0.1% formic acid as solvent A.  Mass spectrometry data analysis We used Proteome v2.4 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA). To identify the peptides, the MS data were searched against the UniProtKB human database (Released 20180207, 42213 sequences including isoforms). A combination of FF spectral databases built from the MS/MS analysis of a top 14 depleted pool (hSAF spectral library) and the MSPepSearch node plus SEQUEST HT was performed (Pla et al., 2020a).   In addition, we added the human spectral library “ProteomeTools_HCD28_PD” and  UniprotKB human database (Date: 2020-01-28) respectively. The search was performed with the following parameters: oxidation of methionine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as dynamic and static modifications and respectively. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. The filters applied FDR<1% and FDR<5% confidence at peptide and protein level, respectively. The peptide/protein quantification was based on the MS peptide signals (label-free quantification). For label-free quantification, the ‘Minora Feature Detector’ node was included in the processing workflow, and the nodes ‘Precursor Ions Quantifier’ and ‘Feature Mapper’ were included in the consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oocyte maturation., Proteomics, Small antral follicles, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Skane University Hospital Malmö, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.
Lund university

### Submitter
Indira Pla Parada

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malm
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Skane University Hospital Malmö, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.


