### Accession
PXD015135

### Title
Posttranslational modifications_Calculation of enrichment factors identifies low abundant lipid droplet-associated proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana seeds and seedlings

### Description
The developmental program of seed formation and seedling development requires not only tight regulation of cell division and metabolism but also the adaption of organelles in structure and function. Therefore, changes in organellar protein composition is one crucial factor in development. Of particular interest in plants is the switch to photoautotrophic growth, for which biosynthesis and degradation of lipid droplets (LDs) play a critical role. We present here a bottom-up proteomics study analyzing eight different developmental phases during silique development, seed germination and seedling establishment. We investigated both total protein fractions and LD-enriched fractions for each time point. The overall changes in the seed and seedling proteome during germination and seedling establishment monitored in this study present a rich resource for researchers interested in different questions of early seedling biology. The analysis of the proteome of LDs using LD-enrichment factors allowed the identification of four LD-associated protein families, which were subsequently confirmed by a cell biological approach. In addition to protein discovery, our dataset allows for the study of the dynamics of LD proteins throughout the developmental phases analyzed. We found that the relative levels of oleosin stay stable, while many other proteins accumulate on LDs at later stages of seedling establishment. The methodology described here is shown to be well suited for describing a comprehensive and quantitative view of the Arabidopsis proteome across time, with a particular focus on proteins associated with LDs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated, protein concentration determined and in-gel tryptically digested as described before (Kretzschmar et al., 2018), but with twenty micrograms of protein digested per replicate. Peptides were then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis modified from what was previously described (Schmitt et al., 2017). First, 2 µL peptide samples were separated by nano-flow LC on a RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid on an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 minutes. Then, peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on an Acclaim PepMan PSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition was gradually changed within a time period of 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 minutes, to 30 % solvent B within the following 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the next 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the following 12 min. All solvents and acids were of Optima LC/MS quality and purchased at Thermo Fisher Scientific. Eluted peptides were ionized on-line by nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) with a Nanspray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and analyzed with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans were recorded in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data was processed for feature detection, peptide identification, and protein group assembly with MaxLFQ algorithm in the MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2014). Settings are specified in the metadata file (Suppl. Dataset 38). In brief, default settings were used. Additionally, label-free quantification was enabled in group-specific parameter settings. In global parameter settings, match between runs and iBAQ were enabled. The TAIR10 protein database was used as reference.

### Publication Abstract
The developmental program of seed formation, germination, and early seedling growth requires not only tight regulation of cell division and metabolism, but also concerted control of the structure and function of organelles, which relies on specific changes in their protein composition. Of particular interest is the switch from heterotrophic to photoautotrophic seedling growth, for which cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) play a critical role as depots for energy-rich storage lipids. Here, we present the results of a bottom-up proteomics study analyzing the total protein fractions and LD-enriched fractions in eight different developmental phases during silique (seed) development, seed germination, and seedling establishment in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). The quantitative analysis of the LD proteome using LD-enrichment factors led to the identification of six previously unidentified and comparably low-abundance LD proteins, each of which was confirmed by intracellular localization studies with fluorescent protein fusions. In addition to these advances in LD protein discovery and the potential insights provided to as yet unexplored aspects in plant LD functions, our data set allowed for a comparative analysis of the LD protein composition throughout the various developmental phases examined. Among the most notable of the alterations in the LD proteome were those during seedling establishment, indicating a switch in the physiological function(s) of LDs after greening of the cotyledons. This work highlights LDs as dynamic organelles with functions beyond lipid storage.

### Keywords
Seedling, Lipid droplets, Seed, Oil bodies, Silique, Germintion

### Affiliations
University of Goettingen, Albrecht-von-Haller-Institute for Plant Sciences, Department for Plant Biochemistry
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
University of Goettingen, Albrecht-von-Haller-Institute for Plant Sciences, Department for Plant Biochemistry


