### Accession
PXD024397

### Title
Palaeoproteomics guidelines to identify proteinaceous binders in artworks following the study of a 15th‑century painting by Sandro Botticelli’s workshop

### Description
Undertaking the conservation of artworks informed by the results of molecular analyses has gained growing importance over the last decades, and today it can take advantage of state-of-the-art analytical techniques, such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Protein-based binders are among the most common organic materials used in artworks, having been used in their production for centuries. However, the applications of proteomics to these materials are still limited. In this work, a palaeoproteomic workflow was successfully tested on paint reconstructions, and subsequently applied to micro-samples from a 15th-century panel painting, attributed to the workshop of Sandro Botticelli. This method allowed the confident identification of the protein-based binders and their biological origin, as well as the discrimination of the binder used in the ground and paint layers of the painting. These results show that the approach is accurate, highly sensitive, and broadly applicable in the cultural heritage field, due to the limited amount of starting material required. Accordingly, a set of guidelines are suggested, covering the main steps of the data analysis and interpretation of protein sequencing results, optimised for artworks.

### Sample Protocol
Samples 20 samples from 10 paint reconstructions were analysed to test the protein extraction protocol on paint materials, prior to the analysis of the historical samples. The details about these samples are reported in Supplementary Information. Three micro-samples (~10-20 μg) were removed from the panel painting “The Virgin and Child with Saint John and an Angel” by Sandro Botticelli’s workshop (Acc. No. NG275, The National Gallery of London - London, UK). All samples were removed from the edge of the painting, which already showed physical damage. Samples were specifically removed from areas where no visible repainting was present. In one location, it was attempted to collect the paint and the ground layer separately, although the flaky properties of the materials and the thinness of the layers did not allow a perfect separation. Nonetheless, samples 1:BP and 1:GL are believed to mostly consist of the paint layer and the ground layer, respectively. Sample 2:YP was collected from the paint layer in a different location. Protein extraction protocol Samples were treated with a protocol previously described by Mackie et al. In order to perform protein extraction and digestion, the micro-samples were placed in separate Protein Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany) and, along with a blank control, incubated for 2 hours at 80°C with 100 μL of an aqueous buffer containing: 2M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl), 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), 20mM chloroacetamide (CAA), and 100mM trisaminomethane (Tris). The pH was adjusted to around 8.0 using NH4OH 10% when needed. Proteins were digested under agitation for 2 hours at 37°C in-solution with 0.2 μg rLysC (Promega, Sweden). Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl using 25mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, and digested overnight under agitation at 37°C with 0.8 μg Trypsin (Promega, Sweden). Samples were then acidified to pH 2 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench digestion. The resulting peptides were collected on in-house made C18 extraction stage-tips, as previously described. Stage-tips were stored at -18°C until mass spectrometry analysis. nLC-MS/MS The nLC-MS/MS method used for the mock-up samples is reported in Supplementary Information. For the painting samples, the extracted peptides were eluted from the stage-tips using 30 μL 40% ACN in water. Extracts were placed in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C until approximately 3 μL of solution were left, and then rehydrated with 5 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN. The peptides were then separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. Buffer A was milliQ water; buffer B was 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were separated with increasing buffer B, going from 5% to 30% in 50 min, 30% to 45% in 10 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min, held at 80% for 5 min before dropping back down to 5% in 5 min and held for 5 min. Flow rate was 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven. A wash-blank method using 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was run in between each sample to hinder cross-contamination.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent top 10 mode. Spray voltage was 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and the heated capillary kept at 275°C. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 350–1400 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 118 ms. The target value was 2e5 and spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000. Normalised collision energy was set at 28% and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z with the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were identified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0), matching them against a reference database containing all the publicly available sequences for the most common proteinaceous paint binders (collagens, egg proteins, milk proteins). In order to investigate the presence of protein residues originating from additional sources, the spectra were then matched against the SwissProt database (downloaded January 2017), which contains a large selection of manually reviewed protein sequences from a wide variety of species. The software was set to search for tryptic peptides with up to a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. All samples were matched against the database of paint binders twice, with different variable modifications. The first search included the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, conversion of glutamic to pyroglutamic acid, and hydroxyproline. A second search was performed with the following variable modifications, including PTMs identified as markers of photo-oxidation: acetylation of protein N-terminal, oxidation of histidine and tryptophan, di-oxidation of histidine and tryptophan, conversion of histidine to aspartic acid, conversion of histidine to hydroxyglutamic acid, conversion of histidine to glycine, oxidation of tryptophan to kynurenine, oxidation of tryptophan to hydroxykynurenine, and hydroxyproline. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for all searches. The minimum peptide length was set to 7, with up to two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 and the minimum score for unmodified and modified peptides was set to 40. The dependent peptides algorithm was applied in the first run, with an FDR of 0.01. Contaminant proteins were assessed using the contamination.fasta provided by MaxQuant, containing common laboratory contaminants, including: primate keratins (likely from the laboratory space or through human handling of samples), excess trypsin, and Bovine Serum Albumin (a common laboratory reagent). Peptides assigned to contaminant proteins were filtered out and not considered further.   Proteins are considered confidently identified if at least two unique non-overlapping peptides are observed, unless otherwise specified. Peptides were considered species-diagnostic when, after search against the entire nrNCBI protein database via the BLAST alignment tool, they were assigned to a single species, or to a limited number of species among which only one can be considered plausible, based on: (i) the nature of the samples, (ii) the geographic origin of the sample, and (iii) the dating of the sample. The deamidation level was calculated using the deamidation tool described in Mackie et al. and freely available on GitHub. The Dependent Peptides algorithm of MaxQuant was used to search for unspecified protein modifications by comparing the MS/MS spectra of identified peptides (usually unmodified) to unidentified spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Undertaking the conservation of artworks informed by the results of molecular analyses has gained growing importance over the last decades, and today it can take advantage of state-of-the-art analytical techniques, such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Protein-based binders are among the most common organic materials used in artworks, having been used in their production for centuries. However, the applications of proteomics to these materials are still limited. In this work, a palaeoproteomic workflow was successfully tested on paint reconstructions, and subsequently applied to micro-samples from a 15th-century panel painting, attributed to the workshop of Sandro Botticelli. This method allowed the confident identification of the protein-based binders and their biological origin, as well as the discrimination of the binder used in the ground and paint layers of the painting. These results show that the approach is accurate, highly sensitive, and broadly applicable in the cultural heritage field, due to the limited amount of starting material required. Accordingly, a set of guidelines are suggested, covering the main steps of the data analysis and interpretation of protein sequencing results, optimised for artworks.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Paint binders, Cultural heritage, Palaeoproteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana
Section for EvoGenomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Fabiana Di Gianvincenzo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Section for EvoGenomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


