### Accession
PXD041196

### Title
Ubiquitination of the actin polymerase VASP

### Description
Filopodia are dynamic, actin-rich structures that extend outward from the cell to explore and respond to cues in the local environment. The actin polymerase VASP is a component of the filopodial tip complex, where it regulates actin polymerization and filopodial dynamics. Previously, we showed that VASP transiently co-localizes with the brain-enriched E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM9 at the tips of neuronal filopodia. TRIM9 was required for the reversible, non-degradative ubiquitination of VASP and this modification was associated with decreased filopodia number and stability. Furthermore, the axon guidance cue netrin promoted deubiquitination of VASP. We hypothesize mono or multi-monoubiquitination of VASP is a mechanism to negatively regulate actin dynamics by blocking VASP and actin interactions. To determine the lysine residues that are ubiquitinated in VASP, we immunoprecipitated exogenously expressed human VASP from HEK293 cells. The immunopurified protein was analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify post-translational modifications. We identified numerous lysine residues that are ubiquitinated in VASP, including a high prevalence at K240 and K286.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation: Immunoprecipitated samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and stained with coomassie. The bands corresponding to VASP were excised and the proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 30 min at RT, alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at RT, and in-gel digested with either ArgC (Promega) overnight at 37˚C or trypsin (Promega) for 1 hr at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted, desalted with C18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis:  The peptide samples (n=2) were analyzed in technical duplicate by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 45 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–38% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1600) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions, 100 ms injection time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Scientific). Peak lists were searched against the reviewed Uniprot human database, appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest. The following parameters were used to identify tryptic or ArgC peptides: 50 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.02 Da product ion mass tolerance; up to 3 missed trypsin cleavage sites; (C) carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; (M) oxidation, (S, T, Y) phosphorylation, and (K) diGly were set as variable modifications. The ptmRS node was used to localize the sites of phosphorylation and diGly sites. Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by the Percolator node using a decoy database search and peptides were filtered using a 1% FDR cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
The actin cytoskeleton performs multiple cellular functions, and as such, actin polymerization must be tightly regulated. We previously demonstrated that reversible, non-degradative ubiquitylation regulates the function of the actin polymerase VASP in developing neurons. However, the underlying mechanism of how ubiquitylation impacts VASP activity was unknown. Here, we show that mimicking multi-monoubiquitylation of VASP at K240 and K286 negatively regulates VASP interactions with actin. Using in vitro biochemical assays, we demonstrate the reduced ability of multi-monoubiquitylated VASP to bind, bundle, and elongate actin filaments. However, multi-monoubiquitylated VASP maintained the ability to bind and protect barbed ends from capping protein. Finally, we demonstrate the electroporation of recombinant multi-monoubiquitylated VASP protein altered cell spreading morphology. Collectively, these results suggest a mechanism in which ubiquitylation controls VASP-mediated actin dynamics.

### Keywords
Actin; ubiquitin; vasp; post-translational modification

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology at UNC Chapel Hill
UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Aurora Cabrera

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Gupton
UNC Chapel Hill


