### Accession
PXD040898

### Title
A combined gas phase separation strategy for ADP-ribosylated peptides

### Description
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a posttranslational modification that is best studied using mass spectrometry. Method developments that are permissive to low inputs or baseline levels of protein ribosylation represent the next frontier in the field. High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) reduces peptide complexity in gas phase, providing a means to achieve maximal ADPr peptide sequencing depth. We therefore investigated the extent to which FAIMS with or without traditional gas-phase fractionation/separation (GPS) can increase the number of ADPr peptides. We examined ADPr peptides enriched from mouse spleens. We gleaned additional insight by also reporting findings from the corresponding non-ADPr peptide contaminants, and the peptide inputs for ADPr peptide enrichment. At increasingly higher compensation voltages, ADPr peptides were more stable whereas the non-ADPr peptides were filtered out. A combination of 3 GPS survey scans, each with 8 compensation voltages resulted in 790 high-confidence ADPr peptides, compared to 90 with GPS alone. A simplified acquisition strategy requiring only two injections corresponding to two MS1 scan ranges coupled to optimized compensation voltage settings, provided 402 ADPr peptides corresponding to 234 ADPr proteins. We conclude that our combined gas phase separation strategy is a valuable addition to any ADP-ribosylome workflow.

### Sample Protocol
All peptides were analyzed on the Exploris 480 fronted with a FAIMS Pro and EASY-Spray Source, coupled to an Easy-nLC1200 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were fractionated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164261); and an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC column, 75 µm X 70 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164946). For all peptides and ADPr peptide samples, the analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/min from 5% to 25% Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 40 minutes, followed by ten minutes of 25% to 35% Solvent B, and another 10 minutes of a 95%-5% jigsaw wash. The MS1 was set to 120 K resolution (maximum injection time, 25 ms), and the top precursor ions (within a 1.5 second cycle time) were subjected to HCD isolation width m/z 2, dynamic exclusion enabled (20 seconds), and MS2 resolution set to 120 K (maximum injection time, auto; normalized collision energy, 26% or 28%). The mouse liver and spleen GPS and FAIMS settings varied slightly since the liver samples were analyzed first, providing insight as to how to better analyze the spleen samples. Liver experiments - both ADPr-enriched and input peptide pools were injected 32 times corresponding to four MS1 scan ranges (m/z 375-1500, m/z 395-705, m/z 695-1005, m/z 995-1300) and eight compensation voltage settings (0V, -30V, -40V, -50V, -60V, -70V, -80V, and -90V) for FAIMS (total carrier gas flow, 4.2 L/min). We injected approximately 0.40 g ADPr and input peptides for the m/z 395-1500 MS1 ranges but 0.20 g ADPr and input peptides for each corresponding GPS range. Spleen experiments - both ADPr-enriched and input peptide pools were injected 32 times corresponding to four MS1 scan ranges (m/z 400-1200, m/z 400-705, m/z 695-1005, m/z 995-1200), first without the FAIMS device, and then again with FAIMS and seven compensation voltage settings (0V, -40V, -50V, -60V, -70V, -80V, and -90V). We injected approximately 0.07 g ADPr peptides and 0.11 g input peptides for the m/z 400-1200 MS1 ranges and each corresponding GPS range. For each 120-minute gradient acquisition, we injected 0.14 g ADPr peptides and scanned either the m/z 400-705 (CVs -70V, -80V, -90V) or m/z 695-1000 (CVs -40V, -50V, -60V) mass range. All other instrument parameters were kept as listed above.

### Data Protocol
ADPr peptide spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) custom-built with the ADPr spectral annotation module, RiboMaP. The spectra were queried against the Uniprot mouse fasta database (downloaded January 18, 2022; n=63,603 entries) using the SEQUEST search engine algorithm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme, allowing up to 4 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. ADPr (+541.061 Da) of Asp, Glu, Lys, Arg, Ser, Thr, Tyr and His; oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine; and acetylation (+42.011 Da) of the N-terminus, were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine was set as a static modification. Spectral mass tolerances were 10 ppm for the precursor and 20 mmu for the fragments. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator (target/decoy method) and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered based on a 1.0%. The ADPr peptide spectra were also annotated and scored for the m-series and p-series, fragments unique to ADPr peptides. All ADPr peptide spectral matches and their corresponding spectral features and scores (including the m-series and p-series scores) are included in the supplemental tables, as listed. The input peptide spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.5) with similar search criteria as the ADPr spectra with the following exceptions – 2 missed cleavages were permitted for tryptic peptides and the ADPr was not considered as a modification.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a post-translational modification that is best studied using mass spectrometry. Method developments that are permissive with low inputs or baseline levels of protein ribosylation represent the next frontier in the field. High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) reduces peptide complexity in the gas phase, providing a means to achieve maximal ADPr peptide sequencing depth. We therefore investigated the extent to which FAIMS with or without traditional gas-phase fractionation-separation (GPS) can increase the number of ADPr peptides. We examined ADPr peptides enriched from mouse spleens. We gleaned additional insight by also reporting findings from the corresponding non-ADPr peptide contaminants and the peptide inputs for ADPr peptide enrichment. At increasingly higher negative compensation voltages, ADPr peptides were more stable, whereas the non-ADPr peptides were filtered out. A combination of 3 GPS survey scans, each with 8 compensation voltages, resulted in 790 high-confidence ADPr peptides, compared to 90 with GPS alone. A simplified acquisition strategy requiring only two injections corresponding to two MS1 scan ranges coupled to optimized compensation voltage settings provided 402 ADPr peptides corresponding to 234 ADPr proteins. We conclude that our combined GPS strategy is a valuable addition to any ADP-ribosylome workflow. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD040898.

### Keywords
Gas-phase segmentation, Gas-phase fragmentation, Mono-adp-ribose, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry, Ribosylation

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Masanori Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital


