### Accession
PXD006362

### Title
PGC7-interacting proteins in HEK293T cells

### Description
Primordial germ cell 7 (PGC7), a maternal factor essential for early development, plays a critical role in the regulation of DNA methylation, transcriptional repression, chromatin condensation, and cell division and the maintenance of cell pluripotentiality. Despite the fundamental roles of PGC7 in these cellular processes, only a few molecular and functional interactions of PGC7 have been reported. Here, a streptavidin–biotin affinity purification technique combined with LC−MS/MS was used to analyze potential proteins that interact with PGC7. In total, 291 potential PGC7-interacting proteins were identified.Knowledge of these new PGC7-interacting proteins will likely explain the findings of previous studies on PGC7 and provide a substantial resource for subsequent in-depth studies on PGC7 functions.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty 15-cm plates of HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids pCDH-BirA-FlagBio-PGC7 (co-expressing BirA and biotinylated PGC7); equal amounts of HEK293T cells were transfected with pCDH-Myc-BirA (only expressing BirA control); Forty eight hours after transfection, the cells were harvested for protein extraction. The nuclear extracts (NEs) of the BirA and BirA + biotinylated PGC7 samples were prepared according to the method described by Wang et al. Equal amounts of NEs (as determined by BCA protein assay) from the BirA (control) and BirA + biotinylated PGC7 samples were used to perform the follow-up experiment. The NE sample was precleared with protein G-agarose (100 μl of partial slurry per 10 mg of protein) for 2 h at 4°C with continuous mixing. The samples were then spun at 300 × g for 5 min at 4°C, and the precleared NE samples were transferred to new tubes. Subsequently, PGC7-associated and control protein complexes were purified from the precleared BirA + biotinylated PGC7 and BirA samples, respectively, using the method one-step streptavidin purification of protein complexes described by Wang et al.  Large sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gels were prepared using 5% stacking gels and 10% resolving gels. The enriched protein complexes samples were separated on the 10% resolving gel and visualized by Coomassie blue staining. Each gel lane was divided into five slices and cut into small pieces. The gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile at 37°C until depigmentation. Subsequently, 500 μl of 100% acetonitrile was added, and the samples were incubated at room temperature with occasional vortexing until the gel pieces became white and shrunk. Dried gel pieces were incubated with enough trypsin buffer (0.01 μg/μl) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted for mass spectrometry analysis. Each sample was resuspended in 20 μl buffer A [5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA)] and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min. Approximately 5 μl supernatant (approximately 2.5 μg protein) was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the auto sampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column (inner diameter 200 μm, Waters). The peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm, Waters) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μl/min for 4 min, and the 35 min gradient was run at 300 nl/min starting from 5% and increasing to 35% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA), followed by a 5 min linear gradient to 60%, followed by a 2 min linear gradient to 80%, maintenance at 80% buffer B for 2 min, and finally a return to 5% for 1 min. According to a modified method described by Andrews et al17, data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, a curtain gas of 30 psi, a nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. The mass spectrometer (MS) was operated with a resolving power (RP) of greater than or equal to 30,000 fwhm for time-of-flight (TOF) MS scans. For information-dependent acquisition (IDA), survey scans were acquired in 100 ms, and as many as 40 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 150 counts per second (counts/s) was exceeded with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 2.8 s. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel time-to-digital converter (TDC) detector with four-anode/channel detection. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35 ±15 eV was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (∼15 s) and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
The acquired peak-lists of all tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra were combined into one Mascot generic format (MGF) file and searched with Mascot software (version 2.3.02) against the International Protein Index (IPI) human sequence database (version 3.87, 91,464 sequences). The search parameters were set as follows: MS/MS Ion search; trypsin as the enzyme, with one missed cleavage allowed; mass values of Monoisotopic; mass tolerance of 0.05 Da for peptides and 0.1 Da for fragmentations; fixed modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications of Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), and Deamidated (NQ). The Mascot instrument setting parameter was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. Mascot ‘identity score’ provides an acceptance threshold with false identification probability at a confidence level of 0.05. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores greater than “identity score” were counted as identified, and each confident protein identification involves at least one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Primordial germ cell 7 (PGC7), a maternal factor essential for early development, plays a critical role in the regulation of DNA methylation, transcriptional repression, chromatin condensation, and cell division and the maintenance of cell pluripotentiality. Despite the fundamental roles of PGC7 in these cellular processes, only a few molecular and functional interactions of PGC7 have been reported. Here, a streptavidin-biotin affinity purification technique combined with LC-MS/MS was used to analyze potential proteins that interact with PGC7. In total, 291 potential PGC7-interacting proteins were identified. Through an in-depth bioinformatic analysis of potential interactors, we linked PGC7 to critical cellular processes including translation, RNA processing, cell cycle, and regulation of heterochromatin structure. To better understand the functional interactions of PGC7 with its potential interactors, we constructed a protein-protein interaction network using the STRING database. In addition, we discussed in detail the interactions between PGC7 and some of its newly validated partners. The identification of these potential interactors of PGC7 expands our knowledge on the PGC7 interactome and provides a valuable resource for understanding the diverse functions of this protein.

### Keywords
Pgc7;hek293t;lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
1,College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China 2,Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Liu Hongliang

### Lab Head
Dr Guo Zekun
1,College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China 2,Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China


