### Accession
PXD022850

### Title
Integrative multi-omics analysis to characterize human brain ischemia

### Description
1. Rationale: Stroke is still a major cause of death and disability worldwide. A better comprehension of stroke pathophysiology is fundamental to reduce its dramatic outcome. The use of high-throughput unbiased omics approaches, such as proteomics and transcriptomics, might aid to deepen the knowledge of stroke at the molecular level. Moreover, the integration of omics data is needed to depict the existing interaction between different molecular units and interpret the results in a global biological context. 2. Objective: Our aim was to identify and verify protein and gene expression changes that occur in the human brain after ischemia through an integrative approach to join and combine the information of both omics analyses. The translational potential of our results was explored in a pilot study with blood samples from ischemic stroke patients.  3. Methods and results: Proteomics and transcriptomics discovery studies were performed in human brain samples from deceased stroke patients, unveiling 128 proteins and 2716 genes significantly dysregulated after cerebral ischemia. Afterwards, integrative bioinformatics analyses joining both datasets exposed several canonical pathways altered in the ischemic area, such as neurotransmitters release or matrisome regulation, highlighting the most influential molecules in these pathways.  To conduct the verification phase, 28 genes and 9 proteins were selected to be validated in independent human brain samples by means of orthogonal techniques. Our results were confirmed for NCDN, RAB3C, ST4A1, DNM1L, A1AG1, A1AT, JAM3, VTDB, ANXA1, ANXA2 and IL8. Finally, the blood circulating levels of the validated protein candidates were explored in ischemic stroke patients over the acute phase of the disease. Protein fluctuations along the first week after onset were detected for A1AG1 and A1AT.  4. Conclusion: The results presented here expand the knowledge of stroke pathology, revealing new key molecules that can be further explored as biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets of ischemic stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Eleven ischemic stroke patients who died during hospitalization in the Vall d’Hebron Hospital (Barcelona, Spain) were included in our brain tissue collection between March 2004 and July 2011. Tissue collection was done under the supervision of an experienced neuropathologist. Brain pieces from the infarct core (IC) and the healthy contralateral (CL) areas were gathered within the first hours after death, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC.  Alkaline cold lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.05% Brij-35 and 0.02% NaN3 was used to prepare 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, USA) solution. Protease inhibitors (1% phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride – PSMF – and 0.5% aprotinin) were added. Frozen brain samples from IC and CL areas were immersed in this solution and homogenized with a dounce tissue grinder with glass pestles. Homogenates were centrifuged for 12 min at 15,300 g at 4ºC and supernatants were stored at -80ºC.  The protein content of brain homogenates was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). For each sample, 25 µg total protein were brought to 30 µL 0.1% Rapigest in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before a standard reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion and sample processing was carried out. Brain digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (NanoAcquity LC system; Waters) coupled to electrospray ionization – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisher) following a gas phase fractionation (GPF)-4 approach.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with Progenesis LC-MS® software v4.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) using default settings and automatic processing of the runs. Each GPF range was analyzed independently, as previously described, before combining them into one single experiment. For those proteins identified with a minimum of 2 unique peptides, protein abundance was quantified in a label-free manner based on the sum of all peak areas for each peptide ion and normalized to all proteins.  Further normalization was done by adding a value of 1 to every data point (to avoid 0 values in the analysis for missing proteins in some brain samples and/or areas). Analysis of data heterogeneity showed a skewed distribution, with top 3 highly abundant proteins interfering in the distribution of the data; these 3 proteins corresponded to hemoglobin α and β and albumin and were excluded from further analysis. Finally, data were log-transformed and used for a statistical paired analysis to compare IC and CL areas based on a linear model (limma package; R software, Austria). Furthermore, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR; multtest R package) was applied to obtain q-values. We considered differentially abundant proteins those with a q-value <0.1. Logarithmic base 2 fold-change (logFC) was computed to show the average protein changes in the IC with respect to the CL areas; a minus sign (-) indicates lower protein abundance in the IC area, and vice versa.

### Publication Abstract
Stroke is a major cause of death and disability. A better comprehension of stroke pathophysiology is fundamental to reduce its dramatic outcome. The use of high-throughput unbiased omics approaches and the integration of these data might deepen the knowledge of stroke at the molecular level, depicting the interaction between different molecular units. We aimed to identify protein and gene expression changes in the human brain after ischemia through an integrative approach to join the information of both omics analyses. The translational potential of our results was explored in a pilot study with blood samples from ischemic stroke patients. Proteomics and transcriptomics discovery studies were performed in human brain samples from six deceased stroke patients, comparing the infarct core with the corresponding contralateral brain region, unveiling 128 proteins and 2716 genes significantly dysregulated after stroke. Integrative bioinformatics analyses joining both datasets exposed canonical pathways altered in the ischemic area, highlighting the most influential molecules. Among the molecules with the highest fold-change, 28 genes and 9 proteins were selected to be validated in five independent human brain samples using orthogonal techniques. Our results were confirmed for NCDN, RAB3C, ST4A1, DNM1L, A1AG1, A1AT, JAM3, VTDB, ANXA1, ANXA2, and IL8. Finally, circulating levels of the validated proteins were explored in ischemic stroke patients. Fluctuations of A1AG1 and A1AT, both up-regulated in the ischemic brain, were detected in blood along the first week after onset. In summary, our results expand the knowledge of ischemic stroke pathology, revealing key molecules to be further explored as biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Integrative analysis, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Ischemic stroke

### Affiliations
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.  Institute de Biomedicine of Seville, IBiS/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville & Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Seville.

### Submitter
Laura Ramiro

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Montaner
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.  Institute de Biomedicine of Seville, IBiS/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville & Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Seville.


