### Accession
PXD047094

### Title
Mutant p53 interactome study with IP-MS

### Description
Inactivating TP53 mutations lead to a loss of function of p53, but can also often result in oncogenic gain-of-function (GOF) of mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins which promote tumor development and progression. The GOF activities of TP53 mutations are well documented, but the mechanisms involved remain poorly understood. Here, we study the mutp53 interactome with IP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
UM-SCC-1-pBabe, UM-SCC-1-mutp53G245D, and UM-SCC-1-mutp53G245D & PIK3CA H1047R cells were labeled via passaging for up to 8 cell divisions in DMEM containing L-arginine (Arg 0) and L-lysine (Lys 0) (“light”) or L-arginine-U-13C615N4 (Arg 10) and L-lysine-U-13C615N2 (Lys 8) (“heavy”). For immunoprecipitation (IP)-mass spectrometry (MS), 1 × 107 cells were lysed with NETN buffer (0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], and 100 mM NaCl with freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors on ice for 30 minutes. The lysates were incubated with 20 μL of p53 antibody-agarose for 2 hours at 4 °C. After 4 washes with NETN buffer, the paired samples were combined and then boiled in 2 × Laemmli buffer before SDS-PAGE and MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched with Maxquant. The cutoff values for candidates were a median fold change higher than 1.5 (G245D/pBabe or G245D + PIK3CA/pBabe) and a P-value (t test) lower than 0.05 in all 8 experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutant p53, Ms, Ip, P53

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology department, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology department, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


