### Accession
PXD038480

### Title
Pexophagy suppresses ROS-induced damage in leaf cells under high-intensity light

### Description
Although light is essential for photosynthesis, it has the potential to elevate intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Since high ROS levels are cytotoxic, plants must alleviate such damage. However, the cellular mechanism underlying ROS-induced leaf damage alleviation in peroxisomes was not fully explored. Here, we show that autophagy plays a pivotal role in the selective removal of ROS-generating peroxisomes, which protects plants from oxidative damage during photosynthesis. We present that autophagy-deficient mutants show light intensity-dependent leaf damage and excess aggregation of ROS-accumulating peroxisomes. The peroxisome aggregates are specifically engulfed by pre-autophagosomal structures and vacuolar membranes in both leaf cells and isolated vacuoles, but they are not degraded in mutants. ATG18a-GFP and GFP-2×FYVE, which bind to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, preferentially target the peroxisomal membranes and pre-autophagosomal structures near peroxisomes in ROS-accumulating cells under high-intensity light. Our findings provide deeper insights into the plant stress response caused by light irradiation.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from atg2(p1) expressing ATG18a-GFP or GFP grown under normal light conditions with 1 mL of lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 0.15 M NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100, and 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20]. ATG18a-GFP-binding proteins were obtained through immunoprecipitation using µMACS Anti-GFP MicroBeads and µMACS columns (Miltenyi Biotec, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). The eluted fraction was assessed by an immunoblot analysis using an anti-GFP antibody to detect GFP or ATG18a-GFP. ATG18a-GFP/GFP-binding proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE following in-gel digestion. The obtained proteins were electrophoresed briefly until the BPB dye band was 2 mm from the well. A 4-mm piece of gel centred on the dye band was cut out and digested with trypsin. Collected peptides were analysed using nano-LC-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The experiments were repeated three times.

### Data Protocol
The obtained spectra were searched against the TAIR 10 Arabidopsis protein database (version 20101214) with MASCOT server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Although light is essential for photosynthesis, it has the potential to elevate intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Since high ROS levels are cytotoxic, plants must alleviate such damage. However, the cellular mechanism underlying ROS-induced leaf damage alleviation in peroxisomes was not fully explored. Here, we show that autophagy plays a pivotal role in the selective removal of ROS-generating peroxisomes, which protects plants from oxidative damage during photosynthesis. We present evidence that autophagy-deficient mutants show light intensity-dependent leaf damage and excess aggregation of ROS-accumulating peroxisomes. The peroxisome aggregates are specifically engulfed by pre-autophagosomal structures and vacuolar membranes in both leaf cells and isolated vacuoles, but they are not degraded in mutants. ATG18a-GFP and GFP-2&#xd7;FYVE, which bind to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, preferentially target the peroxisomal membranes and pre-autophagosomal structures near peroxisomes in ROS-accumulating cells under high-intensity light. Our findings provide deeper insights into the plant stress response caused by light irradiation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Peroxisome, Arabitopsis thaliana, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University
Plant Molecular Biology Lab, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University

### Submitter
Kenji Yamada

### Lab Head
Dr Kenji Yamada
Plant Molecular Biology Lab, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University


