### Accession
PXD024496

### Title
Large-scale analysis of the androgenic gland proteome in the Chinese mitten crab Eriocheir sinensis

### Description
Large-scale analysis of the androgenic gland proteome in the Chinese mitten crab Eriocheir sinensis

### Sample Protocol
Crab androgenic gland samples (n = 3) were ground by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. Next, samples were sonicated using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in four volumes of lysis buffer.

### Data Protocol
Data from MS/MS was processed using the Maxquant (v.1.5.2.8) against the E. sinensis database (22,394 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database and the common contaminants database.

### Publication Abstract
The infraorder Brachyura (true or short-tailed crabs) represents a successful group of marine invertebrates yet with limited genomic resources. Here we report a chromosome-anchored reference genome and transcriptomes of the Chinese mitten crab Eriocheir sinensis, a catadromous crab and invasive species with wide environmental tolerance, strong osmoregulatory capacity and high fertility. We show the expansion of specific gene families in the crab, including F-ATPase, which enhances our knowledge on the adaptive plasticity of this successful invasive species. Our analysis of spatio-temporal transcriptomes and the genome of E. sinensis and other decapods shows that brachyurization development is associated with down-regulation of Hox genes at the megalopa stage when tail shortening occurs. A better understanding of the molecular mechanism regulating sexual development is achieved by integrated analysis of multiple omics. These genomic resources significantly expand the gene repertoire of Brachyura, and provide insights into the biology of this group, and Crustacea in general.

### Keywords
Eriocheir sinensis, Proteome, Androgenic gland

### Affiliations
Ningbo University

### Submitter
Chenchang Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Chenchang Bao
Ningbo University


