### Accession
PXD018359

### Title
7 paired AML Diagnosis vs Relapse patient samples

### Description
MS-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics study based on 7 paired diagnosis-first relapse AML patient samples

### Sample Protocol
FASP processed and IMAC enrichment for phosphopeptides LC-MS/MS label free and silac on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Three fractions were run for SILAC-labeled proteomic samples and single fraction for label-free proteomics and SILAC-labeled phosphoproteomics

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for analysing data. One run was for SILAC-labeled proteomic and phosphoprotoemics sample and another run was for label-free proteomics sample. Perseus further processed MaxQuant outfiles, proteingroups and phosphoSTY files

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hematological malignancy. Nearly 50% of the patients who receive the most intensive treatment develop chemoresistant leukemia relapse. Although the leukemogenic events leading to relapse seem to differ between patients (i.e., regrowth from a clone detected at first diagnosis, progression from the original leukemic or preleukemic stem cells), a common characteristic of relapsed AML is increased chemoresistance. The aim of the present study was to investigate at the proteomic level whether leukemic cells from relapsed patients present overlapping molecular mechanisms that contribute to this chemoresistance. We used liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to compare the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of AML cells derived from seven patients at the time of first diagnosis and at first relapse. At the time of first relapse, AML cells were characterized by increased levels of proteins important for various mitochondrial functions, such as mitochondrial ribosomal subunit proteins (MRPL21, MRPS37) and proteins for RNA processing (DHX37, RNA helicase; RPP40, ribonuclease P component), DNA repair (ERCC3, DNA repair factor IIH helicase; GTF2F1, general transcription factor), and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. The levels of several cytoskeletal proteins (MYH14/MYL6/MYL12A, myosin chains; VCL, vinculin) as well as of proteins involved in vesicular trafficking/secretion and cell adhesion (ITGAX, integrin alpha-X; CD36, platelet glycoprotein 4; SLC2A3, solute carrier family 2) were decreased in relapsed cells. Our study introduces new targetable proteins that might direct therapeutic strategies to decrease chemoresistance in relapsed AML.

### Keywords
Acute myeloid leukemia relapase

### Affiliations
Dep. Biomedicine University of Bergen
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Maria Hernandez-Valladares

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Berven
Dep. Biomedicine University of Bergen


