### Accession
PXD032101

### Title
Extracellular release of two peptidases dominates generation of the quorum sensing signal in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Trypanosomes causing African sleeping sickness use quorum sensing to control the production of transmission-competent stumpy forms in their mammalian hosts. This density-dependent process is signalled by the release of parasite peptidases whose action generates oligopeptides that stimulate the signal transduction pathway leading to stumpy formation. Using mass spectrometry analysis, we have characterised the peptidases released by Trypanosoma brucei brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on a pre-cast Bolt™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gel (Invitrogen) for 5 minutes before overnight in-gel trypsin digestion. Peptide extracts were dried by Speedvac and the dried peptide samples were re-suspended in MS-loading buffer (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) then filtered using a Millex filter before HPLC-MS analysis. The analysis was performed using an online system of a nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Thermo-Fisher) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher) with a 300 µm x 5mm pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap, 5 µm particle size) joined with a 75 µm x 50 cm column (Acclaim Pepmap, 3 µm particle size). Peptides were separated using a multi-step gradient of 2–98% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from MS/MS spectra were searched against a T. brucei database using MASCOT (version 2.4). The parameters used in each search were: (i) missed cut = 2, (ii) fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation modification, (iii) variable methionine oxidation modification, (iv) peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, (v) fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Search results were exported using a significance threshold (p-value) of less than 0.05 and a peptide score cut off of 20.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosomes causing African sleeping sickness use quorum-sensing (QS) to generate transmission-competent stumpy forms in mammalian hosts. This density-dependent process is signalled by oligopeptides that stimulate the signal transduction pathway leading to stumpy formation. Here, using mass spectrometry analysis, we identify peptidases released by trypanosomes and, for 12 peptidases, confirm their extracellular delivery. Thereafter, we determine the contribution of each peptidase to QS signal production using systematic inducible overexpression in vivo, and confirm this activity operates through the physiological QS signalling pathway. Gene knockout of the QS-active peptidases identifies two enzymes, oligopeptidase B and metallocarboxypeptidase&#xa0;1, that significantly reduce QS when ablated individually. Further, combinatorial gene knockout of both peptidases confirms their dominance in the generation of the QS signal, with peptidase release of oligopeptidase B mediated via an unconventional protein secretion pathway. This work identifies how the QS signal driving trypanosome virulence and transmission is generated in mammalian hosts.

### Keywords
Peptidase, Transmission, Quorum sensing, Trypanosoma brucei, Stumpy forms

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh Institute of Immunology and Infection Research

### Submitter
Keith Matthews

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Keith R. Matthews
University of Edinburgh Institute of Immunology and Infection Research


