### Accession
PXD032810

### Title
USP28 enables oncogenic transformation of respiratory cells and its inhibition potentiates molecular therapy targeting mutant EGFR, BRAF and PI3K.

### Description
Oncogenic transformation of lung epithelial cells is a multi-step process, frequently starting with the inactivation of tumor suppressors and subsequent activating mutations in proto-oncogenes, such as members of the PI3K or MAPK family. Cells undergoing transformation have to adjust to changes, such as metabolic requirements. This is achieved, in part, by modulating the protein abundance of transcription factors, which manifest these adjustments. Here, we report that the deubiquitylase USP28 enables oncogenic reprogramming by regulating the protein abundance of proto-oncogenes, such as c-JUN, c-MYC, NOTCH and ∆NP63, at early stages of malignant transformation. USP28 is increased in cancer compared to normal cells due to a feed-forward loop, driven by increased amounts of oncogenic transcription factors, such as c-MYC and c-JUN. Irrespective of oncogenic driver, interference with USP28 abundance or activity suppresses growth and survival of transformed lung cells. Furthermore, inhibition of USP28 via a small molecule inhibitor reset the proteome of transformed cells towards a ‘pre-malignant’ state, and its inhibition cooperated with clinically established compounds used to target EGFRL858R, BRAFV600E or PI3KH1047R driven tumor cells. Targeting USP28 protein abundance already at an early stage via inhibition of its activity therefore is a feasible strategy for the treatment of early stage lung tumours and the observed synergism with current standard of care inhibitors holds the potential for improved targeting of established tumors.

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation was performed as described previously. In brief, lysates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and proteins resuspended in 8 M Urea/10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Concentration of proteins was determined by Bradford assay and 100 µg of protein per samples was used for digestion. For digestion, the samples were diluted to 1 M Urea with 10mM EPPS pH 8.2 and incubated overnight with 1:50 LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digests were acidified using TFA and tryptic peptides were purified by tC18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters). 10 µg peptides per sample were TMT labelled and the mixing was normalized after a single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS to equimolar ratios for each channel. A bridge channel was prepared by pooling 3 μg from all 24 samples which were TMT-labeled together and split into two 10 μg samples for each plex, 130 µg of pooled peptides were dried for High pH Reversed-phase fractionation. Labeled peptide samples were pooled, fractionated into 8 fractions using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific 84868) according to the manufacturer protocol and dried. Additionally, for label free single shots, 10 µg of peptide is cleaned up with Empore C18 stage tipping and dried right away for shooting. All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B).  For total proteome analysis, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 3 to 60% B over 150 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation within 3 s cycle time and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 15 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 1.2 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 150ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw files were processed using proteome discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher). Spectra were recalibrated using the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (2020-03-12) and TMTpro (+304.207 Da) as static modification at N-terminus and Lysines, together with Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Spectra were searched against human database and common contaminants using Sequest HT with oxidation (M) as dynamic modification together with methionine-loss + acetylation and acetylation at the protein terminus. TMTpro (N-term, K) and carbamidomethyl were set as fixed modifications. Quantifications of spectra were rejected if average S/N values were below 5 across all channels and/or isolation interference exceeded 50%. Protein abundances were calculated by summing all peptide quantifications for each protein. Two mixing two plexes, a bridge channel was used additionally. Internal reference scaling (IRS) normalization was performed to obtain proteomics data set across two plexes.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic transformation of lung epithelial cells is a multistep process, frequently starting with the inactivation of tumour suppressors and subsequent development of activating mutations in proto-oncogenes, such as members of the PI3K or MAPK families. Cells undergoing transformation have to adjust to changes, including altered metabolic requirements. This is achieved, in part, by modulating the protein abundance of transcription factors. Here, we report that the ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 28 (USP28) enables oncogenic reprogramming by regulating the protein abundance of proto-oncogenes such as c-JUN, c-MYC, NOTCH and &#x2206;NP63 at early stages of malignant transformation. USP28 levels are increased in cancer compared with in normal cells due to a feed-forward loop, driven by increased amounts of oncogenic transcription factors such as c-MYC and c-JUN. Irrespective of oncogenic driver, interference with USP28 abundance or activity suppresses growth and survival of transformed lung cells. Furthermore, inhibition of USP28 via a small-molecule inhibitor resets the proteome of transformed cells towards a 'premalignant' state, and its inhibition synergizes with clinically established compounds used to target EGFR<sup>L858R</sup> -, BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> - or PI3K<sup>H1047R</sup> -driven tumour cells. Targeting USP28 protein abundance at an early stage via inhibition of its activity is therefore a feasible strategy for the treatment of early-stage lung tumours, and the observed synergism with current standard-of-care inhibitors holds the potential for improved targeting of established tumours.

### Keywords
Buparlisib, Vemurafenib, Hras gefitinib, Pik3ca, Lung cancer, Braf, Usp28, C-myc, Egfr, C-jun

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Haus 75 60590 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
 Süleyman Bozkurt

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


