### Accession
PXD017775

### Title
proteome analysis using mass spectrometry (MS) in acute shYthdf2-mediated knockdown of cultured RGCs

### Description
To identify mouse retinal proteomics changes after Ythdf2 knockdown, we extracted the proteomics of E15.5 retina neurons which were cultured and infected with lentiviral shYthdf2 or shCtrl by urea. After using 100 mM TEAB (Sigma) to dilute the urea concentration to less than 2 M in each sample, trypsin (Promega) was then added to digest the proteins overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were further desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and labelled with TMT10plex Mass Tag Labelling kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufactural instructions. Finally, the labeled peptides were subjected to HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
E15.5 retina neurons were cultured and infected with lentiviral shYthdf2 or shCtrl. After puromycin (Sigma) selection, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with freshly prepared lysis buffer composed of 8 M urea (Sigma), 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.4, Invitrogen), and protease inhibitors (Roche). The cell lysates were then ultrasonicated on ice and centrifuged at 10,000  g for 10 min at 4 °C to discard the cell debris. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 100 g of total protein for each group were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at RT in dark. After using 100 mM TEAB (Sigma) to dilute the urea concentration to less than 2 M in each sample, trypsin (Promega) was then added to digest the proteins overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were further desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and labelled with TMT10plex Mass Tag Labelling kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufactural instructions. Finally, the labeled peptides were subjected to HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Common pollution pools were added in database to eliminate the influence of the pollution of protein in this result. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages and Segments of peptides was adjusted to >7 amino acid residue, the maximum modification number was adjusted as 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification,  oxidation on Met and acetylation on N terminus were specified as variable modifications. Using TMT-6plex as quantification method, FDR was adjusted to < 1% in protein identification and PSM identification.

### Publication Abstract
The precise control of growth and maintenance of the retinal ganglion cell (RGC) dendrite arborization is critical for normal visual functions in mammals. However, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we find that the <i>N</i><sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) reader YTHDF2 is highly expressed in the mouse RGCs. Conditional knockout (cKO) of <i>Ythdf2</i> in the retina leads to increased RGC dendrite branching, resulting in more synapses in the inner plexiform layer. Interestingly, the <i>Ythdf2</i> cKO mice show improved visual acuity compared with control mice. We further demonstrate that <i>Ythdf2</i> cKO in the retina protects RGCs from dendrite degeneration caused by the experimental acute glaucoma model. We identify the m<sup>6</sup>A-modified YTHDF2 target transcripts which mediate these effects. This study reveals mechanisms by which YTHDF2 restricts RGC dendrite development and maintenance. YTHDF2 and its target mRNAs might be valuable in developing new treatment approaches for glaucomatous eyes.

### Keywords
Mouse; retina; ythdf2; knockdown

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology
Southern Unversity of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Fugui Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Shengjian Ji
Southern University of Science and Technology


