### Accession
PXD009394

### Title
Characterization of a nonhuman primate model for the study of testicular peritubular cells – comparison with human testicular cells

### Description
Smooth-muscle-like peritubular cells make up the wall of semniferous tubules of men. These human testicular peritubular cells (HTPC) have been shown to fulfill different roles. They transport sperm, secrete various factors like GDNF (glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor) and are immunologically active. They might contribute to spermatogonial stem cell niche altering and testicular ageing. Previous studies were limited regarding heterogeneity (due to lifestyle, age, medical history etc.) and accessibility of HTPCs. To circumvent this problem a cellular primate model should be established. The proteome of 6 MKTPCs of individual healthy and young (2 or 3 years) donors was assessed to investigate the suitability as a model.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 µg of digest (Lys-C and trypsin) dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RS system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA). Peptide samples were first trapped on a C18 trap column (µ-Precolumn, C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min and separated on a C18 nano-flow column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) at a flow rate of 0.2 µL/min using the following consecutive gradients: 5 to 25 % B for 285 min and 25 to 50 % B for 30 min (A: 0.1 % FA in water, B: 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile). Electrospray ionization was done with an uncoated SilicaTip (FS360-20-10-N-20-C15; New Objective, Woburn, MA) and a needle voltage of 2.3 kV. For MS data acquisition, a data dependent top 70 CID method was performed on a 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data (*.wiff) was processed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) using default settings with some exceptions: match between runs feature enabled and label free quantification feature enabled with a minimum ratio count of 1. The fasta file for the common marmoset (NCBI taxonomy identifier:9483) was retrieved from uniprot.com on 17th June, 2017. Swiss-Prot und Trembl were merged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Dda, Maxquant, Mktpc, Proteome, Marmoset monkey, Peritubular testicular cells, Htpc

### Affiliations
Genzentrum der LMU München
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Fedor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Bernd Stöckl

### Lab Head
Dr Georg J. Arnold
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Fedor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany


