### Accession
PXD014325

### Title
Proteomic analysis of monocyte-derived Extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) convey biological messages through their cargoes. Herein we focus on monocyte/platelet aggregates characteristic of several cardiovascular diseases with an analysis of monocyte-derived EV (mEVs) effects on the atherosclerotic plaque. Monocyte preparations were stimulated with TNF-α in presence or absence of prostacyclin and EVs isolated via centrifugation. EV physical characteristics were determined by Nanoparticle Tracking analysis while surface profile was analysed using imaging flow cytometry.  Atherosclerotic plaques from 5 patients undergoing endarterectomy were cultured with or without mEVs. Cytokines and proteins released in the culture media were measured by multiplex ELISA and mass spectrometry. Proteomic of mEVs prepared in different incubation settings was also conducted. Monocyte isolation yielded ~80% platelet-monocyte aggregates. TNF-α stimulation produced CD14+ EVs as well as a subset bearing the CD41 marker for platelets (CD14+/CD41+). Prostacyclin addition did not modulate monocyte/platelet aggregates, but impacted on mEV numbers. Addition of TNF-α mEVs on atherosclerotic plaque fragments impacted on general protein release (19 upregulated and 7 downregulated) and elevated cytokine release. mEVs generated by TNF-α and prostacyclin produced minimal changes on plaque reactivity. Proteomic analysis of mEVs revealed a distinctive composition when the cell preparation was activated with TNF-α alone or with prostacyclin. In conclusion, mEVs activate the atherosclerotic plaque. Attenuating platelet activation has an effect on EV composition with downstream modulation of their pro-inflammatory actions. EV heterogeneity reflects the mode of activation of the cell of origin and may differently contribute to the development and progression of atherosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
EVs from monocytes treated with TNFα in presence and in absence of PGI2 were pelleted at 20,000xg for 30 min, re-suspended in 20 μl ice cold RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.1 M DTT prior to 5 min boiling at 95°C. Samples were processed by using FASP protocol. Reconstituted samples on Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL Filter Units; Merk, Darmstadt, Germany) were spun at 14,000xg at 20°C for 15 min. Filter units were centrifuged at 14000xg for 15 min at 20°C and washed. Following removal of the supernatant, proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (1:100; Promega) at 37°C, peptides collected in collection tubes via centrifugation at 14,000xg for 10 min and their concentration established by Nanodrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The subsequent procedure for mass spec analysis was conducted as above

### Data Protocol
Downstream analysis of proteomic data was performed by Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). Only the proteins present in at least 50% of the samples in one group were considered identified. Proteins found to be differentially expressed between groups (P<0.05, FDR 0.01) were subjected to pathway mapping analysis and were distributed into categories according to their cellular component, molecular function, and biological process using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Redwood City, USA) or STRING Database (Version 10.5). The molecular activation prediction (MAP) algorithm in IPA was used to predict the upstream and downstream effects of activation and inhibition of associated network functions. STRING was also used to generate protein-protein interaction networks, and the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis tool in PANTHER classification system was also applied to these networks. Finally, the STRING was used to validate IPA findings and provide unique perspectives based on each tool.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as key players in different stages of atherosclerosis. Here we provide evidence that EVs released by mixed aggregates of monocytes and platelets in response to TNF-&#x3b1; display pro-inflammatory actions on endothelial cells and atherosclerotic plaques. Tempering platelet activation with Iloprost, Aspirin or a P2Y<sub>12</sub> inhibitor impacted quantity and phenotype of EV produced. Proteomics of EVs from cells activated with TNF-&#x3b1; alone or in the presence of Iloprost revealed a distinct composition, with interesting hits like annexin-A1 and gelsolin. When added to human atherosclerotic plaque explants, EVs from TNF-&#x3b1; stimulated monocytes augmented release of cytokines. In contrast, EVs generated by TNF-&#x3b1; together with Iloprost produced minimal plaque activation. Notably, patients with coronary artery disease that required percutaneous coronary intervention had elevated plasma numbers of monocyte, platelet as well as double positive EV subsets. In conclusion, EVs released following monocyte/platelet activation may play a potential role in the development and progression of atherosclerosis. Whereas attenuating platelet activation modifies EV composition released from monocyte/platelet aggregates, curbing their pro-inflammatory actions may offer therapeutic avenues for the treatment of atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Human, Monocytes, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Simone Marcone

### Lab Head
Dr Mauro Perretti
The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom


