### Accession
PXD012306

### Title
Quantitative protein profiling of brain vessels in rhesus macaque

### Description
Aging is a major risk factor for cerebrovascular disease. However, the molecular mechanisms of cerebrovascular aging remain to be clarified. In this study, we performed proteomics analysis aimed to reveal the molecular signaling pathways during aging.our study demonstrated that the imbalance of vasodilators and vasoconstrictors caused by downregulation of NOS3, oxidative stress mediated by the suppression of NRF2 pathway, and miRNA-regulated accumulation of ECM proteins were critical for cerebrovascular aging.

### Sample Protocol
Brain vessel specimens of healthy rhesus macaques were obtained from the Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College. Rhesus 1 (R1), 2 (R2), and 3 (R3) were healthy 3-year-, 6-year-, and 20-year-old rhesus macaques.  All brain vessel specimens were rinsed thoroughly with ice-cold PBS and were cut into small pieces in ice-cold PBS. The treated specimens were then centrifuged (12000rpm, 3min) to remove residual blood.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) was used to analysis MS/MS raw data against the rhesus macaque unreviewed Swiss-Prot FASTA database of UniProt database (released on 20171115). The criteria for searching were set as followings according to the software recommendation: A maximum number of two missed trypsin/Lys-C cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set as 10 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyzer) and 0.02 Da (all MS2 spectra), respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT-6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (methionine, M) was specified as the dynamic modification. The proteins and peptides identified within a 1% global FDR were selected for further analysis. Based on the representative MS/MS spectral data of identified peptides and the intensity of TMT precursor, relative protein intensities were quantified using the TMT-6plex method.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is a major risk factor for cerebrovascular disease; however, the molecular mechanisms of cerebrovascular aging remain to be clarified. The aim of this study was to reveal the molecular signaling pathways involved in cerebrovascular aging. This study used high-resolution liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), in combination with quantitative 6-plex tandem mass tag labeling, to profile protein changes in brain vessels from three groups of healthy rhesus macaques (3-years, 6-years, and 20-years). Western blot analyses were used to validate the proteomic data. A total of 2,934 proteins were identified and analyzed. Twenty-two proteins were continuously downregulated with increasing age, while three proteins were continuously upregulated. When comparing Group C vs. Group B, 270 proteins were downregulated, while 73 proteins were upregulated. All these 368 significantly changed proteins were used for further analysis. Bioinformatic analysis showed that the changed proteins were involved in several signaling pathways during cerebrovascular aging. Proteins in the NRF2 pathway, such as Glutathione S-transferase Mu (GSTM), were consistently downregulated especially after 6-years old, whereas proteins related to miRNA targets in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and membrane receptors were upregulated. Protein-protein interaction networks demonstrated that disorders of energy pathways and serine/threonine kinases were critical during cerebrovascular aging. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange under the identifier PXD012306. Our results indicated that during aging, the disorders of energy metabolism and dysfunction of antioxidant activity caused over-production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may exacerbate cerebrovascular aging. In addition, accumulation of ECM proteins during aging might be closely associated with age-related arterial stiffening and decreased compliance.

### Keywords
Aging; rhesus macaque; cerebral vessels; proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China


