### Accession
PXD029370

### Title
Digoxin induces astrocyte activation into a human in vitro astrocyte model

### Description
In this study we have evaluated the effect of digoxin in human astrocytes. Our results have shown that non-cytotoxic concentration of digoxin is able to induce astrocytes activation, by affecting cytoskeleton proteins, increasing the expression of pro-inflammatory genes and altering energy metabolism pathways between other mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS, peptides were dissolved in 5% ACN / 0.1% FA to a concentration of 0.5 µg/µL. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on a Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray ionization-MS/MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur (Dr. Maisch GmBH), 1.9 μm, 100 Å, a home-made column. Peptides were separated using a 160 min segmented gradient of 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and 80 % acteonitril 0.1 % formic acid (solvent B) (Supplementary Table SX), at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data-Independant Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) MS1 was acquired in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 1 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, a scan range from 400 to 1250 m/z followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with variable windows. DIA MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 %. AGC target of 2 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw DIA MS data were matched against the spectral library following the published protocol.  For the data analysis, protein abundances and peptides intensities were exported and analyzed using mapDIA. No further normalization was applied. The following parameters were used : min peptides = 2, max peptides = 10, min correl = − 1. Min_DE = 0.01, max_DE = 0.99, and experimental_design = independent design. Proteins were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with a LFDR < 0.05 and an absolute fold change (|FC|) > 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocyte reaction is a complex cellular process involving astrocytes in response to various types of CNS injury and a marker of neurotoxicity. It has been abundantly studied in rodents but relatively poorly in human cells due to limited access to the brain. Astrocytes play important roles in cerebral energy metabolism and are also key players in neuroinflammation. Astroglial metabolic and inflammatory changes have been reported with age, leading to the hypothesis that mitochondrial metabolism and inflammatory responses are interconnected. However, the relationship between energy metabolism and astrocyte reactivity in the context of neurotoxicity is not known. We hypothesized that changes in energy metabolism of astrocytes will be coupled to their activation by xenobiotics. Astrocyte reaction and associated energy metabolic changes were assessed by immunostaining, gene expression, proteomics, metabolomics, and extracellular flux analyses after 24&#xa0;h of exposure of human ReN-derived astrocytes to digoxin (1-10&#xa0;&#xb5;M) or TNF&#x3b1; (30&#xa0;ng/ml) used as a positive control. Strong astrocytic reaction was observed, accompanied by increased glycolysis at low concentrations of digoxin (0.1 and 0.5&#xa0;&#xb5;M) and after TNF&#x3b1; exposure, suggesting that increased glycolysis may be a common feature of reactive astrocytes, independent of the triggering molecule. In conclusion, whether astrocyte activation is triggered by cytokines or a xenobiotic, it is strongly tied to energy metabolism in human ReN-derived astrocytes. Increased glycolysis might be considered as an endpoint to detect astrocyte activation by potentially neurotoxic compounds in vitro. Finally, ReN-derived astrocytes may help to decipher mechanisms of neurotoxicity in ascertaining the ability of chemicals to directly target astrocytes.

### Keywords
Astrogliosis, Neurotoxicty, Energy metabolism, Astrocytes, Glycolysis, Neuroinflammation

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tatjana Vujic

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


