### Accession
PXD014066

### Title
Evaluation and Optimization of Chemically-Cleavable Linkers for Quantitative Mapping of Small Molecule-Protein Interactomes

### Description
Numerous reagents have been developed to enable chemical proteomic analysis of small molecule-protein interactomes. However, the performance of these reagents has not been systematically evaluated and compared. Herein, we report our efforts to conduct a parallel assessment of two widely-used chemically-cleavable linkers equipped with dialkoxydiphenylsilane (DADPS linker) and azobenzene (AZO linker) moieties. Profiling a cellular cysteinome using iodoacetamide alkyne probe demonstrated a significant discrepancy between the experimental results obtained through the application of each of the reagents. To better understand the source of observed discrepancy, a mass tolerant database search strategy using MSFragger software was performed. This resulted in identifying a previously unreported artifactual modification on the residual mass of the azobenzene linker. Furthermore, we conducted a comparative analysis of enrichment modes using both cleavable linkers. This effort determined that enrichment of proteolytic digests yielded a far greater number of identified cysteine residues than the enrichment conducted prior to protein digest. Inspired by recent studies where multiplexed quantitative labeling strategies were applied to cleavable biotin linkers, we combined this further optimized protocol using the DADPS cleavable linker with tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling to profile the FDA-approved covalent EGFR kinase inhibitor dacomitinib against the cysteinome of an epidermoid cancer cell line. Our analysis resulted in the detection and quantification of over 10,000 unique cysteine residues, a nearly 3-fold increase over previous studies that used cleavable biotin linkers for enrichment. Critically, cysteine residues corresponding to proteins directly as well as indirectly modulated by dacomitinib treatment were identified. Overall, our study suggests that the dialkoxydiphenylsilane linker could be broadly applied wherever chemically cleavable linkers are required for chemical proteomic characterization of cellular proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
1000 µg of cellular extract were alkylated using 100 µM final concentration of iodoacetamide alkyne. Following alkylation, the samples were subjected to CuAAC reaction for a final concentration of: 100 µM TBTA, 1 mM CuSO4, 1.0 mM TCEP and 100 µM cleavable biotin-linker azide. 10 mM stock solutions of the dialkoxydiphenylsilane cleavable biotin linker (DADPS) and azobenzene cleavable biotin linker (AZO) were used. Samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 60 minutes. Each cleavable linker was analyzed in three experimental replicates, with each experimental replicate originating from a different cell culture flask. Two sets of each cleavable biotin linker were processed, with one set being reserved for enrichment of denatured proteins and the other set being processed for enrichment of peptides post-trypsin digestion. Following the CuAAC reaction, protein precipitation was performed using methanol-chloroform. Samples designated for denatured protein enrichment were suspended in 650 µL of 2.5% SDS solution in DPBS, sonicated for one cycle of 20 seconds at 35% output, and heated at 65 ˚C for 5 minutes. Following centrifugation at 5000 x g for 5 minutes to pellet insoluble debris, the supernatant was transferred to a 15 mL conical tube. 100 µL of pre-washed streptavidin beads was washed with DPBS and added in 1 mL of DPBS to the conical tube. 8 mL of DPBS was added to dilute the final concentration of SDS to 0.2% and the mixture was incubated overnight on a rotating apparatus. The following day, the tubes were centrifuged at 700 x g for 3 minutes to pellet the beads. The supernatant was vacuum aspirated, and the beads were re-suspended in 1 mL of 1% SDS in DPBS and transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Samples were washed twice with 1 mL of 1% SDS in DPBS, twice with 1 mL of 6M urea in DPBS, thrice with 1 mL DPBS and once with 1mL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, with all wash steps occurring by centrifuging the beads at 8000 x g for 1 min. 225 µL of ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 was added to the beads and 5 µL of 500 mM TCEP and 25 uL 500 mM CAA were added to reduce and alkylate free cysteines. Samples were incubated in a Thermomixer C for 30 minutes at 750 rpm at 37 ˚C. 1.0 µg of LysC diluted in 10 µL of ammonium bircarbonate was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 hour at 37 ˚C at 1000 rpm in the Thermomixer. An aliquot of 1.0 µg of trypsin diluted in 10 µL of ammonium bicarbonate was added and the digest proceeded overnight. The next day the beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was aspirated and retained for further desalting. The beads were then washed 10 times with 1 mL of DPBS. DADPS-cleavable biotin linker samples were treated with 200 µL of 10% formic acid and incubated for 20 minutes on a rotating apparatus. Azobenzene-cleavable biotin linker samples were treated with 200 µL of 25 mM sodium dithionite in DPBS and incubated for 20 minutes on a rotating apparatus. All cleavages were repeated for a total of three times, and the individual eluent fractions for each respective cleavable biotin linker were combined. Sodium dithionite-cleaved peptides were acidified to 1% formic acid immediately prior to peptide desalting. Samples designated for peptide enrichment were re-suspended in 300 µL of ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 containing 10 µg of LysC and incubated in a Thermomixer at 37 ˚C at 750 rpm for one hour. An additional 200 µL of ammonium bicarbonate was added containing 10 µg of trypsin and the digestion proceeded overnight. The next day, peptides were reduced and alkylated at a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP and 20 mM CAA for 30 minutes at 37 ˚C at 750 rpm in a Thermomixer. The peptide mixture was centrifuged at 5000 x g for 5 minutes to pellet any insoluble debris and 100 µL of streptavidin beads pre-washed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 was added in 500 µL of ammonium bicarbonate to the supernatant of the digested peptides in a clean new tube. The tube was incubated on a rotating apparatus at room temperature overnight. The following day the beads were washed 10 times with 1 mL of DPBS. DADPS-cleavable biotin linker samples were treated with 200 µL of 10% formic acid and incubated for 20 minutes on a rotating apparatus. Azobenzene-cleavable biotin linker samples were treated with 200 µL of 25 mM sodium dithionite in DPBS and incubated for 20 minutes on a rotating apparatus. All cleavages were repeated for a total of three times, and the individual eluent fractions for each respective cleavable biotin linker were combined. Sodium dithionite-cleaved peptides were acidified to 1% formic acid immediately prior to peptide desalting. For analysis of dacomitinib-treated A431 cells, the SL-TMT protocol (10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00217) was incorporated with the use of the DADPS linker. 500 µg of cellular extract was processed per replicate.  Samples were acquired on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion or Fusion Lumos MS.

### Data Protocol
AZO vs DADPS Comparison: FragPipe (v9.1) was utilized with MSFragger (v20190222) and philosopher (v201903191601) toperform mass tolerant database searching of samples acquired using HCD and Orbitrap MS2 detection. Raw files were searched against a canonical sequence database of the Swissprot-validated human proteome that was downloaded from Uniprot on September 6, 2017 (20320 entries) and appended with the cRAP protein sequences from the Global Proteome Machine (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). A reverse decoy database was included. Trypsin was selected with 2 enzyme termini and 1 missed cleavage. Default open search parameters were enabled with the following alterations: precursor mass tolerance 0-500 Da, precursor true tolerance 20 ppm, variable modification on M (+15.99490) and fixed modification on C (+57.021464). PeptideProphet was enabled with the following settings: --nonparam --expectscore --decoyprobs --masswidth 1000.0 --clevel -2. Crystal-C was enabled with the following settings: max charge 6, mass tolerance 20 ppm, number of isotopes 3, precursor isolation window 1.6. Localization of mass modifications was performed with PTMProphetParser.exe (TPP v5.1.0) using the following parameters:  VERBOSE MZTOL 0.02 MASSDIFFMODE M:15.9949, C57.021464. Database searching of raw files acquired using CID and LTQ MS2 detection was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.5.0) in order to tabulate the number of unique cysteine-sites identified using each cleavable linker. Standard label-free searching was selected. Andromeda search engine was used to perform a database search created from a canonical sequence database of the Swissprot-validated human proteome that was downloaded from Uniprot on September 6, 2017 (20320 entries). Trypsin/P with two missed cleavages was selected. Minimum peptide length was set to 7. Carbamidomethyl C (+57.021463 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications used were: Deamidation N/Q (+0.984015 Da), Oxidation M (+15.994914 Da), DADPS-residual C (+181.121512 Da), AZO-residual C(+216.101111) and AZO-SULFO-residual C (+296.057925). PSM and Protein FDR were set to 1%. The remainder of the search parameters were left at default values.  For recombinant GSTO1 samples, FragPipe(v9.1) FragPipe (v9.1) was utilized with MSFragger (v20190222) and philosopher (v201903191601) to perform standard database searching. Files were searched against a Swissprot-validated human proteome as previously described. Trypsin was selected with 2 enzyme termini and 1 missed cleavage. Default closed search parameters were enabled with the following alterations: precursor mass tolerance 0-20 ppm, precursor true tolerance 20 ppm, isotope error 0/1/2, variable modification on M (+15.99490), C (+216.1011), C(+296.0579) and fixed modification on C (+57.021464). PeptideProphet was enabled with the following settings: --nonparam --expectscore --decoyprobs --accmass  --ppm.  Dacomitinib TMT Profiling: Database searching of raw files was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.5.0). Reporter ion MS3 with isotopic correction factor adjustment was used. Andromeda search engine was used to perform a database search created from a canonical sequence database of the Swissprot-validated human proteome that was downloaded from Uniprot on September 6, 2017 (20320 entries). Trypsin/P with two missed cleavages was selected. Minimum peptide length was set to 7. Carbamidomethyl C (+57.021463 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications used were: Deamidation N/Q (+0.984015 Da), Oxidation M (+15.994914 Da) and DADPS-residual C (+181.121512 Da). PSM and Protein FDR were set to 1%. The remainder of the search parameters were left at default values. For database searching of the peptides used as input for enrichment to quantify the proteome, only unmodified peptides (unique + razor) were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous reagents have been developed to enable chemical proteomic analysis of small molecule-protein interactomes. However, the performance of these reagents has not been systematically evaluated and compared. Herein, we report our efforts to conduct a parallel assessment of two widely used chemically cleavable linkers equipped with dialkoxydiphenylsilane (DADPS linker) and azobenzene (AZO linker) moieties. Profiling a cellular cysteinome using the iodoacetamide alkyne probe demonstrated a significant discrepancy between the experimental results obtained through the application of each of the reagents. To better understand the source of observed discrepancy, we evaluated the key sample preparation steps. We also performed a mass tolerant database search strategy using MSFragger software. This resulted in identifying a previously unreported artifactual modification on the residual mass of the azobenzene linker. Furthermore, we conducted a comparative analysis of enrichment modes using both cleavable linkers. This effort determined that enrichment of proteolytic digests yielded a far greater number of identified cysteine residues than the enrichment conducted prior to protein digest. Inspired by recent studies where multiplexed quantitative labeling strategies were applied to cleavable biotin linkers, we combined this further optimized protocol using the DADPS cleavable linker with tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling to profile the FDA-approved covalent EGFR kinase inhibitor dacomitinib against the cysteinome of an epidermoid cancer cell line. Our analysis resulted in the detection and quantification of over 10,000 unique cysteine residues, a nearly 3-fold increase over previous studies that used cleavable biotin linkers for enrichment. Critically, cysteine residues corresponding to proteins directly as well as indirectly modulated by dacomitinib treatment were identified. Overall, our study suggests that the dialkoxydiphenylsilane linker could be broadly applied wherever chemically cleavable linkers are required for chemical proteomic characterization of cellular proteomes.

### Keywords
Cleavable biotin linker, Dialkoxydiphenylsilane, Dacomitinib, Tmt, Azobenzene

### Affiliations
Discovery Platform Technologies, AbbVie

### Submitter
Adam Rabalski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Baranczak
Discovery Platform Technologies, AbbVie


