### Accession
PXD006265

### Title
NHBE proteome response to a wild type infectious clone of H1N1 Influenza virus

### Description
Proteomic data from mouse lung; Treated with wild-type and mutant H7N9 and mockulum; Time points 1, 2, 4 & 7 days; 5 biological replicates

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Influenza is a worldwide health and financial burden posing a significant risk to the immune-compromised, obese, diabetic, elderly, and pediatric populations. We identified increases in glucose metabolism in the lungs of pediatric patients infected with respiratory pathogens. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we found metabolic changes occurring after influenza infection in primary human respiratory cells and validated infection-associated increases in c-Myc, glycolysis, and glutaminolysis. We confirmed these findings with a metabolic drug screen that identified the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 as a regulator of infectious virus production. BEZ235 treatment ablated the transient induction of c-Myc, restored PI3K/mTOR pathway homeostasis measured by 4E-BP1 and p85 phosphorylation, and reversed infection-induced changes in metabolism. Importantly, BEZ235 reduced infectious progeny but had no effect on the early stages of viral replication. BEZ235 significantly increased survival in mice, while reducing viral titer. We show metabolic reprogramming of host cells by influenza virus exposes targets&#xa0;for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Influenza, H1n1, Epithelial

### Affiliations
University of Tennesse Health Sciences Center
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Heather S. Smallwood
University of Tennesse Health Sciences Center


