### Accession
PXD028740

### Title
The ternary complex CEP90, FOPNL and OFD1 specifies the future location of centriolar distal appendages, and promotes their assembly

### Description
Cilia assembly starts with centriole to basal body maturation, migration to the cell surface and docking to the plasma membrane. The basal body docking process involves the interaction of both the distal end of the basal body and the transition fibers (or mature distal appendages), with the plasma membrane. During this process, the transition zone assembles and forms the structural junction between the basal body and the nascent cilium. Mutations in numerous genes involved in basal body docking and transition zone assembly are associated with the most severe ciliopathies, highlighting the importance of these events in cilium biogenesis. The conservation of this sequence of events across phyla is paralleled by a high conservation of the proteins involved. We identified CEP90 by BioID using FOPNL as a bait. Ultrastructure expansion microscopy showed that CEP90, FOPNL and OFD1 localized at the distal end of both centrioles/basal bodies in Paramecium and mammalian cells. These proteins are recruited early after duplication on the procentriole. Finally, functional analysis performed both in Paramecium and mammalian cells demonstrate the requirement of this complex for distal appendage assembly and basal body docking. Altogether, we propose that this ternary complex is required to determine the future position of distal appendages.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis Gel plugs were discolored using a solution of ACN/NH4HCO3 50mM (50/50) during 15 min with agitation. Plugs were reduced with a solution of 10 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) during 45 min at 56°C, then the plugs were alkylated using à 55mM solution of Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) during 45 min at room temperature. After a step of washing and dehydration, proteins in the plugs where digested overnight with Trypsin (10g/ml) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C in a 25-mM NH4HCO3 buffer (0.2 μg trypsin in 20 μL). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA).  LC-MS/MS acquisition Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion equipped with an easy spray ion source and coupled to a nano-LC Proxeon 1200 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded with an online preconcentration method and separated by chromatography using a Pepmap-RSLC C18 column (0.75 x 750 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific), equilibrated at 50°C and operating at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and solvent B (ACN/H2O 80/20, 0.1% FA), the column was first equilibrated 5 min with 95 % of A, then B was raised to 28 % in 105 min and to 40% in 15 min. Finally, the column was washed with 95% B during 20 min and re-equilibrated at 95% A during 10 min. Peptide masses were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000, a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4.105. MS/MS were performed in the top speed 3s mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collisional Energy of 27% and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment masses were measured in an Ion trap in the rapid mode, with and an AGC target of 1.104. Monocharged peptides and unassigned charge states were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS and 35 ms for MS/MS acquisitions respectively.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was done on Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in Hi-3 mode for protein abundance calculation. MGF peak files from Progenesis were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.4). Identification of proteins was done with the Swissprot database release 2018_12 with the Homo sapiens taxonomy. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was authorized. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to respectively 7 ppm and 0.5 Da. The following post-translational modifications were included as variable: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY), D-Biotin (K). The following post-translational modifications were included as fixed: Carbamidomethyl (C). Spectra were filtered using a 1% FDR using the percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mnr, Ofd1, Kiaa0753, For20, Cep90, Centrosomal, Ofip, Fopnl, Pibf1, Centriolar

### Affiliations
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University)
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University)


