### Accession
PXD030302

### Title
NuA4 and H2A.Z control environmental responses and autotrophic growth in Arabidopsis

### Description
Nucleosomal acetyltransferase of H4 (NuA4) is an essential transcriptional coactivator in eukaryotes, but remains poorly characterized in plants. Here, we describe Arabidopsis homologs of the NuA4 scaffold proteins Enhancer of Polycomb-Like-1 (AtEPL1) and Esa1- Associated Factor 1 (AtEAF1). Loss of AtEAF1 results in inhibition of growth and chloroplast development. These effects are stronger in the Atepl1 mutant and are further enhanced by loss of Golden2-Like (GLK) transcription factors, suggesting that NuA4 activates nuclear plastid genes alongside GLK. We demonstrate that AtEPL1 is necessary for nucleosomal acetylation of histones H4 and H2A.Z by NuA4 in vitro. These chromatin marks are diminished genome-wide in Atepl1, while another active chromatin mark, H3K9 acetylation (H3K9ac), is locally enhanced. Expression of many chloroplast-related genes depends on NuA4, as they are downregulated with loss of H4ac and H2A.Zac. Finally, we demonstrate that NuA4 promotes H2A.Z deposition and by doing so prevents spurious activation of stress response genes.

### Sample Protocol
TAP purifications using 50 g of six-day old AtEPL1B-CGSrhino Arabidopsis seedlings per experiment, were performed as described in Van Leene et al, 2015. Bound proteins were digested on-bead after a final wash with 500 uL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). Beads were incubated with 1 ug Trypsin/Lys-C in 50 uL 50 mM NH4OH and incubated at 37°C overnight in a thermomixer at 800 rpm. Next day, an extra 0.5 ug Trypsin/Lys-C was added and the digest was further incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Finally, the digest was separated from the beads and centrifuged at 20800G in an Eppendorf centrifuge for 5 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Peptides were purified on C18 Bond Elut OMIX tips (Agilent) and later dried in a Speedvac and stored at -20°C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Co-purified proteins were identified by mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using standard procedures (Nelissen et al., 2015). Proteins with at least two matched high confident peptides were retained. Background proteins were filtered out based on frequency of occurrence of the co-purified proteins in a large dataset containing 543 TAP experiments using 115 different baits. True interactors that might have been filtered out because of their presence in the list of non-specific proteins were retained by means of semi-quantitative analysis using the average normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) of the identified proteins in the EPL1B TAPs. Proteins identified with at least two peptides in at least two experiments, showing high (at least 10-fold) and significant [-log10(p-value(T-test)) >=10] enrichment compared to calculated average NSAF values from a large dataset of TAP experiments with non-related bait proteins, were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nua4 / eaf1 / epl1 / h4 acetylation / h2a.z acetylation / h2a.z deposition / photosynthesis / stress response

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Genome Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Adam 8 Mickiewicz University, 61-614 Poznan, Poland
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Piotr A. Ziolkowski
Laboratory of Genome Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Adam 8 Mickiewicz University, 61-614 Poznan, Poland


