### Accession
PXD032332

### Title
TIAR and FMRP shape pro-survival nascent proteome of leukemia cells in the bone marrow microenvironment

### Description
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells circulate between blood and bone marrow niche, representing different microenvironments. We studied the role of the two RNA binding proteins, T-cell-restricted intracellular antigen (TIAR) and the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) in the regulation of protein translation in CML cells residing in settings mimicking peripheral blood microenvironment (PBM) and bone marrow microenvironment (BMM). We studied how conditions shaped the translation process through TIAR and FMRP activity, considering its relevance in therapy resistance. The QuaNCAT mass-spectrometric approach revealed that TIAR and FMRP have a discrete modulatory effect on protein synthesis and thus affect distinct aspects of leukemic cells functioning in the hypoxic niche. We demonstrate that TIAR substantially supports the resistance of CML cells to translation inhibition by homoharringtonine in the BMM. Overall, our results show that targeting post-transcriptional control should be considered when designing anti-leukemia therapeutic solutions.

### Sample Protocol
QuaNCAT sample preparation. To study differences in the level of nascent peptides synthesis the cells were incubated with 1mM L-homopropargylglycine (L-HPG) (Jena Bioscience, #86256) for 4h at 37°C in DMEM w/o L-Arg, L-Leu, L-Lys, L-Met (AthenaES, #0421), supplemented with 10% of filtered FBS (Gibco), 2mM L-Glu (Biowest), 0.8mM L-Leu (AthenaES, #0418), and supplemented with isotypically labeled L-Lys (0.67 mM) and L-Arg (0.40 mM) to label the newly synthetized peptides as ‘heavy’: 13C6, 15N2 L-Lysine (#88209) and 13C6, 15N4 L-Arginine (#89990); or as ‘medium’: 4,4,5,5-D4  L-Lysine (#88437) and 13C6 L-Arginine (#88210); all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. After two washing steps with cold PBS, cells were lysed in 2% SDS in PBS for 5 min in RT and stored at -80oC prior further analysis. Lysates from equal counts of the ‘heavy’ and the ‘medium’cells were combined. The combined lysates were sonicated and diluted to final concentration (f.co.) of 0.5% SDS in PBS. The samples were subjected to the click reaction with 0.1mM azide-PEG3-biotin (Jena Bioscience, #86256) in the click reaction mixture containing: 1mM CuSO4, 2mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; SigmaAldrich, #C4706) and 0.4mM tris(3-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethyl)amine (THPTA; SigmaAldrich, #762342) for 1h at 25oC with 1100rpm shaking. Then the reaction was quenched by adding EDTA to 5mM f. co., followed by precipitation of proteins with methanol (1:1, v/v) and chloroform (0.25:1, v/v). Precipitated proteins were collected at 3500xg for 5 min at RT, the precipitates sonicated in 1ml of methanol, spun at 18000xg for 5min at RT and after 3 rounds of this methanol addition/sonication/centrifugation/methanol removal protocol the proteins were air dried and solubilized in 2% SDS in PBS, sonicated and diluted with PBS to 0.5% SDS. Then 30l of the Pierce High Capacity NeutrAvidin agarose beads (ThermoScientific, #29202) were added to each sample (washed in 0.5% SDS/PBS) and incubated for 2 h at 25oC with 1100rpm shaking. After that, the beads were subject to a series of washing and centrifugation at 5000xg for 3 min at RT: 3x with 0.5% SDS/PBS, 3x with PBS, 2x with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate/H2O (AMBIC). The beads were suspended in AMBIC supplemented with 5mM TCEP and 10mM chloroacetamide. Trypsin (Promega, # V511A) was added (1g/sample with 800g of input protein) and the beads incubated at 37⁰C overnight with 1100rpm shaking. Thebeads were pelleted at 5000xg for 3 min and the supernatant containing peptides was collected, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to f.co. 0.5% and stored at -80oC. The supernatants were then desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio – C18 (Affinisep, cat. no. SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.T1.47.20) and concentrated using a Savant SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. LC-MS/MS analysis of QuaNCAT samples. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50cm long × 75μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45°C by applying a 150min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 150ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 2e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 3e3.

### Data Protocol
Data processing for QuaNCAT samples. The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 2.0.3.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the reference human proteome UP000005640 (Uniprot.org) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files corresponding to 3 replicate samples obtained from K562 cells cultured for 72h in N and CO conditions were processed together. Raw files corresponding to 3 replicate samples obtained from the cells subjected to four pairs of conditions (1. shNEG and shTIAR-transduced cultured in N; 2. shNEG and shTIAR-transduced cultured in CO; 3. shNEG and shFMRP-transduced cultured in N; 4. shNEG and shFMRP-transduced cultured in CO) were processed together in a separate search. During the primary search the multiplicity was set to 3 (Light labels: Lys0 & Arg0; Medium labels: Lys4 & Arg6; Heavy labels: Lys8 & Arg10) and the re-quantify function in the software disabled. During the secondary search the multiplicity was set to 2 (Medium labels: Lys4 & Arg6; Heavy labels: Lys8 & Arg10) and the re-quantify function enabled (this search was perform to allow inclusion in the analysis of proteins, for which either ‘Medium’ or ‘Heavy’ counterparts were not detected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). Data were further analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.10.0 and Microsoft Office Excel 2016.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells circulate between blood and bone marrow niche, representing different microenvironments. We studied the role of the two RNA-binding proteins, T-cell-restricted intracellular antigen (TIAR), and the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) in the regulation of protein translation in CML cells residing in settings mimicking peripheral blood microenvironment (PBM) and bone marrow microenvironment (BMM). The outcomes showed how conditions shaped the translation process through TIAR and FMRP activity, considering its relevance in therapy resistance. The QuaNCAT mass-spectrometric approach revealed that TIAR and FMRP have a discrete modulatory effect on protein synthesis and thus affect distinct aspects of leukemic cells functioning in the hypoxic niche. In the BMM setup, FMRP impacted metabolic adaptation of cells and TIAR substantially supported the resistance of CML cells to translation inhibition by homoharringtonine. Overall, our results demonstrated that targeting post-transcriptional control should be considered when designing anti-leukemia therapeutic solutions.

### Keywords
Tiar, Fmrp, Chronic myeloid leukemia, Quancat

### Affiliations
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology 3 Pasteura Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Paulina Podszywalow-Bartnicka
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology 3 Pasteura Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland


