### Accession
PXD034327

### Title
Structure of the metastatic factor P-Rex1 reveals a two-layered autoinhibitory mechanism

### Description
Rho GTPases regulate actin dynamics and cell motility, and their hyperactivation drives cancer metastasis1. P-Rex (PI(3,4,5)P3-dependent Rac Exchanger) guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) are potent on-switches for Rho GTPase signalling and are frequently dysregulated in metastatic cancer2. P-Rex GEFs are autoinhibited under basal conditions and activated synergistically by binding to Gβγ and PI(3,4,5)P33. However, the molecular basis for P-Rex autoinhibition remains unknown. Here we utilise X-ray crystallography, cryo-EM and cross-linking mass spectrometry to determine the autoinhibited P-Rex1 structure. P-Rex1 forms a characteristic bipartite structure with its seven domains split into distinct N- and C-terminal modules. The two modules are connected by a previously unrecognised C-terminal four-helix bundle that binds the N-terminal Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. In the N-terminal module, the catalytic surface of the Dbl homology (DH) domain is occluded by the compact arrangement of the PH and DEP1 domains. Structural analysis of the DH-PH-DEP1 array reveals that a remarkable conformational transition, centred on a 126° opening of a hinge helix reminiscent of calmodulin dynamics, leads to the release of DH domain autoinhibition. Furthermore, given the off-axis position of the Gβγ and PI(3,4,5)P3 binding sites, our data suggest that concurrent Gβγ and PI(3,4,5)P3 requires counter-rotation of the two halves of P-Rex1 by 90°, leading to the uncoupling of the PH domain from the four-helic¬¬al bundle, and release of the autoinhibited DH domain to drive Rho GTPase signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking mass spectrometry was performed by adding BS3 (Thermo Fisher) cross-linker at a 1:100 molar ratio to 5 µM P-Rex1 and P-Rex1 variants in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, and 2 mM DTT. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 min prior to the addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to quench the reaction. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to further processing. Samples were denatured for 30 min at 65 °C in the presence of 10 mM DTT. Subsequently, 40 mM chloroacetamide was added to the samples prior to incubation for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. A 1:100 (w/w) ratio of trypsin was added to the samples and further incubated at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped with the addition of 1 % (v/v) formic acid. Samples were cleaned using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and stored in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid prior to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled onto an QExactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). An Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) were used to separate tryptic peptides by increasing concentrations of 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid at a flow of 250 nl min−1 for 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using the following parameters. The MS1 resolution was set at 120,000 over a scan range of 375-2000 m/z. The AGC target was set at 3.0×106 with a maximum injection time of 118 ms. The 12 most abundant precursor peaks were selected for MS2 acquisition using a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 5.0×105 with a maximum injection time of 118 ms. pLink230 was used to identify BS3 cross-linked peptides. Each dataset is derived from at least two repeats, and cross-linked peptides were considered for further analysis if they had a E-value of less than 10−4. Visual representations of cross-linked peptides were generated in Circos31. The maximum compatible cross-linker length was considered to be 30 Å, as previously defined16. To calculate the FDR, cross-links were rendered in 3D by mapping constraints to the Cβ atomic coordinates of lysines in the different atomic models. The FDR for each model was defined as the sum of forbidden cross-links multiplied by their frequency of observation, divided by the total sum of all observed cross-links.

### Publication Abstract
P-Rex (PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>-dependent Rac exchanger) guanine nucleotide exchange factors potently activate Rho GTPases. P-Rex guanine nucleotide exchange factors are autoinhibited, synergistically activated by G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; and PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> binding and dysregulated in cancer. Here, we use X-ray crystallography, cryogenic electron microscopy and crosslinking mass spectrometry to determine the structural basis of human P-Rex1 autoinhibition. P-Rex1 has a bipartite structure of N- and C-terminal modules connected by a C-terminal four-helix bundle that binds the N-terminal Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. In the N-terminal module, the Dbl homology (DH) domain catalytic surface is occluded by the compact arrangement of the DH-PH-DEP1 domains. Structural analysis reveals a remarkable conformational transition to release autoinhibition, requiring a 126&#xb0; opening of the DH domain hinge helix. The off-axis position of G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; and PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> binding sites further suggests a counter-rotation of the P-Rex1 halves by 90&#xb0; facilitates PH domain uncoupling from the four-helix bundle, releasing the autoinhibited DH domain to drive Rho GTPase signaling.

### Keywords
Cryo-em, P-rex1, Rac1, Metastasis, Cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Ellisdon
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


