### Accession
PXD021684

### Title
Proteomic Adaptation of Clostridioides difficile to Treatment with the Antimicrobial Peptide Nisin

### Description
Clostridioides difficile is the leading cause of antibiotics-associated diarrhea but can also result in more serious, life-threatening conditions. As incidence of C. difficile infections in hospitals is increasing, both in frequency and severity, and antibiotic-resistant C. difficile strains are advancing, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are an interesting alternative to classic antibiotics. Knowledge on the effects of AMPs on C. difficile will therefore not only enhance the knowledge for possible biomedical application but may also provide insights in mechanisms of C. difficile to adapt or counteract AMPs. This study applies state-of-the-art mass spectrometry methods to quantitatively investigate the proteomic response of C. difficile 630∆erm to sublethal concentrations of the AMP nisin allowing to follow the cellular stress adaptation in a time-resolved manner. The results do not only point at a heavy reorganization of the cellular envelop but also determined pronounced changes in central cellular processes such as carbohydrate metabolism. Moreover, the number of flagella per cell was changed during the process of adaptation to nisin suggesting a role of these cellular structures in combating this particular AMP, which is independent from pure cell motility

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630∆erm, here named wild type, was grown at 37 °C in brain heart infusion (BHI) in an anaerobic chamber. In exponential growth phase (OD600nm of 0.4) cultures were stressed with sublethal concentrations of nisin (50 µg/L), resulting in a rapid decrease of optical density and subsequent re-growing with a growth rate comparable to an untreated control culture (Figure 1). Samples were taken before the treatment (control), 90 min and 180 min after addition of nisin. Experiments were performed in three biological replicates. Cells were harvested before the treatment (control), 90 min and 180 min after addition of nisin by centrifugation and were subsequently resuspended in TE-buffer (10 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA [ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid], pH 7.5). Cells were lysed by ultrasonication at 4 °C (Bandelin Sonoplus HD 3200 with MS73, 3 cycles of 1 min 70% amplitude). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 9,000 x g, 4 °C) and the supernatant was used to determine the protein concentration with the Bradford assay (Bradford MM. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 72:248–254) before 4 mg protein were used to enrich membrane proteins according a protocol published elsewhere (Eymann C, Dreisbach A, Albrecht D, Bernhardt J, Becher D, Gentner S, Tam LT, Büttner K, Buurman G, Scharf C, Venz S, Völker U, Hecker M. 2004. A comprehensive proteome map of growing Bacillus subtilis cells. Proteomics 4:2849–76), leaving out the extraction of proteins by n-dodecyl-β-d-maltoside treatment. In brief, sedimented cell membranes are subjected to subsequent ultracentrifugation/washing steps, including washing of the pellets with high-salt and carbonate buffer resulting in the membrane fraction that is depleted of cytosolic proteins. The cytosolic fraction represents the supernatant after the first ultracentrifugation step in the membrane-enrichment protocol. Twenty µg of protein samples were supplemented with loading buffer (final concentration: 0.1 M Tris-HCl [pH 6.8], 2% [w/v] SDS, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 2% [v/v] β-mercaptoethanol) heated for 5 min at 95 °C and separated via SDS-PAGE (Criterion TG 4-20% Precast Midi Gel, BIO-RAD Laboratories, Inc.). After staining with Coomassie, each gel lane was cut into pieces, destained, desiccated and rehydrated in trypsin as previously described (Bonn F, Bartel J, Büttner K, Hecker M, Otto A, Becher D. 2014. Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal Chem 86:7421–7427). In gel-digest was incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were eluted with water by sonication for 15 min and desalted using Millipore C18 Zip Tips (Sigma Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides was carried out by database search using MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 with the implemented Andromeda algorithm applying the following parameters: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modification, methionine oxidation, and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide; activated LFQ option with minimal ratio count of 2 and ‘match-between runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match and protein level were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The database for C. difficile 630∆erm Dannheim H, Riedel T, Neumann-Schaal M, Bunk B, Schober I, Spröer C, Chibani CM, Gronow S, Liesegang H, Overmann J, Schomburg D. 2017. Manual curation and reannotation of the genomes of Clostridium difficile 630Δerm and Clostridium difficile 630. J Med Microbiol) contained 3781 entries. Common laboratory contaminations and reverse entries were added during MaxQuant search. A protein was considered to be identified if two or more unique peptides were identified in a biological replicate.  The comparative proteome analyses of treated and control samples based on MaxQuant LFQ values were performed separately for cytosolic and membrane samples. Proteins were considered to be quantified if a quantitative value based on at least two unique peptides was available in at least two biological replicates. Log2-transformed LFQ values as proxy for protein abundance were used for statistical analysis. An ANOVA test was performed to analyze changes in protein amounts during nisin treatment (control vs. 90 min nisin vs. 180 min nisin). Additionally, Student’s t-tests were performed to test for significant changes between samples (control vs. 90 min nisin and 90 min nisin vs 180 min nisin, respectively). Proteins with significantly changed amount exhibited a p-value<0.01 and an average log2 fold change >|0.8|. For comparison of absolute protein amounts in the membrane fraction iBAQ values were exported from MaxQuant and width adjusted in Perseus 1.5.3.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nisin, C. difficile, Proteomics, Antimicrobial peptides, Antibiotic resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


