### Accession
PXD033503

### Title
Inhibition of mTOR signaling protects human glioma-cells from starvation-induced cell death in an autophagy-independent manner

### Description
Although malignant gliomas frequently show aberrant activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), mTOR inhibitors have performed poorly in clinical trials. Besides regulating cell growth and translation, mTOR controls the initiation of autophagy. By recycling cellular components, autophagy can mobilize energy resources, and has thus been attributed cancer-promoting effects. Here, we asked whether the activation of autophagy represents an escape mechanism to pharmacological mTOR inhibition, and explored co-treatment with mTOR and autophagy inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy. Mimicking conditions of the glioma microenvironment, glioma cells were exposed to nutrient starvation and hypoxia. Following treatment with mTOR inhibitor torin2 or rapamycin, and autophagy inhibitors bafilomycin A1 or MRT68921, we analyzed autophagic activity, cell growth, viability and oxygen consumption. Changes in global proteome were quantified by mass spectrometry. In the context of hypoxia and starvation, autophagy was strongly induced in glioma cells, and further increased by mTOR inhibition. While torin2 enhanced glioma cell survival, co-treatment with torin2 and bafilomycin A1 failed to promote cell death. Importantly, treatment with bafilomycin A1 alone also protected glioma cells from cell death. Mechanistically, both compounds significantly reduced glioma growth and oxygen consumption. Mass spectrometry analysis showed that bafilomycin A1 induced broad changes in the cellular proteome. More specifically, proteins downregulated by bafilomycin A1 were associated with the mitochondrial respiratory chain and ATP synthesis. Taken together, our results show that activation of autophagy does not account for the cytoprotective effects of mTOR inhibition in our in vitro model of the glioma microenvironment. Our proteomic findings suggest that the pharmacological inhibition of autophagy induces extensive changes in the cellular proteome that can support glioma cell survival under nutrient-deplete and hypoxic conditions. These findings provide a novel perspective on the complex role of autophagy in gliomas and may have implications for the design of future trials.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and proteins resuspended in 8 M Urea/10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Concentration of proteins was determined by Bradford assay and 300 µg of protein per samples was used for digestion. For digestion, the samples were diluted to 1 M Urea with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and incubated overnight with 1:50 LysC (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and 1:100 sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Digests were acidified using TFA and tryptic peptides were purified by tC18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). 25 µg peptides per sample were TMT labelled and the mixing was normalized after a single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS to equimolar ratios for each channel. The pooled peptides were dried for offline High pH Reverse phase fractionation by HPLC.  Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation Peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC. 250 µg of pooled and purified TMT-labeled samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC), 5% ACN, and separated on a 250 mm long C18 column (X-Bridge, 4.6 mm ID, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 100% Solvent A (5% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) to 60% Solvent B (90% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) over 70 min. Eluting peptides were collected every 45 s into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 12 fractions and dried for further processing.  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). For proteome analysis, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression. Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 9 to 32% B over 210 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 16 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 10 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 10”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 85 ms, AGC target value of 2 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database. Static modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and lysines and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: Oxidation (M), Met-loss (Protein N-terminus), Acetyl (Protein N-terminus) and Met-loss acetyl (Protein N-terminus). Normalized PSMs were summed for each accession and data exported for further use.  For GO-term analyses, gene sets were extracted from data using fold change and significance cutoffs as indicated. Enrichment analysis was performed with DAVID 6.8 using default settings for biological processes and cellular components. For visualization of network enrichment, Cytoscape 3.9.0 software was used with Omics Visualizer 1.3.0 plugin.

### Publication Abstract
Although malignant gliomas frequently show aberrant activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), mTOR inhibitors have performed poorly in clinical trials. Besides regulating cell growth and translation, mTOR controls the initiation of autophagy. By recycling cellular components, autophagy can mobilize energy resources, and has thus been attributed cancer-promoting effects. Here, we asked whether the activation of autophagy represents an escape mechanism to pharmacological mTOR inhibition in glioma cells, and explored co-treatment with mTOR and autophagy inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy. Mimicking conditions of the glioma microenvironment, glioma cells were exposed to nutrient starvation and hypoxia. We analyzed autophagic activity, cell growth, viability and oxygen consumption following (co-)treatment with the mTOR inhibitors torin2 or rapamycin, and autophagy inhibitors bafilomycin A1 or MRT68921. Changes in global proteome were quantified by mass spectrometry. In the context of hypoxia and starvation, autophagy was strongly induced in glioma cells and further increased by mTOR inhibition. While torin2 enhanced glioma cell survival, co-treatment with torin2 and bafilomycin A1 failed to promote cell death. Importantly, treatment with bafilomycin A1 alone also protected glioma cells from cell death. Mechanistically, both compounds significantly reduced cell growth and oxygen consumption. Quantitative proteomics analysis showed that bafilomycin A1 induced broad changes in the cellular proteome. More specifically, proteins downregulated by bafilomycin A1 were associated with the mitochondrial respiratory chain and ATP synthesis. Taken together, our results show that activation of autophagy does not account for the cytoprotective effects of mTOR inhibition in our in vitro model of the glioma microenvironment. Our proteomic findings suggest that the pharmacological inhibition of autophagy induces extensive changes in the cellular proteome that can support glioma cell survival under nutrient-deplete and hypoxic conditions. These findings provide a novel perspective on the complex role of autophagy in gliomas.

### Keywords
Human, Glioma, Autophagy, Mtor

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Iris Divé

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany


