### Accession
PXD011561

### Title
A proteomic approach to identify biomarkers of Glycogen Storage Disease type 1a progression in mouse livers: evidence for metabolic reprogramming, tissue inflammation and macrophage polarization

### Description
Glycogen storage disease type 1a (GSD-1a) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the catalytic subunit of the glucose-6-phosphatase-alpha (G6Pase-α). The current treatment of GSD-1a is based on the control of symptomatic hypoglycemia.   Long-term complications such as renal failure and development of hepatocellular adenoma/carcinoma develop in the majority of patients.   The aim of this study was to determine the proteomic expression changes in the liver of LS-G6pc-/- mice, a mouse model of GSD-1a, in comparison with wild type mice to identify potential biomarkers of the pathophysiology of the affected liver.

### Sample Protocol
50-100 g of whole liver tissue was homogenized with a Tissue Lyser (Qiagen) in 400l of ice cold lysis buffer (PBS, 4% sodium deoxycholate, 100mM DTT),   incubated for 2-3 hr at 100°C, denaturated and reduced using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Inc, Cat. No. 44250). Briefly, the samples were mixed with 0.3 ml of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA solution), loaded into the filtration devices, alkylated in 0.1 ml of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA solution for 1 h in darkness at room temperature (RT). Samples were digested using sequentially 1 µg of LysC and 3 µg of Trypsin in 50 mM NaHCO3 solution at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units  Each sample digest was desalted on StageTips and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software. Comparative proteomics profiling was performed by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) implemented in ClustVis online resource. Time-course analysis used the Significance Analysis of Microarrays method  implemented in the Web-enabled and Cross-platform SAM via Shiny For building the SAM interactive web app straight from R, we used the Shiny R package setting up a two classes, unpaired, time course analysis with slope function as summary measure for each time course.  The slope is useful for finding proteins with a consistent increase or decrease over time.  For two class-unpaired data, SAM summarizes each time series by a slope. Then the slopes are compared across the two groups. Thus a positive SAM score means that the slopes are larger (on average) in the group 2 than in the group 1; the opposite is true for a negative. A positive SAM score could mean that the slopes are positive in both groups, but larger in the group 2, or they could both be negative but less negative in group 2, or finally they could be negative in group 1 and positive in group 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist G. Gaslini


