### Accession
PXD021895

### Title
Hijacking of transcriptional condensates by endogenous retroviruses

### Description
Heterochromatin plays essential roles in repressing retrotransposons, e.g. endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) during mammalian development, but the contribution of retrotransposition to lethality observed in embryonic cells deficient for heterochromatin-mediated ERV repression is poorly understood. Here we report that selective degradation of the TRIM28 heterochromatin adapter protein leads to reduced association of transcriptional condensates with loci encoding super-enhancer -driven pluripotency genes in embryonic stem cells, a collapse of the pluripotency transcriptional circuit, and a pre-lethal restriction of pluripotent lineages in mouse embryos. De-repressed ERVs recruit transcriptional condensates in the absence of TRIM28, and ERV RNA facilitates condensation of RNA Polymerase II in vitro. We propose that retrotransposons contribute to the genomic distribution of nuclear condensates, and that RNA species may facilitate “hijacking” of transcriptional condensates in various developmental and disease contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation was done according to a published protocol with minor modifications (Kulak, Pichler et al. 2014). In brief, three biological replicates of dTAG-13 treated samples with 4 million cells per sample lysed under denaturing conditions and sequentially digested with LysC and tryptsin (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Desalted peptides were further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously (Ni, Hagras et al. 2019). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.10.43) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB with 55,471 entries, released in May 2020.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.10.43) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB with 55,471 entries, released in May 2020. The MaxQuant processed output files, showing peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, % sequence coverage of the protein, q-values, and label free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Most endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) in mammals are incapable of retrotransposition; therefore, why ERV derepression is associated with lethality during early development has been a mystery. Here, we report that rapid and selective degradation of the heterochromatin adapter protein TRIM28 triggers dissociation of transcriptional condensates from loci encoding super-enhancer (SE)-driven pluripotency genes and their association with transcribed ERV loci in murine embryonic stem cells. Knockdown of ERV RNAs or forced expression of SE-enriched transcription factors rescued condensate localization at SEs in TRIM28-degraded cells. In a biochemical reconstitution system, ERV RNA facilitated partitioning of RNA polymerase&#x2009;II and the Mediator coactivator into phase-separated droplets. In TRIM28 knockout mouse embryos, single-cell RNA-seq analysis revealed specific depletion of pluripotent lineages. We propose that coding and noncoding nascent RNAs, including those produced by retrotransposons, may facilitate 'hijacking' of transcriptional condensates in various developmental and disease contexts.

### Keywords
Transcriptional condensates, Heterochromatin, Transposable elements

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Department of Genome Regulation Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Meissner
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Department of Genome Regulation Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany


