### Accession
PXD045268

### Title
Integrated proteomics spotlight the proteasome as a pervasive therapeutic vulnerability in Embryonal Tumors with Multilayered Rosettes (ETMR)

### Description
Embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes (ETMR) are rare malignant embryonal brain tumors. The prognosis of ETMR is poor and novel therapeutic approaches are desperately needed. Comprehension of ETMR tumor biology is based on only few previous molecular studies, which mainly relied on the analyses of nucleic acids. In this study, we explored integrated ETMR proteomics with the aim to identify novel therapeutic vulnerabilities in these deadly tumors. Using mass spectrometry, proteome data were acquired from FFPE tissue of 40 embryonal brain tumors (16 ETMR, 9 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT), 15 medulloblastomas (MB)) and integrated with case-matched global DNA methylation data, publicly available transcriptome data, and proteome data of further pediatric brain tumors.  Proteome-based cluster analyses grouped ETMR samples according to histomorphology, separating neuropil-rich tumors with neuronal signatures from primitive tumors with signatures relating to stemness and chromosome organization. Microdissection analyses highlighted the close relationship of ETMR histomorphology and proteome profiles, regardless of intra- or intertumoral comparisons. Integrated proteomics showcased that ETMR harbor proteasome regulatory proteins in abundancy, implicating their strong dependency on the proteasome machinery to safeguard proteostasis. Respectively, in vitro cell culture viability assays using embryonal brain tumor cell lines BT183 (ETMR), BT16 (AT/RT), and D283 (MB) highlighted that ETMR cells were highly vulnerable towards treatment with the CNS penetrant proteasome inhibitor Marizomib. In summary, histomorphology stipulates the proteome signatures of ETMR. Pervasive and histomorphology-independent abundancy of proteasome regulatory proteins in ETMR indicates a strong proteasome dependency throughout these tumors. As validated in cell culture experiments, proteasome inhibition poses a promising therapeutic option in ETMR.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Punch biopsies and/or microdissected tissue sections were collected from FFPE embryonal brain tumors. For whole sample analyses, care was taken to compile samples, which sufficiently protray the entire tumor’s histomorphology. For paraffin removal, samples were incubated in 0.5 mL n-heptane at room temperature for 30 min, using a ThermoMixer (ThermoMixer® 5436, Eppendorf). Samples were centrifuged at 14 000 g for 5 min and the supernatant was discarded. Samples were reconditioned with 70 % ethanol and centrifuged at 14 000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded. The procedure was repeated twice. Pellets were dissolved in 150 µL 1 % w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) and incubated for 1 h at 95 °C for reverse formalin fixation. Samples were sonicated for 5 seconds at an energy of 25 % to destroy interfering DNA. A bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was performed (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific) to determine the protein concentration, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Tryptic digestion was performed for 20 microgram protein, using the Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol, as described by Hughes et al. [39]. Eluted Peptides were dried in a Savant SpeedVac Vacumconcentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and stored at -20 ° until further use. Directly prior to measurement dried peptides were resolved in 0.1 % FA to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL. In total 1 μg was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis. Mass spectrometry analyses Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometer (LC–MS/MS) measurements were performed on a quadrupole-ion-trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS, QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were injected to the LC system via an autosampler, purified and desalted by using a reversed phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap; 100 μm × 2 cm, 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and thereafter separated with a reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18; 75 μm × 25 cm, 100 A pore size, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Trapping was performed for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 µL/min with 98% solvent A (0.1 % FA) and 2 % solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). Separation and elution of peptides were achieved by a linear gradient from 2 to 30 % solvent B in 65 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Eluting peptides were ionized by using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1800 V, transferred into the MS, and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 240 ms or until a charge density of 1 × 1^6 ions (AGC target) were reached. Fourier-transformation-based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed by covering a mass range of 400 – 1200 m/z with a resolution of 70 000 at m/z = 200. Peptides with charge states between 2+ – 5+ above an intensity threshold of 5 000 were isolated within a 2.0 m/z isolation window in top-speed mode for 3 s from each precursor scan and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 25 %, using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS2 scanning was performed, using an orbitrap mass analyzer, with a starting mass of 100 m/z at an orbitrap resolution of 17 500 at m/z = 200 and accumulated for 50 ms or to an AGC target of 1 × 10^5. Already fragmented peptides were excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquisition and preprocessing of proteome data LC-MS/MS raw spectra were searched against a reviewed human Swissprot database, obtained in February 2022, containing 20 300 entries, using the SEQUEST algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software (v 3.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A maximum number of 2 missing tryptic cleavages was set. Peptides between 6 and 144 amino acids were considered. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for cysteine residues and the oxidation of methionine, and pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus, as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. A strict cutoff (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01) was set for peptide and protein identification. Protein quantification was carried out, using the Minora Algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer. For quantification, only unique peptides were used. Retrieved protein abundancies were normalized at the protein level, using all proteins quantified. Scaling was disabled. Protein abundances were log2 transformed and normalized using sample-wise median centering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lin28a, Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, 850k, Dna methylation, Embryonal brain tumor, Etmr, Transcriptome, Multiomics, Proteome, Methylome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Section mass-spectrometry and proteomics Diagnostic Center, Research Campus N27 Room 00.008 Martinistr. 52 20246 Hamburg

### Submitter
Ali Biabani

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hartmut Schlüter
Section mass-spectrometry and proteomics Diagnostic Center, Research Campus N27 Room 00.008 Martinistr. 52 20246 Hamburg


