### Accession
PXD004813

### Title
Dependence of Synaptic Protein Degradation on Proteasomal Function

### Description
Synaptic function crucially depends on uninterrupted synthesis and degradation of synaptic proteins. While much has been learned on synaptic protein synthesis, little is known on the routes by which synaptic proteins are degraded. Here we systematically studied how inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasomal system (UPS) affects the degradation rates of thousands of neuronal and synaptic proteins. We identified a number of proteins, including several proteins related to glutamate receptor trafficking, whose degradation rates were significantly slowed by UPS inhibition. Unexpectedly, however, degradation rates of most synaptic proteins were not significantly affected. Interestingly, many of the differential effects of UPS inhibition were readily explained by a quantitative framework that considered known metabolic turnover rates for the same proteins. In contrast to the limited effects on protein degradation, UPS inhibition profoundly and preferentially suppressed the synthesis of a large number of synaptic proteins. Our findings point to the importance of the UPS in the degradation of certain synaptic proteins, yet indicate that under basal conditions most synaptic proteins might be degraded through alternative pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Cortical neurons were grown in culture for two weeks in the presence of isotopically separable lysine and arginine, that is, ‘heavy’ or ‘medium’ (M) variants.  After 14 days in vitro, the media was replaced gently with media containing no isotopically labeled AAs and lactacystin (10µM) was added to the set of preparations labeled with Heavy AAs. The cells were harvested after 4, 10 or 24 hours, mixed together (as pairs of time matched lactacystin-treated and control sets), run together on preparative gels, digested and subjected to MS analysis . LC-MS/MS analysis was done on the tryptic peptides using the Q Exective plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were analysed by the MaxQuant software  for identification and silac quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic function crucially depends on uninterrupted synthesis and degradation of synaptic proteins. While much has been learned on synaptic protein synthesis, little is known on the routes by which synaptic proteins are degraded. Here we systematically studied how inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) affects the degradation rates of thousands of neuronal and synaptic proteins. We identified a group of proteins, including several proteins related to glutamate receptor trafficking, whose degradation rates were significantly slowed by UPS inhibition. Unexpectedly, however, degradation rates of most synaptic proteins were not significantly affected. Interestingly, many of the differential effects of UPS inhibition were readily explained by a quantitative framework that considered known metabolic turnover rates for the same proteins. In contrast to the limited effects on protein degradation, UPS inhibition profoundly and preferentially suppressed the synthesis of a large number of synaptic proteins. Our findings point to the importance of the UPS in the degradation of certain synaptic proteins, yet indicate that under basal conditions most synaptic proteins might be degraded through alternative pathways.

### Keywords
Degradation, Synaptic protein, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Technion
Technion Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratories,

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Noam Ziv
Technion Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratories,


