### Accession
PXD005467

### Title
Time-resolved Global and Chromatin Proteomics during Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV-1) Infection

### Description
Herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) lytic infection results in global changes to the host cell proteome and the proteins associated with host chromatin. We present a system level characterization of proteome dynamics during infection by performing a multi-dimensional analysis during HSV-1 lytic infection of human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells. Our study includes identification and quantification of the host and viral proteomes, phosphoproteomes, chromatin bound proteomes and post-translational modifications (PTMs) on cellular histones during infection. We analyzed proteomes across six time points of virus infection (0, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 hours post-infection) and clustered trends in abundance using fuzzy c-means. Globally, we accurately quantified more than 4,000 proteins, 200 differently modified histone peptides and 9,000 phosphorylation sites on cellular proteins. In addition, we identified 67 viral proteins and quantified 571 phosphorylation events (465 with high confidence site localization) on viral proteins, which is currently the most comprehensive map of HSV-1 phosphoproteome. We investigated chromatin bound proteins by proteomic analysis of the high-salt chromatin fraction and identified 510 proteins that were significantly different in abundance during infection. We found 53 histone marks significantly regulated during virus infection, including a steady increase of histone H3 acetylation (H3K9ac and H3K14ac). Our data provide a resource of unprecedented depth for human and viral proteome dynamics during infection. Collectively, our results indicate that the proteome composition of the chromatin of HFF cells is highly affected during HSV-1 infection, and that phosphorylation events are abundant on viral proteins. We propose that our epi-proteomics approach will prove to be important in the characterization of other model infectious systems that involve changes to chromatin composition.

### Sample Protocol
All chemicals used for preparation of nLC-MS/MS samples were of at least sequencing grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, unless otherwise stated. Cells were lysed in 60 ul of cold lysis buffer (6M urea/2M thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.2, Phosphatase and Protease Inhibitors Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) by vortexing. Proteins were digested first with endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako, MS grade) for 3 h, after which the solution was diluted 10 times with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at room temperature and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of approximately 1:50 for 12 h at room temperature. After digestion, the samples were concentrated to the volume of ~100 ul by lyophilization. Phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatographic resin was performed as previously described. The lyophilized phosphorylated peptide samples were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 RP (PerSeptive Biosystems) P200 columns. Unbound peptides from the TiO2 flow-through and subsequent TiO2 washes were combined and lyophilized to produce a non-modified peptide fraction. The non-modified peptide fraction was resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted using Sep-Pak tC18 Plus Light Cartridge (Waters). The peptide samples were subsequently lyophilized and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. Dried samples were resuspended in buffer-A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a picofrit 18 cm long fused silica capillary column (75 um inner diameter) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 um resin. The gradient length was 165 minutes for the (phospho)proteome and 105 min for the salt fractions. The gradient was from 2-26% buffer-B (100% ACN/0.1% formic acid) for phosphopeptides and from 4-28% B for unmodified peptides, including salt fractions, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS method was set up in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For full MS scan, the mass range of 350-1200 m/z was analyzed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 FWHM (200 m/z) resolution and 5x10e5 AGC target value. HCD collision energy was set to 27, AGC target to 10e4 and maximum injection time to 200 msec. Detection of MS/MS fragment ions was performed in the ion trap in the rapid mode using the TopSpeed mode (3 seconds).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 for the salt fractions and version 1.5.5.1 for proteome and phosphoproteome analysis. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Human UniProt FASTA database [9606] (20,160 reviewed canonical entries, version December January 2015). Viral proteins were identified using Human Herpes virus strain 17 (17syn+) [10299] (73 reviewed canonical entries, version December January 2015). Additionally, the database included 247 common contaminants, discarded during data analysis. The search for total proteome included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Analysis of phosphoproteome included carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as fixed modification, while phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was set as variable modification. Trypsin (cleaves K/R) was specified as digestive enzyme with two missed cleaves allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. iBAQ, intensity-based absolute quantification, was enabled for protein label-free quantification. For matching between runs, the retention time alignment window was set to 20 min and the match time window was 1 min. All other values were kept as default, including false discovery rate (FDR, < 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
Herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) lytic infection results in global changes to the host cell proteome and the proteins associated with host chromatin. We present a system level characterization of proteome dynamics during infection by performing a multi-dimensional analysis during HSV-1 lytic infection of human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells. Our study includes identification and quantification of the host and viral proteomes, phosphoproteomes, chromatin bound proteomes and post-translational modifications (PTMs) on cellular histones during infection. We analyzed proteomes across six time points of virus infection (0, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 h post-infection) and clustered trends in abundance using fuzzy c-means. Globally, we accurately quantified more than 4000 proteins, 200 differently modified histone peptides and 9000 phosphorylation sites on cellular proteins. In addition, we identified 67 viral proteins and quantified 571 phosphorylation events (465 with high confidence site localization) on viral proteins, which is currently the most comprehensive map of HSV-1 phosphoproteome. We investigated chromatin bound proteins by proteomic analysis of the high-salt chromatin fraction and identified 510 proteins that were significantly different in abundance during infection. We found 53 histone marks significantly regulated during virus infection, including a steady increase of histone H3 acetylation (H3K9ac and H3K14ac). Our data provide a resource of unprecedented depth for human and viral proteome dynamics during infection. Collectively, our results indicate that the proteome composition of the chromatin of HFF cells is highly affected during HSV-1 infection, and that phosphorylation events are abundant on viral proteins. We propose that our epi-proteomics approach will prove to be important in the characterization of other model infectious systems that involve changes to chromatin composition.

### Keywords
Lytic infection, Phosphoproteomics, Post-translational modifications (ptms), Viral life cycle, Chromatin dynamics, Histone modifications, Herpes simplex virus (hsv-1) infection

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA Division of Cancer Pathobiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Weitzman
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA Division of Cancer Pathobiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA


