### Accession
PXD014609

### Title
Mechanisms of ROS-induced mitochondria-dependent apoptosis underlying liquid storage of goat spermatozoa

### Description
Liquid storage of spermatozoa is important for artificial insemination and herd genetic breeding. However, the extending time of storage inducing rapid decline of spermatozoa quality limits the development of this technology. The molecular mechanisms underlying liquid storage of spermatozoa remain largely unexplored. In this study, the effects of liquid storage on functional quality of spermatozoa were assessed in goat (Capra hircus). The time-dependent decline of spermatozoa motility showed a strong correlation with the significant increase of apoptosis. Moreover, apoptosis-related ultrastructural changes were observed, especially the defect in mitochondria. Meanwhile, significant decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential and expression changes of mitochondrial apoptosis-related proteins indicated mitochondrial dysfunction and activation of mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Notably, the abnormal high level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) caused by liquid storage resulted in the oxidative damage to mitochondria and accelerated mitochondria-dependent apoptosis, which was demonstrated by addition of ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine. Furthermore, critical differentially expressed proteins involved in mitochondria-dependent apoptosis and antioxidant defense were identified and profiled by quantitative proteomic analysis, facilitating the understanding of molecular regulation of ROS-induced mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. These outcomes provide insights into the mechanisms underlying liquid storage of goat spermatozoa and enhance the progress of semen storage technology.

### Sample Protocol
Semen collection and liquid storage Semen samples were collected from six mature Guanzhong dairy goats (2-3 years of age) by artificial vagina. Initial semen quality was assessed for each ejaculate: only semen with volume > 0.5 mL, spermatozoa concentration > 3 × 109/mL and normal motility > 90% was accepted. All acceptable semen was diluted to a final spermatozoa concentration of 3 × 108/mL with pre-warmed Tris-based extender (Tris 3.63 g/100 mL, fructose 0.50 g/100 mL, citric acid 1.99 g/100 mL, egg yolk 10 mL/100 mL, penicillin 5000 IU/100 mL, streptomycin 0.1g/100 mL and pH 6.8) as previously described. For the experiments of inhibition of ROS, N-acetylcysteine (NAC; ROS scavenger) was added to the semen extender with the concentration of 0 (control), 5 and 10 mM, respectively. The diluted semen was allowed to adapt to room temperature for 30 min and maintained in the refrigerator at 4 ℃. Assessment of mitochondrial lipid peroxidation  The extraction and concentration determination of mitochondrial protein were performed according to the above description. Lipid peroxidation was assessed by malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration using a MDA assay kit (A003-1, Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China). The MDA level was determined by the method of thiobarbituric acid and measured at 535 nm using a microplate reader (Multiskan Spectrum, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis  The spermatozoa samples under liquid storage at 0 h (A library), 48 h (B library) and 96 h (C library) were used for quantitative proteomic analysis with three biological replicates. Protein was extracted from the stored spermatozoa in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz Biotechnology, Ningbo, China), and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were then subjected to trypsin digestion, TMT labeling, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis based on the previously reported methods. Peptide sample was labeled using 10-plex TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The labeled peptides were then fractionated using high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 300 Extend C18 column; 5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm length). The graded sample was separated by Easy-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scienctific) and then was subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scienctific) coupled online to the UPLC. The raw MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Capra hircus protein database in NCBI (42,687 sequences).   Bioinformatics analysis R package was used for the analyses of principal component analysis (PCA) and Pearson correlation coefficients (PCC) to detect the variations between different replicated protein samples. The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. Only protein with a fold change > 1.5 (or < 0.67) and p-value < 0.05 was considered to be differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between two sample groups. Protein functional annotation and classification were conducted according to the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. Enrichment analysis of DEPs was further performed with a corrected p-value < 0.05 for determining significant difference. GO annotation and classification were performed according to three major categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. KEGG pathway annotation was performed using KEGG online service tools. Heat map of protein expression was generated by using MultiExperiment Viewer (MeV) software based on the values of fold change. Online STRING (version 10.5) software was employed for protein-protein interactions with a confidence score > 0.4.   Statistical analysis Data are presented as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). Statistical analysis was conducted with SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), and significance was assessed by one-way ANOVA. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid storage of spermatozoa is important for artificial insemination and herd genetic breeding. However, the extended time of storage inducing the rapid decline in spermatozoa quality limits the development of this technology. The molecular mechanisms underlying liquid storage of spermatozoa remain largely unexplored. In this study, the effects of liquid storage on functional quality of spermatozoa were assessed in goat (<i>Capra hircus</i>). The time-dependent decline in spermatozoa motility showed a strong correlation with the significant increase in apoptosis. Moreover, apoptosis-related ultrastructural changes were observed, especially the defects in mitochondria. A significant decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential and changes in the expression of mitochondrial apoptosis-related proteins indicated mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial apoptotic pathway activation. Notably, the abnormally high level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) caused by liquid storage resulted in oxidative damage to mitochondria and accelerated mitochondria-dependent apoptosis, as demonstrated by the addition of ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine. Furthermore, critical differentially expressed proteins involved in mitochondria-dependent apoptosis and antioxidant defense were identified and profiled by quantitative proteomic analysis, facilitating the understanding of molecular regulation of ROS-induced mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. These outcomes provide insights into the mechanisms underlying liquid storage of goat spermatozoa and enhance the progress of semen storage technology.

### Keywords
Goat spermatozoa, Liquid storage, Differentially expressed protein, Ros, Mitochondria-dependent apoptosis

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province, 712100, China
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Tengfei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Tengfei Liu
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province, 712100, China


