### Accession
PXD015386

### Title
Exosomes from mesenchymal stromal cells reduce murine colonic inflammation via a macrophage-dependent mechanism

### Description
Conventional treatments for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have multiple potential side effects. Therefore, alternative treatments are desperately needed. In the present study, we proposed a new therapeutic tool for the treatment of IBD in murine pre-clinical models by using MSC-Exos. We demonstrated that the infused MSC-Exos are immunotolerated by the host, which is convenient for a future clinical application of MSC-Exos in IBD. To understand the molecular basis mediating the anticolitic benefit of MSC-Exos, we performed proteomic analysis using iTRAQ technology to detect the protein expression profiles in MSC-Exos and the corresponding supernatants from their parent cell MSCs. Proteomic analysis revealed that MSC-Exos were enriched in proteins involved in regulating multiple biological processes associated with the anti-colitic benefit of MSC-Exos. Particularly, metallothionein-2 in MSC-Exos was required for the suppression of inflammatory responses in macrophages. Taken together, MSC-Exos are critical regulators of inflammatory responses and may be promising candidates for IBD treatment.

### Sample Protocol
1. Preparation of mesenchymal stromal cells. Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (hereinafter referred to as MSCs) were used in the current study. Briefly, fresh bone marrow was obtained from the iliac crest of three adult healthy volunteers (China, male, with an age range of 24-30 years), followed by culture of obtained cells in MEM Alpha (GIBCO) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine sera (FBS), 1% glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. After 3 h, nonadherent cells were removed carefully and fresh medium was replaced. The culture medium was changed every other day. For subsequent passage, the culture was treated with TrypLE™ Express Enzyme (GIBCO) for 2 min at 37 ℃ when primary cultures became almost confluent. 2. Exosome extraction and identification. Exosomes were isolated from the supernatants of MSCs (hereinafter referred to as MSC-Exos) by ultracentrifugation methods. Briefly, the cells (passage 5) were cultured in the normal medium until about 70-80% confluent; thereafter medium was replaced with defined medium supplemented with 10% exosome-depleted FBS (System Bioscience, USA), and then cells were cultured under 5% CO2 at 37 ℃. After 3 days of culture, the cell culture medium was harvested. After centrifugation at 300×g for 15 min, 2,000×g for 20 min, 10,000×g for 30 minutes at 4 ℃, the supernatants were filtrated through 0.22 µm filters (Millipore). The obtained medium was at 100,000×g for 70 min at 4 ℃ (Beckman Coulter) to pellet exosomes. The resulting supernatant was discarded without disturbing the pellet, which was then washed with a large volume of PBS, and then again ultracentrifuged at the same conditions, before final resuspension in a specific volume of PBS. The identification of purified exosomes was performed using Particle Metrix (PMX), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and western blotting for detection of two known exosomes markers (TSG101 and CD9). The harvested exosomes were stored at -80 °C until further use.  3. Preparation of exosome-depleted supernatants of MSCs. For the preparation of supernatant samples, exosomes in the supernatants of MSCs were depleted using centrifugation-based depletion protocol. Briefly, culture medium of MSCs was centrifuged at 300×g for 15 min, 2,000×g for 20 min, 10,000×g for 30 minutes at 4 ℃, and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove cellular debris, and the obtained medium was then was depleted of exosomes by ultracentrifugation for 120 min at 100,000×g at 4 ℃ (Beckman Coulter).  4. Sample preparation for TMT analysis. MSCs (passage 5, isolated from three healthy male volunteers) were seeded in 75 cm2 culture flasks and washed with PBS when they reached 70-80% confluence. After incubation in exosome-depleted complete medium (10 ml per flask) for 3 days, MSCs and their supernatants were collected. Three MSC-Exos samples (called E1, E2 and E3, isolated from the three MSCs) were isolated from the supernatants (called S1, S2 and S3), respectively. Before proteomic analysis, exosomes in the supernatants of MSCs were depleted by ultracentrifugation for 120 min at 100,000×g unless they are specifically mentioned as non-depleted. Exosomes and supernatants were quantified using Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and then all samples were adjusted to have an equal total protein concentration among each sample. An equal amount of total protein from each sample (MSC-Exos versus supernatants) was processed for TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis by Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou, China).

### Data Protocol
1.LC-MS/MS Analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in  Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. 2.Database Search. The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot Human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursorions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on Met and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. For the protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% at protein, peptide and PSM levels. 3.Bioinformatics Methods. A protein domain is a conserved part of a given protein sequence and structure that can evolve, function and exist independently of the rest of the protein chain. Each domain forms a compact three-dimensional structure and often can be independently stable and folded. Many proteins consist of several structural domains. One domain may appear in a variety of different proteins. Molecular evolution uses domains as building blocks and these may be recombined in different arrangements to create proteins with different functions. Domains vary in length from between about 25 amino acids up to 500 amino acids in length. The shortest domains such as zinc fingers are stabilized by metal ions or disulfide bridges. Domains often form functional units, such as the calcium-binding EF hand domain of calmodulin. Because they are independently stable, domains can be "swapped" by genetic engineering between one protein and another to make chimeric proteins. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. To identify the predominant biological process of the identified proteins of MSC-Exos, gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was performed to classify all identified proteins into three categories (cell component, molecular function and biological process) using the UniPort-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and GO annotation (http://geneontology.org/). Differentially expressed proteins were identified with a cutoff of absolute fold change ≥2. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO analysis with a corrected p values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Conventional treatments for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have multiple potential side effects. Therefore, alternative treatments are desperately needed. This work demonstrated that systemic administration of exosomes from human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC-Exos) substantially mitigated colitis in various models of IBD. MSC-Exos treatment downregulated inflammatory responses, maintained intestinal barrier integrity, and polarized M2b macrophages but did not favor intestinal fibrosis. Mechanistically, infused MSC-Exos acted mainly on colonic macrophages, and macrophages from colitic colons acquired obvious resistance to inflammatory restimulation when prepared from mice treated with MSC-Exos versus untreated mice. The beneficial effect of MSC-Exos was blocked by macrophage depletion. Also, the induction of IL-10 production from macrophages was partially involved in the beneficial effect of MSC-Exos. MSC-Exos were enriched in proteins involved in regulating multiple biological processes associated with the anticolitic benefit of MSC-Exos. Particularly, metallothionein-2 in MSC-Exos was required for the suppression of inflammatory responses. Taken together, MSC-Exos are critical regulators of inflammatory responses and may be promising candidates for IBD treatment.

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Exosomes, Macrophages

### Affiliations
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University
1.Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 2.Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Diseases, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

### Submitter
Ping Lan

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Lan
1.Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 2.Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Diseases, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.


