### Accession
PXD008829

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA3904 pull down coupled to LC-MS/MS

### Description
pETDUET His-PAAR4 and pETDUET Flag-PAAR4 were transformed into BL21 E. coli DE3 and expressed as described above.  An equal volume of PAO1 retS was grown to an OD600 of 2.0.  E. coli expressing His-PAAR4 or Flag-PAAR4 and Pseudomonas cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed as described above.  Lysates of both species were combined and His-PAAR4 or Flag-PAAR4 were purified as before.  Eluted sample was mixed with SDS-loading buffer, boiled and run on a 12% SDS-PAGE for 0.6 cm.  After coomassie staining and de-staining, the resulting band was excised and used for LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system. Tryptic peptides (2 μl) were loaded directly onto an Easy Spray Column (ES801; ThermoFisher) at a maximum of 700 bars. Peptides were eluted using a 25 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 22 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 3min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (see above). Solvent A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water. Peptides were then electrosprayed using 2.0 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4e5 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (35% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The AGC and the maximum injection time were set at 1e4 and 35 ms, respectively, for the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
The Lumos raw data files (*.raw) were converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using RawConverter (v1.1.0.18; The Scripps Research Institute) operating in a data dependent mode. Monoisotopic precursors having a charge state of +2 to +7 were selected for conversion. This mgf file was used to search a database specified by the customer using Mascot algorithm (Matrix Sciences; version 2.4). Search parameters for MS data included trypsin as enzyme, a maximum number of missed cleavage of 1, a peptide charge equal to 2 or higher, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm. A mass error tolerance of 0.6 Da was selected for the fragment ions. Only peptides identified with a score having a confidence higher than 95% were kept for further analysis. The Mascot data files were imported into Scaffold (v4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc) for comparison of different samples based on their mass spectral counting.   

### Publication Abstract
The type VI secretion system (T6SS) is used by many Gram-negative bacteria as a molecular weapon to modulate neighbouring bacterial and eukaryotic cells, thereby affecting the dynamics of community structure in multiple species environments. The T6SS injects its inner-needle Hcp tube, the sharpening tip complex consisting of VgrG and PAAR, and toxic effectors into neighbouring cells. Its functions are largely determined by the activities of its delivered effectors. Six mechanisms of effector delivery have been described: two mediated by the inner tube and the others mediated by the VgrG and PAAR tip complex. Here, we report an additional effector delivery mechanism that relies on interaction with a chaperone complex and a PAAR protein as a carrier. The Pseudomonas&#x2009;aeruginosa PAO1 TOX-REase-5 domain-containing effector TseT directly interacts with PAAR4 and the chaperone TecT for delivery, and an immunity protein, TsiT, for protection from its toxicity. TecT forms a complex with its co-chaperone, co-TecT, which is disrupted by the carboxy-terminal tail of PAAR4. In addition, we delineate a complex, multilayered competitive process that dictates effector trafficking. PAAR delivery provides an additional tool for engineering cargo protein translocation.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Ecosystem and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine; Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, AB, T2N4Z6, Canada

### Submitter
Brianne Burkinshaw

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Dong
Ecosystem and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine; Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, AB, T2N4Z6, Canada


