### Accession
PXD001058

### Title
Unravelling the proteomic profile of rice meiocytes during early meiosis

### Description
Transfer of genetic traits from wild or related species into cultivated rice is nowadays an important aim in rice breeding. Breeders use genetic crosses to introduce desirable genes from exotic germplasms into cultivated rice varieties. However, in many hybrids there is only a low level of pairing (if existing) and recombination at early meiosis between cultivated rice and wild relative chromosomes. With the objective of getting deeper into the knowledge of the proteins involved in early meiosis, when chromosomes associate correctly in pairs and recombine, the proteome of isolated rice meiocytes has been characterized by nLC-MS/MS at every stage of early meiosis (prophase I). Up to 1316 different proteins have been identified in rice isolated meiocytes in early meiosis, being 422 exclusively identified in early prophase I (leptotene, zygotene or pachytene). The classification of proteins in functional groups showed that 167 were related to chromatin structure and remodelling, nucleic acid binding, cell-cycle regulation and cytoskeleton. Moreover, the putative roles of sixteen proteins which have not been previously associated to meiosis or were not identified in rice before, are also discussed namely: seven proteins involved in chromosome structure and remodeling, five regulatory proteins (such as SKP1 (OSK), a putative CDK2 like efector), a protein with RNA recognition motifs, a neddylation-related protein, and two microtubule-related proteins. Revealing the proteins involved in early meiotic processes could provide a valuable tool kit to manipulate chromosome associations during meiosis in rice breeding programs.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Seeds of cultivated rice Nipponbare (Oryza sativa L. spp. japonica, AA, 2n = 2x = 24) were germinated for 10 days at 25ºC on water-soaked filter paper. Germinated seeds were grown in 7×7×11 cm pots in a soil mix containing low pH loam, lime free horticultural sand and horticultural grit (3:2:0.5; vol:vol:vol). Plants were subsequently, cultivated in flooded trays in a growth chamber under 14 h photoperiod of fluorescent light at 360 μE m-2 s-1, at 28 ºC (day) and 24 ºC (night) and 70-95% relative humidity. After two weeks, plants were transplanted into bigger (10×10×11 cm) pots and kept there until flowering. Collection of rice panicles in meiosis and discrimination of the meiotic stage  Fresh young panicles were fixed in ethanol:acetic acid (3:1, v/v) in three rounds of 10 minutes under vacuum kept on ice (450 mmHg, vaccum pump R-400, Pobel, Madrid, Spain). Subsequently, the fixed panicles were stored at 4 ºC for up to three months. An anther from each fixed flower was removed using fine forceps under a dissection microscope (Stemi 2000-C stereomicroscope, Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) equipped with a cold-light source. Anthers were then stained in acetocarmine solution, squashed on ethanol-cleaned slides and checked under a PrimoStar light microscope (Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany). Photographs were taken using an AxioCam ICc3 digital camera (Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) attached to the microscope. Anthers collection and meiocytes isolation After the identification of the meiotic stage, the five remaining anthers of each flower were immediately collected in ice cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail set VI (PI) (Calbiochem, Merck Chemicals Ltd. UK). In brief, groups of 10 staged anthers were placed on 15 µl of PBS and 1% PI in a well of a multi-well slide (ICN Biomedicals Inc., Ohio, USA). Then, anthers were halved using two fine needles (0.5 ml BD Micro-Fine+ Insulin Syringes, 30G, 0.3mm× 8mm, BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium) under the stereomicroscope and gently squeezed to obtain a suspension of meiocytes, which was recovered in 1.5 ml tubes using a micropipette tip and kept on ice. Sample aliquots were loaded into a Neubauer chamber for checking successful meiocytes isolation/enrichment under the light microscope. Isolated meiocytes were stored a -80ºC until protein extraction. Protein extraction and quantification Frozen meiocytes were resuspended in phenol extraction buffer (0.9 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-HCl, 50 mM EDTA, 0.1 M KCl, Milli-Q water and freshly added 1% Triton X-100, 2% -mercaptoethanol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail set VI (Calbiochem), pH 8) and homogenized on ice using Eppendorf micropestles. The solutions of meiocytes were sonicated with an ultrasonic homogenizer (Sonopuls HD2070, BANDELIN electronic, Berlin, Germany) during three cycles of 1 pulse of 20 s followed by 1 min on ice. Samples were then mixed with one volume of phenol solution equilibrated with 10 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), shaken for 1 min, incubated for 20 min in a tube rotator at 4 ºC and centrifuged at 18000 × g for 10 min at 4 ºC. The upper phenolic phase was collected and proteins were subsequently precipitated by adding five volumes of ice cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate and 13 mM DTT in methanol at -80 ºC for at least 2 h or overnight. A pellet of proteins was obtained by centrifugation at 20000 × g for 20 min at 4 ºC. Then, the pellet was washed once with ice cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate, 13 mM DTT in methanol and twice with 80% ice cold acetone. The washes consisted on the incubation of the resuspended pellet for 2 h at -20 ºC followed by 20 min centrifugation at 20000 × g for protein recovery. Finally, the pellet was air dried, dissolved in denaturing buffer containing 6 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 and stored at -80 ºC.

### Data Protocol
Reverse phase-liquid chromatography RP-LC-MS/MS analysis  Protein extracts in 6 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 were reduced and alkylated. Disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted to reduce urea concentrations below 1.4 M and digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37 ºC in a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:5 (w/w). Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Then, the supernatants were dried down and desalted onto ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA) until mass spectrometric analysis. Desalted digested proteins were dried out, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1 mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark), and then separated using a 0.075 mm × 100 mm C18 RP column (Proxeon) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted in a 120-min gradient of 5 to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was carried out using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion mode applied during 30 s periods. Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.3, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed against MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project Database ver. 7.0. The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. Searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) was performed using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. Protein identification by nLC-MS/MS was carried out at the CBMSO protein chemistry facility, a member of ProteoRed network.  Bioinformatics and functional analysis of identified proteins  The output accessions obtained with the Proteome Discoverer software were exported to Microsoft Excel for data analysis. The genome annotation from the MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project Database and Resource was used to match locus identifiers (accessions) with their putative functions. Firstly, a table containing information of all the proteins identified at the five meiotic stages analyzed was generated (Table S1). And secondly, a table containing the proteins identified at early prophase I stages (leptotene, zygotene and pachytene, Table S2A) and another table with the proteins exclusively identified in Early Prophase I but not found at later stages (neither diplotene nor diakinesis, Table S2B) were created. For proteins which were only identified at early prophase I, hyperlinks of MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project and Rice Annotation Project were manually attached. MSU annotation was converted into RAP annotation using the ID converter tool in RAP database. Gene onthology (GO) annotations, InterPro domains data and information about the putative Arabidopsis (http://www.arabidopsis.org) or Poaceae orthologous genes were used to classify the identified proteins according to their functions. If no functional annotation was found in these databases, putative conserved domains or functions were searched through an amino acid sequence blast (protein-protein BLAST) using BLASTP 2.2.27+. Similarly, MSU or RAP accessions were searched in UniProtKB for additional information.

### Publication Abstract
Transfer of genetic traits from wild or related species into cultivated rice is nowadays an important aim in rice breeding. Breeders use genetic crosses to introduce desirable genes from exotic germplasms into cultivated rice varieties. However, in many hybrids there is only a low level of pairing (if existing) and recombination at early meiosis between cultivated rice and wild relative chromosomes. With the objective of getting deeper into the knowledge of the proteins involved in early meiosis, when chromosomes associate correctly in pairs and recombine, the proteome of isolated rice meiocytes has been characterized by nLC-MS/MS at every stage of early meiosis (prophase I). Up to 1316 different proteins have been identified in rice isolated meiocytes in early meiosis, being 422 exclusively identified in early prophase I (leptotene, zygotene, or pachytene). The classification of proteins in functional groups showed that 167 were related to chromatin structure and remodeling, nucleic acid binding, cell-cycle regulation, and cytoskeleton. Moreover, the putative roles of 16 proteins which have not been previously associated to meiosis or were not identified in rice before, are also discussed namely: seven proteins involved in chromosome structure and remodeling, five regulatory proteins [such as SKP1 (OSK), a putative CDK2 like effector], a protein with RNA recognition motifs, a neddylation-related protein, and two microtubule-related proteins. Revealing the proteins involved in early meiotic processes could provide a valuable tool kit to manipulate chromosome associations during meiosis in rice breeding programs. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the PXD001058 identifier.

### Keywords
Meiocytes proteome, Chromosome pairing, Chromosome recognition, Cytoskeleton, Prophase i, Skp1 proteins, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Instituto de Agricultura Sostenible-CSIC Av. Menéndez Pidal s/n Campus Alameda del Obispo Apartado 4084, 14080 Córdoba, Spain
IAS-CSIC

### Submitter
Enriqueta Alos

### Lab Head
Dr Pilar Prieto
Instituto de Agricultura Sostenible-CSIC Av. Menéndez Pidal s/n Campus Alameda del Obispo Apartado 4084, 14080 Córdoba, Spain


