### Accession
PXD036650

### Title
Identification of Cannabidiol interactome in K562 cells

### Description
Cannabidiol (CBD) showed antiproliferative activity and induction of apoptosis in chronic myelogenous leukaemia cancer cells (K562 cells). A consolidated DARTS (Drug Affinity Response Target Stability) and t-LIP-MRM (targeted- Limited Proteolysis-Multiple Reaction Monitoring Mass spectrometry) platform was applied to unveil the interactome of CBD and to shed light on its mechanism of action. Both approaches point to the identification of DNA topoisomerase 2-alpha (TOP2A) as a major CBD target in K562 cells.

### Sample Protocol
K562 cell pellets were resuspended in PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) pH 7.4 containing 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were mechanically lysed and the debris discarded by centrifugation at 1000×g and 4◦C for 10 min. The protein concentration of the obtained supernatant was determined by Bradford spectrophotometric assay and adjusted to 3 mg/mL. 90 μg protein aliquots were incubated (1h, RT, 300 RPM, Thermomixer, Biosan) with DMSO (vehicle) or with CBD (1 μM, 10 μM and 100 μM final concentrations). Subsequently, samples were subjected to limited proteolysis with the unspecific protease subtilisin (enzyme to proteins ratio of 1:500 or 1:1500 w/w, 30 min, RT, 300 RPM). Proteolysis was quenched adding 1mM final concentration of PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; 10 min, RT, 300 RPM). Then, samples were prepared for 1D-SDS-PAGE and 20 µg were loaded on a 4%–12% Bis-Tris CriterionTM XT Precast Gel (BioRad Laboratories), which was stained with a Coomassie solution, cut and digested in situ by trypsin10. Briefly, gel bands were destained, reduced by DTT (6.5 mM in AmBic 50mM, 60°C, 1h) and carboamidomethylated by IAA (54mM in AmBic 50mM, RT, in the dark, 30min). A 12 ng/µl trypsin/LysC solution (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) was used to digest proteins (overnight, 37°C). Finally, peptides were extracted with 100% ACN, dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 30 µl of Formic Acid (FA) 10% for the subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. It was performed on an UltiMate 3000 Ultra-High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) equipped with an EASY-Spray PepMAPTM RSLC C18 column (3µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) interfaced with the nanoESI of the mass spectrometer Q-Exactive Classic (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen). 1µl of each sample was injected and separated in 60 min with the following gradient: 1 min at 3% B, 1 min to 40 min to 28% B, 40 min to 41 min to 70% B, 41 min to 49 min at 70% B and 50 min to 60 min back to 3% B (A: 95% H2O, 5% ACN, 0.1% AcOH; B: 95% ACN, 5% H2O, 0.1% AcOH). Data were acquired in Full MS/dd-MS2 (Top8) mode. Full MS settings were: resolution of 70000, AGC target of 3e6, maximum IT of 50 ms and scan range 375–1500 m/z. dd-MS2 settings were: resolution of 17500, AGC target of 1e5, maximum IT of 80 ms and NCE of 28.

### Data Protocol
MS data were then processed by the MS Converter General User Interface software (ProteoWizard; http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/project.html) and submitted to MASCOT Deamon (version 5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) for protein identification, employing the SwissProt database and the following settings: two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST) as variable modifications; peptide tolerance 30 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of the interactome of cannabidiol (CBD), a non-psychoactive cannabinoid from <i>Cannabis sativa</i> L., has been here performed on chronic myelogenous leukemia cancer cells, using an optimized chemo-proteomic stage, which links Drug Affinity Responsive Target Stability with Limited Proteolysis Multiple Reaction Monitoring approaches. The obtained results showed the ability of CBD to target simultaneously some potential protein partners, corroborating its well-known poly-pharmacology activity. In human chronic myelogenous leukemia K562 cancer cells, the most fascinating protein partner was identified as the 116&#xa0;kDa U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein element called EFTUD2, which fits with the spliceosome complex. The binding mode of this oncogenic protein with CBD was clarified using mass spectrometry-based and <i>in silico</i> analysis.

### Keywords
Cbd; k562 cells; top2a; darts; t-lip-mrm; chemoproteomics; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano

### Submitter
Sara Ceccacci 

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Chiara Monti
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy


