### Accession
PXD002774

### Title
Proteomic profiling of retinoblastoma by high resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
We performed a high throughput comparative proteomics study to identify differentially expressed proteins that could serve as putative targets in retinoblastoma. We used iTRAQ based quantitative proteomics approach and analyzed the samples on orbitrap velos mass spectrometer. We identified and quantified a total of 3733 proteins in retinoblastoma when compared with normal adult retina.  In total, we identified 987 proteins that were differentially expressed in retinoblastoma with a fold change of ≥2 of which 392 proteins were upregulated and 595 were downregulated.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were thawed on ice, resuspended in lysis buffer (0.5% SDS buffer) and sonicated on ice for 2-3 cycles. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until further use. For proteomic analysis, equal amount of protein from normal retina (n=5) was pooled and compared with a pooled retinoblastoma sample (n=5).  100µg of pooled retina and tumor proteins were incubated with reducing agent (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) at 60°C for 60 min. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was carried out using cysteine blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate) for 10 mins. Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at 37°C in sequencing grade trypsin. To maintain a technical replicate, tryptic digests of normal retina was split in equal halves and labeled with iTRAQ reagents yielding reporter ions at 114 and 115 m/z. Similarly, tryptic digests from retinoblastoma sample were split in equal halves and labeled with iTRAQ reagents yielding reporter ions at 116 and 117 m/z. Peptide fractionation was carried out using strong cation exchange chromatography. Consecutive fractions with relatively less peptides (based on UV absorbance at 280 nm) were pooled and a total of 18 fractions were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were vacuum dried and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were desalted using C18 zip tips before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3). The peptide search work flow includes spectrum selector followed by reporter ion quantitation. The spectra were searched using MASCOT and SEQUEST search algorithm against NCBI RefSeq database version 65. The search parameters included trypsin as the enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed, alkylation of cysteine, iTRAQ modifications at N-terminus of peptide and lysine as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. The protein and peptide data were extracted using high peptide confidence and top one peptide rank filters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Retina, Retinoblastoma, Itraq, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Sankara Nethralaya
Department of Nanotechnology, Vision Research Foundation, Sankara Nethralaya, 18-college Road, Nungambakkam, Chennai 600006 India

### Submitter
Sailaja Elchuri

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sailaja V Elchuri
Department of Nanotechnology, Vision Research Foundation, Sankara Nethralaya, 18-college Road, Nungambakkam, Chennai 600006 India


