### Accession
PXD002629

### Title
Human γδ T-cell, LC-MS/MS -  Zoledronic acid boosts γδ T-cell activity in children receiving αβ+ T and CD19+ cell-depleted grafts from an HLA-haplo-identical donor

### Description
A new method of graft manipulation based on physical removal of αβ+ T cells and CD19+ B cells, leaving mature NK cells and γδ T cells in the graft, has been recently developed for HLA-haploidentical HSCT. We demonstrated that γδ T cells collected from transplanted patients are endowed with capacity of killing leukemia cells after ex vivo treatment with zoledronic acid (ZOL). Thus, we hypothesized that infusion of ZOL in patients receiving this type of graft, may boost γδ T cell cytotoxic activity against acute leukemia blasts.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty-three patients with acute leukemiareceived αβ+T and CD19+ depleted grafts from a HLA-haplo-identical donorand most of them were treated with ZOL within 1 month after HSCT and then every 28 days for at least 2 treatments. γδ T cells before and after ZOL treatments were studied till at least 7 months after HSCT by high-resolution mass spectrometry, flow-cytometry, and degranulation assay. For the proteomics analysis, 3-4x1E5 γδ T cells were lysed and the extracted proteins subjected to proteolysis employing an in-StageTip method. Samples were analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in which selected peptides were fragmented by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Identification, quantification and data normalization were achieved by an intensity-based label-free approach using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
We demonstrated that &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells of patients given HLA-haploidentical HSCT after removal of &#x3b1;&#x3b2;<sup>+</sup> T cells and CD19<sup>+</sup> B cells are endowed with the capacity of killing leukemia cells after <i>ex vivo</i> treatment with zoledronic acid (ZOL). Thus, we tested the hypothesis that infusion of ZOL in patients receiving this type of graft may enhance &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T-cell cytotoxic activity against leukemia cells. ZOL was infused every 28 d in 43 patients; most were treated at least twice. &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells before and after ZOL treatments were studied in 33 of these 43 patients, till at least 7 mo after HSCT by high-resolution mass spectrometry, flow-cytometry, and degranulation assay. An induction of V&#x3b4;2-cell differentiation, paralleled by increased cytotoxicity of both V&#x3b4;1 and V&#x3b4;2 cells against primary leukemia blasts was associated with ZOL treatment. Cytotoxic activity was further increased in V&#x3b4;2 cells, but not in V&#x3b4;1 lymphocytes in those patients given more than one treatment. Proteomic analysis of &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells purified from patients showed upregulation of proteins involved in activation processes and immune response, paralleled by downregulation of proteins involved in proliferation. Moreover, a proteomic signature was identified for each ZOL treatment. Patients given three or more ZOL infusions had a better probability of survival in comparison to those given one or two treatments (86% vs. 54%, respectively, <i>p</i> = 0.008). Our data indicate that ZOL infusion in pediatric recipients of &#x3b1;&#x3b2; T- and B-cell-depleted HLA-haploidentical HSCT promotes &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T-cell differentiation and cytotoxicity and may influence the outcome of patients.

### Keywords
Human, Leukemia cells, Γδ t-cell, Zolendric acid (zol)

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Gaslini Children's Hospital


