### Accession
PXD032065

### Title
Constitutive nuclear accumulation of endogenous alpha-synuclein in mice causes motor impairment and cortical dysfunction, independent of protein aggregation.

### Description
A growing body of evidence suggests that nuclear alpha-synuclein (aSyn) plays a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD). However, this question has been difficult to address as controlling the localization of aSyn in experimental systems often requires protein overexpression, which affects its aggregation propensity. To overcome this, we engineered Snca-NLS mice which localize endogenous aSyn to the nucleus. We characterized these mice on a behavioral, histological, and biochemical level to determine whether the increase of nuclear aSyn is sufficient to elicit PD-like phenotypes. SncaNLS mice exhibit age-dependent motor deficits and altered gastrointestinal function. We found that these phenotypes were not linked to aSyn aggregation or phosphorylation. Through histological analyses, we observed motor cortex atrophy in the absence of midbrain dopaminergic neurodegeneration. We sampled cortical proteomes of Snca-NLS mice and controls to determine the molecular underpinnings of these pathologies. Interestingly, we found several dysregulated proteins involved in dopaminergic signalling, including Darpp32, Pde10a, and Gng7, which we further confirmed was decreased in cortical samples of the Snca-NLS mice compared to controls. These results suggest that chronic endogenous nuclear aSyn can elicit toxic phenotypes in mice, independent of its aggregation. This model raises key questions related to the mechanism of aSyn toxicity in PD and provides a new model to study an underappreciated aspect of PD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Whole mouse cortex was dissected from 9-month-old mouse brain and peptides were isolated using the EasyPepTM Mini MS Sample Prep Kit(Thermofisher cat# A40006) following manufacturer instructions. These samples were labelled with the TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermofisher cat# 90406) then combined into a single tube and fractionated into 12 samples using the PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermofisher cat# 84868). Fractions 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, and 12 were combined due to low protein concentration (combined to have consistent protein concentration with other fractions) and the 6 final fractions were submitted for LC-MS to the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute Proteomics Core Facility.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with UltiMate 3000 RLSC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Proteowizard MS-CONVERT was used to generate peak lists for preliminary qualitative analysis using MASCOT software version 2.7.0 (Matrix Science, UK). Protein identification and quantitative analysis was performed using MaxQuant (Tyanova, Nature Protocols 2016, 11:2301). The reference proteome for peptide spectrum matching was UniProt/Mus musculus(version 2020-10-06). The MaxQuant results were exported to Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software, USA) for further analysis and viewing.

### Publication Abstract
A growing body of evidence suggests that nuclear alpha-synuclein (&#x3b1;Syn) plays a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, this question has been difficult to address as controlling the localization of &#x3b1;Syn in experimental systems often requires protein overexpression, which affects its aggregation propensity. To overcome this, we engineered SncaNLS mice, which localize endogenous &#x3b1;Syn to the nucleus. We characterized these mice on a behavioral, histological and biochemical level to determine whether the increase of nuclear &#x3b1;Syn is sufficient to elicit PD-like phenotypes. SncaNLS mice exhibit age-dependent motor deficits and altered gastrointestinal function. We found that these phenotypes were not linked to &#x3b1;Syn aggregation or phosphorylation. Through histological analyses, we observed motor cortex atrophy in the absence of midbrain dopaminergic neurodegeneration. We sampled cortical proteomes of SncaNLS mice and controls to determine the molecular underpinnings of these pathologies. Interestingly, we found several dysregulated proteins involved in dopaminergic signaling, including Darpp32, Pde10a and Gng7, which we further confirmed was decreased in cortical samples of the SncaNLS mice compared with controls. These results suggest that chronic endogenous nuclear &#x3b1;Syn can elicit toxic phenotypes in mice, independent of its aggregation. This model raises key questions related to the mechanism of &#x3b1;Syn toxicity in PD and provides a new model to study an underappreciated aspect of PD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Mouse, Tmt10plex, Cortex

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Haley Geertsma

### Lab Head
Dr Maxime Rousseaux
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada


