### Accession
PXD012990

### Title
Identification of DNA-damage sensing factors in D.melanogaster

### Description
In order to identify protein involved in sensing DNA double strand breaks and recruiting the repair machinry, we performed in vitro assembly of chromatin on small circular and linear DNA templates, respectively. Proteins involved in chromatin assembly and sensing of free DNA ends were isolated and subjected to proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
D. melanogaster embryo extract (DREX) is a protein-rich extract that has been demonstrated to assemble chromatin features on externally added free DNA templates. Therefore, this is a valuable tool to study the processes involved in chroatin assembly. We further examined the system to sense DNA damage, comparing linearized and circular DNA templates. Following assembly for different timepoints, chromatinized templates were isolated by streptavidin-affinity purificatin and subjected to protein reduction and alkylation, tryptic digestion, and proteomic analysis by data-indepedent LC-MS/MS. Therefore, a peptide library was created from pooled peptide mixtures from different assembly reactions measured with data-depedent aquisition LC-MS/MS. Replicates of different assembly timepoints and DNA-templates were analyzed using an optimized SWATh-MS protcol and the same gradient applied for library generation.

### Data Protocol
Protein libraries were assembled by searching data-depedent acquisitions against a D. melanogaster fasta-database (Flybase, vs. 5.16) using protein pilot vs. 5.0 (SCIEX) for tryptic digested proteins allowing cysteine carbamidomethylation, and biological modifcations. The obtained protein groups file was loaded into Peak View software using the SWATH quantitation menu. Shared peptides were excluded from analysis and all SWATH samples were RT correted using a set of selected peptides from abundant proteins that cover the whole RT range. SWATH features were mapped for each protein selecting a maximum of 7 peptides with 5 transitions allowing a maximum mass deviation of 25 ppm, 2 min RT deviation and and FDR rate of 5%. Protein abundances were extraced from the SWATh-MS data using the Markerview software (SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Preblastoderm Drosophila embryo development is characterized by fast cycles of nuclear divisions. Extracts from these embryos can be used to reconstitute complex chromatin with high efficiency. We now discovered that this chromatin assembly system contains activities that recognize unprotected DNA ends and signal DNA damage through phosphorylation. DNA ends are initially bound by Ku and MRN complexes. Within minutes, the phosphorylation of H2A.V (homologous to &#x3b3;H2A.X) initiates from DNA breaks and spreads over tens of thousands DNA base pairs. The &#x3b3;H2A.V phosphorylation remains tightly associated with the damaged DNA and does not spread to undamaged DNA in the same reaction. This first observation of long-range &#x3b3;H2A.X spreading along damaged chromatin in an in vitro system provides a unique opportunity for mechanistic dissection. Upon further incubation, DNA ends are rendered single-stranded and bound by the RPA complex. Phosphoproteome analyses reveal damage-dependent phosphorylation of numerous DNA-end-associated proteins including Ku70, RPA2, CHRAC16, the exonuclease Rrp1 and the telomer capping complex. Phosphorylation of spindle assembly checkpoint components and of microtubule-associated proteins required for centrosome integrity suggests this cell-free system recapitulates processes involved in the regulated elimination of fatally damaged syncytial nuclei.

### Keywords
Chromatin assembly, Repair factors, Dna double strand break

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik (Protein Analysis Unit) Großhadernerstr. 9 / Raum NC01.043 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: 089 2180 75420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik (Protein Analysis Unit) Großhadernerstr. 9 / Raum NC01.043 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: 089 2180 75420


