### Accession
PXD021182

### Title
dentification of Cross-linking partners of BpA modified p37 and p97  by photo cross-linking MS

### Description
we wanted to see where and how the protein p37 interacts with its partner proteins p97, PPI,Sds22 and I3. To this end p37 derivatives with genetically encoded crosslinking amino acid (p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine) were generated. After incubation with the partner proteins,  photocross-linking and tryptic digest the resulting cross-linked peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC/MS/MS A volume corresponding to 30 µg of protein from each cross-linking sample was Methanol/Chloroform precipitated (Wessel & Flügge, 1984). The protein pellet was rehydrated in 8M Urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and the proteins subjected to in-solution digestion (ISD). Briefly, Proteins were reduced with DTT (5 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Protein reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 30 min, room temperature) and quenching of excess IAM with DTT (final concentration DTT 30 mM). Samples were digested with LysC (1 µg) for 3h at 37°C. After adjusting the urea concentration to 0.8M urea with 50 mM ABC the samples were digested for 16h with trypsin (1 µg) at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5%. The tryptic digests were then desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, peptides were immobilized and washed on a 2 disc StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid solution (10 μL) and directly used for LC-MS/MS experiments (see below for details).  LC-MS/MS settings MS Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS instrument (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo). The UPLC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 46 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation PRSO-V2) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was set to 50 °C during sample loading and data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 240 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 9% B; gradient 9% to 60% B for 200 min; gradient 60% to 100% B for 20 min and 100% B for 20 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was controlled by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Application (version 3.3.2782.28) and operated using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (OTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 370-1400 and at a resolution of 120000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the OTMS in a variable scan range (“auto”) and at resolution 30000.  The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 2.3 kV. Source fragmentation was switched on (energy “10V”). Peptides were analyzed using a “Top Speed” regime (repeating cycle of full precursor ion scan (AGC target “standard” or 50 ms) followed by dependent MS2 scans for 5 seconds (minimum intensity threshold 5×104)). The precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window 1.4 m/z). After Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision mode set to “stepped” and normalized collision energy set to “23, 28, 35%”) the product ions were measured in the OTMS (AGC target “50000” or 150 ms, mass range “normal”). During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Only charge states between 3-8 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using StavroX.  Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and submitted to StavroX (v3.6.6.) for further analysis. For each search a dedicated database containing only the sequences of the investigated proteins was used. BpA modified amino acids were indicated by “x”. In StavroX we used the following settings: Amino acids: the default amino acid table complemented by the entry for BpA (“x”; composition C16H13NO2; Mass 251.0946). Protease sites: C-terminal at Lys and Arg (both blocked as XL site) with max. 3 missed cleavages. Modifications: static modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of M. Crosslinker: table complemented with entry for BPA (max. Distance 30 Å; Site1: x; Site 2: all natural amino acids and N/Ctermini; mass: 0.0). Mass Composition: precursor precision 5 ppm, Fragment ion precision 5 ppm, lower mass limit, 200 Da, upper mass limit 6000 Da, signal-to-noise ratio: 2, Ion types b,y with deisotoping was turned on. Score & FDR: precursor was not activated; FDR cutoff: 5%, score cutoff: 0. Decoy database was generated using shuffled sequences with kept protease sites.

### Publication Abstract
The AAA-ATPase VCP/p97 cooperates with the SEP-domain adapters p37, UBXN2A and p47 in stripping inhibitor-3 (I3) from protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) for activation. In contrast to p97-mediated degradative processes, PP1 complex disassembly is ubiquitin-independent. It is therefore unclear how selective targeting is achieved. Using biochemical reconstitution and crosslink mass spectrometry, we show here that SEP-domain adapters use a multivalent substrate recognition strategy. An N-terminal sequence element predicted to form a helix, together with the SEP-domain, binds and engages the direct target I3 in the central pore of p97 for unfolding, while its partner PP1 is held by a linker between SHP box and UBX domain locked onto the peripheral N-domain of p97. Although the I3-binding element is functional in p47, p47 in vitro requires a transplant of the PP1-binding linker from p37 for activity stressing that both sites are essential to control specificity. Of note, unfolding is then governed by an inhibitory segment in the N-terminal region of p47, suggesting a regulatory function. Together, this study reveals how p97 adapters engage a protein complex for ubiquitin-independent disassembly while ensuring selectivity for one subunit.

### Keywords
Photo cross-linking, Sds22, P37, Ppi, P97

### Affiliations
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany
University Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


