### Accession
PXD017602

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Mycobacterium smegmatis subcellular fractions

### Description
Proteomics analysis of the cell filtrate (CF), mycomembrane-cell wall complex (CW), plasma membrane (PM) and cytoplasmic (CP) fractions from Mycobacterium smegmatis.

### Sample Protocol
Sub-cellular fractions were analysed as previously described (Chiaradia, 2017, Sci Rep. 9;7(1):12807), with slight modifications. , Briefly   25 μg of each protein sample was reduced by incubation with dithiothreitol (DTT) (25 mM) at 95°C, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (100 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then loaded and concentrated on an SDS-PAGE. For this purpose, the electrophoresis was stopped as soon as the proteins left the stacking gel to enter the resolving gel as one single band. The proteins, revealed with Instant Blue (Expedeon) for 20 minutes, were found in one blue band of around 5 mm width. The band of each fraction was cut and washed before in-gel digestion of the proteins overnight at 37°C with a solution of modified trypsin (protein:trypsin w:w ratio of 1:50). The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel using two successive incubations in 10 % formic acid (FA)/acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v) for 15 min at 37°C. The two collected fractions were pooled, dried and resuspended with 25 μL of 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed in quadruplicate injections using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRS system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. 5 μL of each sample were loaded onto a C18-precolumn (300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm) at 20 μL/min in 2 % ACN, 0.05 % TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 nanocolumn (75 μm inner diameter x 15 cm, packed in-house) equilibrated in 95 % solvent A (5 % ACN, 0.2 % FA) and 5 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.2 % FA). Peptides were eluted by using a 5-25 % gradient of solvent B for 75 min, then a 25-50 % of solvent B for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3 s) with the XCalibur software. Survey scans MS were acquired in the Orbitrap, on the 400-2,000 m/z (mass to charge ratio) range, with the resolution set to a value of 120,000 at m/z 400. Most intense multiply charged ions (2+ to 7+) per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation (35% HCD Collision Energy), and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution set to a value of 30,000 at m/z 400. Dynamic exclusion was used within 60s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
The Mascot (Mascot server v2.6.0; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the UniProt M. smegmatis strain ATCC 700084 / mc² 155 database (release June 2017, 12,683 sequences). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set to 8 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The following protein modifications were setup: fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of protein N-terminus. The Proline software v2.0 was used for the validation and the label-free quantification of identified proteins in each sample (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Mascot identification results were imported into Proline. Search results were validated with a peptide rank=1 and at 1 % FDR both at PSM level (on Adjusted e-Value criterion) and protein sets level (on Modified Mudpit score criterion). The identification summaries (i.e., the validated Mascot search results) of all the MS analyses corresponding to one biological replicate were merged and a protein inference list was created. Label-free quantification was performed for all protein identified: peptides were quantified by extraction of MS signals in the corresponding raw files, and post-processing steps can be applied to filter, normalize, and aggregate peptide quantitative data into protein abundance values.   The subsequent data analysis and visualization were performed using the R language v3.5.2 (R Development Core Team, 2012; http://www.R-project.org/) on RStudio v1.1.463. We retreaved the “abundance” field from Proline protein sets table. First, the quantitative values associated with no psm were removed, as well as the proteins with 1 or less unique peptide, or the proteins with no quantification values. The data were log2-transformed and normalized to the median of each run. Mean of technical (run) replicates were calculated before replacing missing values with the mean of 50 draws from a normal distribution around the 1 % quantile per biological replicate and a standard deviation estimated based on the proteins in the 10 % quantile of the entire data set. We performed an ANOVA (unpaired) followed by Tukey correction and retrieved the pvalue for each pairwise comparison. Pvalues were then corrected for multiple testing using Storey.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Cytoplasmic fraction, Cell filtrate, Plasma membrane, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Subcellular fractions, Mycomembrane-cell wall complex

### Affiliations
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04


