### Accession
PXD015605

### Title
Systems-wide understanding of the osmotic response and metabolic rearrangement in Bacillus megaterium

### Description
For many years now, Bacillus megaterium has served as a microbial industrial strain for high-level production of recombinant proteins in the g/L-scale. Nevertheless, the impact of process-related stress has only been poorly characterized so far. Taking advantage of the recent technical developments for quantifying the cell at various molecular levels, we interrogated the osmotic stress response of B. megaterium using transcriptome, proteome, metabolome and fluxome analyses. Under osmotic upshift conditions, several stress response enzymes, iron scavenging, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) fighting proteins were upregulated. The downregulation of genes of the upper part of glycolysis resulted in the activation of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), generating an oversupply of NADPH. The (NADH/NAD+) ratio indicating the redox state of the cell was also altered, which was partially compensated by the higher production of lactate accompanied by the reduction of acetate secretion. NADH was produced mainly within the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle elucidated from the higher mRNA and protein levels of enzymes involved within this pathway. This adaptation mainly focused on the massive de novo synthesis of the compatible solute proline recruiting an osmo-dependent pathway to fulfil this requirement. 13C flux analyses confirmed these findings. Giving the high flux towards acetyl-CoA and large pool of NADPH, B. megaterium cells redirected the produced acetyl-CoA to the polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) biosynthetic pathway under non-limiting nutrient condition, amassing around 30% of the CDW as PHB. This direct relation between osmotic stress and intracellular PHB content has been evidenced for the first time, thus opening new avenues for synthesizing this valuable biopolymer using varying salt concentrations under non-limiting nutrient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
B. megaterium was grown in a modified M9 minimal medium derived from Harwood and Cutting (Harwood and Cutting, 1990).For proteome analysis, cells were collected in the mid-exponential phase and washed with TE-Buffer (10 mM TRIS, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8). Intracellular proteins were then extracted by mechanical cell disruption (3 x 1 min, 6.5 m·s-1, 4 °C, FastPrep®-24, MP Biomedical, Santa Ana, CA, USA) using soda-lime glass beads (20 % v/v, 0.038-0.045 mm, Worf Glaskugeln GmbH, Mainz, Germany) and protein concentration was determined (Roti® Nanoquant, Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany). Prior to measurement by LC-IMSE, protein extracts were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, États-Unis) as described previously (Muntel et al., 2012) and peptide solution was then desalted by stage tip purification using a standard protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2007). For absolute quantification, the peptide mix was spiked with tryptic yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at a final concentration of 50 fmol µL-1. Peptide separation, identification and quantification were completed using a NanoACQUITY™ UPLC™-system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Synapt-G2 mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 onto an analytical column (nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ column, BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm / 200 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and separation of peptides for IMSE was achieved using a 90 min gradient from 5 % to 26 % buffer B. All MSE analyses were performed as previously described (Muntel et al., 2014), except that the collision energy was alternated between 4 eV in the precursor ion trace and a ramp of 25-45 eV for fragment ion trace. In addition, wave velocity was ramped from 1,000 to 400 m s-1 and wave height was set to 40 V.

### Data Protocol
Collected LC-IMSE data were imported in the ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.3-Software (PLGS, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and further processed with the Apex3D-Algorithmus setting parameters as follows: chromatographic peak width and MS TOF resolution were set to automatic, lock mass charge 2 set to 785.8426 Da / e with a lock mass window of 0.25 Da, low and elevated energy threshold were set at 200.0 and 20.0 counts, respectively, and intensity limit at 750 counts. Peptide sequence identification was performed with the „ion accounting“ algorithm using a randomized Uniprot B. megaterium DSM319 database (Version august 2011) comprising all employed laboratory contaminants and the sequence of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1 – 10,286 entries). Next criteria were set for positive protein identification: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein, 2 missed cleavage allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N, Q, (+0.9840), oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidone N-TERM (-27.9949). The protein false discovery rate was set to 5 %. Only 2 peptide identifications were considered for final analysis. Subsequently, MS data were corrected for detector saturation effects as described earlier (Zuhlke et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
For many years now, <i>Bacillus megaterium</i> serves as a microbial workhorse for the high-level production of recombinant proteins in the g/L-scale. However, efficient and stable production processes require the knowledge of the molecular adaptation strategies of the host organism to establish optimal environmental conditions. Here, we interrogated the osmotic stress response of <i>B. megaterium</i> using transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, and fluxome analyses. An initial transient adaptation consisted of potassium import and glutamate counterion synthesis. The massive synthesis of the compatible solute proline constituted the second longterm adaptation process. Several stress response enzymes involved in iron scavenging and reactive oxygen species (ROS) fighting proteins showed higher levels under prolonged osmotic stress induced by 1.8 M NaCl. At the same time, the downregulation of the expression of genes of the upper part of glycolysis resulted in the activation of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), generating an oversupply of NADPH. The increased production of lactate accompanied by the reduction of acetate secretion partially compensate for the unbalanced (NADH/NAD<sup>+</sup>) ratio. Besides, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) mainly supplies the produced NADH, as indicated by the higher mRNA and protein levels of involved enzymes, and further confirmed by <sup>13</sup>C flux analyses. As a consequence of the metabolic flux toward acetyl-CoA and the generation of an excess of NADPH, <i>B. megaterium</i> redirected the produced acetyl-CoA toward the polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) biosynthetic pathway accumulating around 30% of the cell dry weight (CDW) as PHB. This direct relation between osmotic stress and intracellular PHB content has been evidenced for the first time, thus opening new avenues for synthesizing this valuable biopolymer using varying salt concentrations under non-limiting nutrient conditions.

### Keywords
Polyhydroxybutyrate, Flux analysis, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Proline, Bacillus megaterium, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Greifswald, Germany


