### Accession
PXD040391

### Title
Targeted AURKA degradation: Towards new therapeutic agents for neuroblastoma

### Description
Aurora kinase A (AURKA) is a well-established target in neuroblastoma (NB) due to both its catalytic functions during mitosis and its kinase-independent functions, including stabilization of the key oncoprotein MYCN. We present a structure-activity relationship (SAR) study of MK-5108-derived PROTACs against AURKA by exploring different linker lengths and exit vectors on the thalidomide moiety. PROTAC SK2188 induces the most potent AURKA degradation (DC50,24h 3.9 nM, Dmax,24h 89%) and shows an excellent binding and degradation selectivity profile. Treatment of NGP neuroblastoma cells with SK2188 induced concomitant MYCN degradation, high replication stress/DNA damage levels and apoptosis. Moreover, SK2188 significantly outperforms the parent inhibitor MK-5108 in a cell proliferation screen and patient-derived organoids. Furthermore, altering the attachment point of the PEG linker to the 5-position of thalidomide allowed us to identify a potent AURKA degrader with a linker as short as 2 PEG units. With this, our SAR-study provides interesting lead structures for further optimization and validation of AURKA degradation as a potential therapeutic strategy in neuroblastoma

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were homogenized in 200 μl lysis buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. Next, the resulting lysate was transferred to a 96-well PIXUL plate in 100 μl aliquots and sonicated with a PIXUL Multisample sonicator (Active Motif) for 10 min with default settings (Pulse 50 cycles, PRF 1 kHz, Burst Rate 20 Hz). After centrifugation of the samples for 15 min at maximum speed at room temperature (RT) to remove insoluble components, the protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific) and from each sample 100 μg of protein was isolated to continue the protocol. Proteins were reduced by addition of 15 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 30 min at 55 °C and then alkylated by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min at RT in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently samples were diluted 7-fold with binding buffer containing 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55. The samples were loaded on a 96-well S-Trap™ plate (Protifi) and a Resolvex® A200 positive pressure workstation (Tecan Group Ltd) was used for semi-automatic processing. After protein binding, the S-trap™ plate was washed three times with 200 μl binding buffer. A new deepwell plate was placed below the 96-well S-Trap™ plate and trypsin (1/100, w/w) was added for digestion overnight at 37 °C. Also using the Resolvex® A200 workstation, peptides were eluted in three times, first with 80 μl 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 μl 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and finally with 80 μl 0.2% FA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (50/50, v/v). Eluted peptides were dried completely by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were redissolved in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) and desalted on a reversed phase (RP) C18 OMIX tip (Agilent). The tip was first washed 3 times with 100 μl pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 100 μl of wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water) before the sample was loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 100 μl of wash buffer and peptides were eluted twice with 100 μl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). The combined elutions were transferred to HPLC inserts and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 μl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) of which 5 μl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 2 min in loading solvent A on a 5 mm trapping column (Thermo scientific, 300 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads). The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Aurora Ultimate, 1.7 μm C18, 75 μm inner diameter (Ionopticks) kept at a constant temperature of 45 °C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 100 min, 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 135 min, 70% MS solvent B in 145 min followed by a 10-min wash at 70% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 (minimum AGC of 1,000) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s.

### Publication Abstract
Aurora kinase A (AURKA) is a well-established target in neuroblastoma (NB) due to both its catalytic functions during mitosis and its kinase-independent functions, including stabilization of the key oncoprotein MYCN. We present a structure-activity relationship (SAR) study of MK-5108-derived PROTACs against AURKA by exploring different linker lengths and exit vectors on the thalidomide moiety. PROTAC SK2188 induces the most potent AURKA degradation (DC<sub>50,24h</sub> 3.9&#xa0;nM, D<sub>max,24h</sub> 89%) and shows an excellent binding and degradation selectivity profile. Treatment of NGP neuroblastoma cells with SK2188 induced concomitant MYCN degradation, high replication stress/DNA damage levels and apoptosis. Moreover, SK2188 significantly outperforms the parent inhibitor MK-5108 in a cell proliferation screen and patient-derived organoids. Furthermore, altering the attachment point of the PEG linker to the 5-position of thalidomide allowed us to identify a potent AURKA degrader with a linker as short as 2 PEG units. With this, our SAR-study provides interesting lead structures for further optimization and validation of AURKA degradation as a potential therapeutic strategy in neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
Aurka; mycn; neuroblastoma; protac; targeted protein degradation

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium; Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Teresa Mendes Maia

### Lab Head
Dr Kaat Durinck
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium; Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium


