### Accession
PXD037432

### Title
Proximity labelling with TurboID shows that client proteins of PML NBs differ in three cell contexts

### Description
PML nuclear body (PML NB) recruits different client proteins under different cell context. We used TurboID proximity labeling (PL) method followed by MS to determine the composition of PML NBs in mESCs, differentiated cells, and NaAsO2-treated mESCs.

### Sample Protocol
We constructed a TurboID-PML mES cell line with stable expression of GFP-PML-TurboID-FLAG fusion protein. Proximity-dependent biotinylation was activated by incubating cells in medium with exogenous 200 μM biotin, while equal volume of DMSO was added in parallel as negative control. Proteins within PML NBs would be properly biotinylated and captured by streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo-fisher scientific, 88816). Enriched protein was eluted from beads by boiling each sample in 30 μL of 2× protein loading buffer supplemented with 2 mM biotin and 20 mM DTT at 95 °C for 10 minutes. Run samples on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel for protein extraction and trypsin digestion. Subsequent LC-MS/MS sequencing was finished on QE HF-X or LUMOS-FAIMS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data analysis was performed on Proteome Discoverer (PD2.3) software, then matched against swissprot mouse_reviewed_20210314 database. Protein-protein interaction network analysis was performed on STRING web server (https://cn.string-db.org/, version 11.5), then exported into Cytoscape software (version 3.9.1). Proteins located in nucleus were selected by compartment filters. Node size was continuously mapped to Log2 (TurboID/DMSO). Width of the edges were continuously mapped to the String score. Gene ontology analysis was performed using DAVID 6.8 web server (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp).

### Publication Abstract
TRIM33 is a chromatin reader required for mammalian mesendoderm differentiation after activation of Nodal signaling, while its role in mESCs is still elusive. Here, we report that TRIM33 co-localizes with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) specifically in mESCs, to mediate Nodal signaling-directed transcription of Lefty1/2. We show that TRIM33 puncta formation in mESCs depends on PML and on specific assembly of PML-NBs. Moreover, TRIM33 and PML co-regulate Lefty1/2 expression in mESCs, with both PML protein and formation of mESCs-specific PML-NBs being required for TRIM33 recruitment to these loci, and PML-NBs directly associating with the Lefty1/2 loci. Finally, a TurboID proximity-labeling experiment confirmed that TRIM33 is highly enriched only in mESCs-specific PML-NBs. Thus, our study supports a model in which TRIM33 condensates regulate Nodal signaling-directed transcription in mESCs and shows that PML-NBs can recruit distinct sets of client proteins in a cell-context-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Naaso2, Differentiation, Mesc, Pml, Turboid

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Centre for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

### Submitter
Yutong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Lin
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Centre for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China


