### Accession
PXD031386

### Title
Extinct species identification from late Middle Pleistocene and earlier Upper Pleistocene bone fragments and tools not recognizable from their osteomorphological study by an enhanced proteomics protocol

### Description
Ancient preserved molecules offer the opportunity of gaining a deeper knowledge on their biological past. However, the development of a proteomic workflow remains a challenge. The analysis of fossils must involve a low quantity of material to avoid damaging the samples. In this study an  enhanced proteomic protocol was applied to 5-milligram samples of about 130,000-year-old mammalian bones ranging from the end of the Middle Pleistocene up to the earlier Upper Pleistocene, excavated from Scladina Cave (Sclayn, Belgium). Using sequence homology with modern sequences, a biological classification was successfully achieved and the associated taxonomic ranks to each bone were identified consistently with the information gained from osteomorphological studies and palaeoenvironmental and palaeodietary data. Amino acid substitutions on collagens were identified, thus providing new information on extinct species sequences and helping in taxonomy-based clustering. Considering samples with no osteomorphological information, such as two bone retouchers, proteomics successfully identified the families providing paleontologists new information on these objects. Combining osteomorphology studies and amino acid variations identified by proteomics, one of the retouchers was potentially identified as belonging to the Ursus spelaeus species.

### Sample Protocol
Ten bones excavated in Scladina Cave were selected from different stratigraphic Units (Units 4B, 5, 6A, 6B, 6C, 4B). Several dating methods were used to estimate the age of this part of the stratigraphic sequence, which is older than 130,000 years old. The species of 8 bones out of 10 were identified through their anatomy. The 2 remaining ones, having either unknown or hypothetical origins, are of particular interest, since they are directly associated with bone retouchers by refitting. All solutions were prepared using ultrapure water purified with a MilliQ™ Academic system. Bone fragments were mechanically ground into fine powder with a pestle in an agate mortar. Five milligrams of bone powder were demineralized with 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water. The demineralization solution was evaporated for proteomics analysis. The bone powder was delipided. eFASP digestion was performed on both the bone powder and the demineralized fraction. The peptides were purified through extraction with ethyl acetate. The peptides obtained after digestion of each fraction were diluted at a concentration of 1 µg/µL before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer hyphenated to a U3000 RSLC HPLC System.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were processed with Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against NCBI database (NCBiProt_20210815) restricted to Mammalian (12,254,278 sequences). The second bioinformatics analysis was performed with PEAKS X (Bioinformatics software, Waterloo, Canada) against a home-made database containing 1,765 collagen sequences extracted from NCBi database (All_Collagen, downloaded 08-2019) restricted to Mammalian and from publications. Peptides with amino acids substitutions was filtered with minimal intensity set as 1E+7. Peptides identified on collagen I alpha 1 and I alpha 2 were aligned against the NCBI non redundant protein sequence (all non-redundant GenBank CDS translations+PDB+SwissProt+PIR+PRF excluding environmental samples from WGS projects containing 308,570,119 sequences) to find similarity with BLASTp (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Taxonomy, Mammalian bones, Amino acids substitution, Scladina cave, Palaeoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Peptides modifications, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
MSAP, UAR 3290, CNRS 59655 villeneuve d'Ascq, France

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Fabrice Bray
MSAP, UAR 3290, CNRS 59655 villeneuve d'Ascq, France


