### Accession
PXD026959

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of cecal contents from healthy mice versus mice with DSS-induced colitis

### Description
The gut microbiota influences host epigenetics by fermenting dietary fiber into butyrate.  Although butyrate could promote histone acetylation by inhibiting histone deacetylases, it may also undergo oxidation to acetyl-CoA, a necessary cofactor for histone acetyltransferases.  Here, we find that epithelial cells from germ-free mice harbor a loss of histone H4 acetylation across the genome except at promoter regions.  Using stable isotope tracing in vivo with 13C-labeled fiber, we demonstrate that the microbiota supplies carbon for histone acetylation.  Subsequent metabolomic profiling revealed hundreds of labeled molecules and supported a microbial contribution to host fatty acid metabolism, which declined in response to colitis and correlated with reduced expression of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation.  These results illuminate the flow of carbon from the diet to the host via the microbiota, disruptions to which may affect energy homeostasis in the distal gut and contribute to the development of colitis.

### Sample Protocol
Mice (C57BL/6, female, 8-10 wks, Jackson Labs, n = 6 per group) were acclimated to the AIN76a diet over 3 days and then had colitis induced with 2% dextran sodium sulfate (DSS, MP Bio, 36-50 kDa) in the drinking water, marking day 0.  Healthy control mice were maintained on normal drinking water (H2O).  On days 6 and 7, mice received an oral gavage of 100 mg of U-13C-labeled (13C) or unlabeled (un) inulin (IsoLife) dissolved in 200 µl PBS.  On day 8, mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation after a 4 hour fast. Livers, colons, ceca, and cecal contents were harvested and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Small molecules were first extracted from the lyophilized cecal contents by homogenization in roughly 500 µl 80% methanol per 10 mg of tissue with bead beating using the Precellys system (Bertin Technologies).  To precipitate proteins, 400 µl of methanol was added to a 100 µl aliquot of extract followed by centrifugation for 10 mins at top speed and 4°C in a microfuge.  The supernatant containing small molecules was further processed for metabolomics.  Proteins were extracted from the pellet with resolubilization buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M NaCl, and 50 mM Tris pH 8 supplemented with protease inhibitors).  Insoluble debris was pelleted by centrifugation.  Roughly 20 µg of soluble protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 mins at room temperature and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 mins at room temperature in the dark.  After adding four volumes of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C and then desalted with C18 stage tips for mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were resolved by C18 chromatography with an online EasyLC1000 nano-LC system.  The gradient consisted of 2 to 30% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 52 mins, 30 to 60% solvent B over 24 mins, and 60 to 90% solvent B over 2 mins at a flow rate of 300 nl/min before a washing and re-equilibration phase.  Water with 0.1% formic acid served as solvent A.  The mass spectrometer (Thermo QE) was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.  A full scan in positive profile mode was acquired over the range of 300-1400 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum IT of 100 ms.  The top 15 precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation at NCE 30 and MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum IT of 50 ms, and an isolation width of 2.0 m/z in centroid mode.  Only ions with charge states between +2 and +6 were considered.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 seconds.  The minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed with ProteomeDiscoverer and searched against a custom sequence database, constructed by concatenating the mouse proteome with the proteomes of bacteria from the most abundant OTUs based BLAST results of 16S sequencing data.  For database searches, trypsin was set as the protease with up to 2 missed cleavages.  The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for fragments.  Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da to Cys) was specified as a fixed modification while oxidation (+15.995 Da to Met), carbamylation (+43.006 Da to Lys and peptide N-termini), acetylation (+42.011 Da to protein N-termini), methionine loss (-131.040 Da to protein N-termini), and methionine loss with acetylation (-89.030 Da to protein N-termini) were set as variable modifications.  The Percolator node was used to control for false-positive PSMs.  Data from the Protein and Peptide tables from PD, allowing usage of the “Match between runs” feature, were further analyzed in R with the MSStats package.  Proteins were required to be identified as the Master Protein with high FDR confidence and at least 2 unique peptides.  Quantitative comparisons were made between the DSS and healthy control groups separately for the 13C-inulin versus unlabeled inulin conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Dss, Inulin, Colitis, Cecal contents

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania.  Moving shortly to Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics at Washington University in St. Louis.

### Submitter
Peder Lund

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania.  Moving shortly to Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics at Washington University in St. Louis.


