### Accession
PXD008837

### Title
Differential regulation of tobacco host factors upon TMV infection

### Description
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) became one of the model virus for fundamental biological research and understanding of the host-pathogen interaction. It utilizes host machinery smartly to complete the life cycle, though many parts of life cycle remained a mystery, such as host factors involved in virus replication processes. We utilized the 8-Plex iTRAQ study to understand host-pathogen interaction between TMV and host tobacco.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein samples (100 ug) from mock and TMV infected tobacco plant used for trypsin digestion. Total protein samples were first reduced with tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with methyl methane-thiosulfonate (MMTS), followed by trypsin digestion at 37 C for 16 hours. Digested peptides were vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. iTRAQ reagent 8-Plex kit (ABI-SCIEX) was used to carry out labeling of total protein samples according to manufacturer’s protocol. All eight iTRAQ reagent labeled samples were pulled together and used strong-cation exchange column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (SCIEX) to remove excess iTRAQ reagents and organic solvents.  For a desalting purpose, C18 Sep-Pak (Pierce) cartridge used and lyophilized. Lyophilized samples were prepared for 2D-LC by dissolving in 1 ml 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH10.iTRAQ labeled peptides separated by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) equipped with C18 column. 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10 were used as mobile phase A and mobile phase B was 80% ACN. The gradient was used as follows; mobile phase B 0-10% in 5 mins, 10-40% in 60 mins, 40-70% in 15 mins, 70-100% in 1 min, held at 100% for 5 mins and 100-0% in 1 min and continued for 10 mins at 0%. There were 82 fractions were collected at 1 mins of the interval with the flow rate 0.5 mL/min. Eluted fractions were pools in 10 fractions and lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile with 98% water. The Tendon MS analysis of 10 fractions was performed on 5600 TripleTOF system (SCIEX), whereas precursor ion selection parameters were mass range 400-1800 m/z and accumulation times 250 ms/second.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot Software 4.2 (AB SCIEX) were used for identification of proteins and relative iTRAQ quantification. ProteinPilot utilizes Paragon™ Algorithm for peptide identification and Pro Group™ for protein assignment. The user defined search parameters in ProteinPilot were used for the MS/MS spectra: (a) Sample type: iTRAQ 8-Plex; (b) Alkylation: MMTS; (c) Digestion: Trypsin; (d) Instrument, TripleTOF5600 (e) Special Factors: None

### Publication Abstract
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) is a positive single-stranded RNA virus. Its 5' end ORF codes for the replicase proteins, namely 126&#x202f;kDa and 183&#x202f;kDa, respectively. These proteins interact with many host proteins to form a virus replication complex (VRC). This study aims to dissect the proteome profile of TMV-infected Nicotiana tabacum in host cellular and molecular pathways. We used the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technique to analyse the differential global proteomic profile of TMV infected and mock infected plants. Out of 1897 total proteins, we identified 407 differentially abundant proteins and grouped them into three functional categories, namely metabolism, cellular processes and signalling processing. Our results showed that photosynthesis, carbon metabolism, plant defence, protein synthesis, and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum were significantly altered. Carbon metabolism and photosynthesis were present in very low abundance, whereas accumulation of reactive oxygen species and misfolded proteins lead to the accumulation of thioredoxin H-type 1. In conclusion, we identified several key host proteins that are involved in TMV infection/replication in N. tabacum plants. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY: TMV is one of the most widely studied plant virus. It is used as a tool to study host-virus interaction. There are several host proteins reported that facilitate VRC formation and replication of TMV. However, there is limited knowledge in the expression regulation of these host proteins upon TMV infection. This study is the first report that investigates the response of host protein expression involved in TMV infection through a quantitative proteomics technique iTRAQ, combined with LC-MS/MS analysis. We used TMV-infected Nicotiana tabacum plants to investigate the effects of TMV infection on host proteins. Our results revealed differential abundance of proteins involving various pathways in protein translation, protein processing, photosynthesis and plant defence. There was a high abundance of thioredoxin H-type 1, a protein that counters oxidative stress and accelerated regulation of fatty acid synthesis to provide additional lipid molecules for VRC formation. There was a significant reduction in abundance of psaA and psbB proteins in the photosynthetic pathways. Our results identified key candidate host proteins involved in TMV-infected N. tabacum for functional studies in future.

### Keywords
Tobacco, Tmv, Itraq

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Prem Prakash Das

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Wong Sek Man
Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore


