### Accession
PXD014933

### Title
ZIKV and DENV-2 sfRNA RNA Pull down Hela extract LC-MSMS

### Description
Insect-borne flaviviruses produce a 300-500 base long noncoding RNA, termed sfRNA, by stalling the cellular 5’-3’ exoribonuclease XRN1 via structures located in their 3’ untranslated regions.  In this study we demonstrate that the production of sfRNAs by Zika virus results in the repression of XRN1 similar to what we have previously shown for other flaviviruses.  Using protein-RNA reconstitution and a stringent RNA pulldown assay, we demonstrate that the sfRNA from both dengue type 2 and Zika viruses interact with a common set of 21 RNA binding proteins that influence post-transcriptional processes in the cell, including splicing, RNA stability and translation.  We demonstrate that four of these interacting proteins - DDX6 and EDC3 (RNA decay factors), PHAX1 (a regulator of the biogenesis of the splicing machinery) and APOBEC3C (a nucleic acid editing deaminase) are inherently antiviral restriction factors for Zika virus infection.  Furthermore, we demonstrate that cellular mRNA decay regulation as well as cellular RNA splicing are compromised during Zika virus infection.  Collectively, these data demonstrate the large extent in which Zika virus sfRNAs interact with cellular RNA binding proteins as well as the potential for widespread dysregulation of post-transcriptional control which likely limits the effective response of the cell to viral infection. 

### Sample Protocol
pGEM4, or derivatives harboring ZIKV 3’UTR, DENV-2 3’ UTR sequences downstream of a SP6 promoter sequence were linearized via restriction enzyme digestion and in vitro transcription reactions were performed in the presence of Biotin-14-CTP (Thermo Fisher) to generate biotinylated RNAs capable of downstream isolation via streptavidin magnetic beads. Newly transcribed RNAs were extracted using phenol/chloroform/iso-amyl-alcohol (24:25:1), ethanol precipitated using 10M ammonium acetate, and resuspended in ddH2O. Biotinylated RNAs were quantified using a Nanodrop 2000c (Thermo Fisher).  1g of each biotinylated RNA was incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature with 100uL of uMacs streptavidin magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotech).  uMacs magnetic bead columns were equilibrated and rinsed 2X with Binding Buffer (10mM HEPES pH 7.0, 50mM KCL, 10% glycerol, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, 0.5% Triton X-100, and Ribolock RNase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher). Pre-cleared HeLa cell cytoplasmic extract (prepared as described in 72,73) supplemented with 5l protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each reaction tube and incubated at 4oC with rotation for 60 minutes.  Columns were washed 4X with 1mL Wash buffer (Binding buffer supplemented with 250 mM KCl). RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) were eluted from the RNAs via the addition of Binding buffer supplemented with 1M NaCl.  Equal volumes of eluted RBPs were electrophoresed into a 10% SDS PAGE.  Proteins were Coomassie stained, excised from the gel, and submitted to Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility at Colorado State University for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS protein identification. Scaffold 4 software was used to analyze the mass spectrometry data and proteins were identified based on a protein threshold of 95% with the minimum number of peptides equaling 2 (95% peptide threshold) and a 0.0% decoy false discovery rate.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by ProteoWizard MsConvert (version 3.0). Spectra from all samples were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.01) against the Uniprot_Human_rev_071916 database (unknown version, 185161 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine and carboxymethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Search results from all samples were imported and combined using the probabilistic protein identification algorithms (Keller et al., 2002) implemented in the Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.5.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR; Searle et al., 2008). Peptide thresholds (95%) were set such that a peptide FDR of 0.0% was achieved based on hits to the reverse database (Kall et al., 2008). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zikv, Hela extract, Denv-2, Sfrna, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology Department; Colorado State University; USA
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Jeff Wilusz

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Wilusz
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology Department; Colorado State University; USA


