### Accession
PXD033922

### Title
Protein interaction partners of long non-coding RNA NUDT6 in human aortic smooth muscle cells

### Description
The long non-coding RNA NUDT6 was found to be deregulated in abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) with higher expression in diseased human tissue specimens versus control aortic tissue. Apart from the already well-studied DNA: RNA interaction as a natural antisense transcript to Fibroblast Growth Factor 2 (FGF2), we were interested in identifying protein interaction partners to unravel further involvement in the pathogenesis and progression of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Therefore, we performed a RNA pulldown experiment using biotinylated NUDT6 and control RNA in human aortic smooth muscle cell lysate to identify further interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
Beads were supplemented with 6M GdmCl, 50mM Tris/HCl. Samples were supplemented with 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing three C18-disks and 3 SCX-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Peptides were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 25 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and an additional gradient to 50% for 5min with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), Perseus 1.6.1.3 (Tyranova et al 2016) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2016) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The human reference proteome set (Uniprot, September 2021, 78120 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Reverse identifications and common contaminants were removed. Proteins were filtered to be at least identified 4 times (n=6) in one experimental group.  Missing values were replaced by background values from normal distribution. Significant interacting proteins were determined by student´s t-Test.  Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003 Feb 1;75(3):663-70. doi: 10.1021/ac026117i. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Tyanova S, Cox J. (2018) Perseus: A Bioinformatics Platform for Integrative Analysis of Proteomics Data in Cancer Research. Methods Mol Biol. 1711:133-148. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7493-1_7.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) orchestrate various biological processes and regulate the development of cardiovascular diseases. Their potential therapeutic benefit to tackle disease progression has recently been extensively explored. Our study investigates the role of lncRNA Nudix Hydrolase 6 (NUDT6) and its antisense target fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) in two vascular pathologies: abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) and carotid artery disease. Using tissue samples from both diseases, we detected a substantial increase of NUDT6, whereas FGF2 was downregulated. Targeting Nudt6 in&#xa0;vivo with antisense oligonucleotides in three murine and one porcine animal model of carotid artery disease and AAA limited disease progression. Restoration of FGF2 upon Nudt6 knockdown improved vessel wall morphology and fibrous cap stability. Overexpression of NUDT6 in&#xa0;vitro impaired smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration, while limiting their proliferation and augmenting apoptosis. By employing RNA pulldown followed by mass spectrometry as well as RNA immunoprecipitation, we identified Cysteine and Glycine Rich Protein 1 (CSRP1) as another direct NUDT6 interaction partner, regulating cell motility and SMC differentiation. Overall, the present study identifies NUDT6 as a well-conserved antisense transcript of FGF2. NUDT6 silencing triggers SMC survival and migration and could serve as a novel RNA-based therapeutic strategy in vascular diseases.

### Keywords
Vascular disease, Long non-coding rnas, Rna/protein interaction, Lc-msms, Abdominal aortic aneurysm

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Klinikum rechts der Isar der TU München, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Mägdefessel
Klinikum rechts der Isar der TU München, Munich, Germany


