### Accession
PXD045213

### Title
Phosphorylation and protein interactions in plant gravity sensing

### Description
We studied the phosphorylation of Arabidopsis LAZY4 proteins during gravistimulation, and searched for its interaction proteins using Immunoprecipitation-Mass Spectrometry (IP-MS). For the identified kinases MPK3 and MKK5, we carried out in vitro kinase assays using recombinant LAZY4 as the substrate.

### Sample Protocol
The following buffers were prepared for carrying out IP-MS on LAZY4-GFP and MPK3-GFP. Lysis buffer: 1x RIPA buffer (Abcam: ab156034), 1 mM PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Mei5bio: MF182-plus-01), and 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Mei5bio: MF183-01). Dilution buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM Beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Sodium orthovanadate, 0.5% (w/v) Sodium deoxycholate, 1mM EGTA, 1mM EDTA, and 150 mM Sodium chloride. Wash buffer: 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM EGTA, and 5 mM KCl. Four-day-old Arabidopsis seedlings (around 4 g) were collected and ground into powder with liquid nitrogen, and proteins were extracted using lysis buffer and diluted to around 1 mg/mL with dilution buffer. Immunoprecipitation was then performed with GFP-Trap beads (ChromoTek, gtma-20), using 50 μL GFP-Trap beads for around 6 mg proteins. The proteins were eluted from the beads with 50-60 μL 0.2 M glycine solution (pH 2.5) by gently shaking for 30-60 s, followed by magnetic or centrifuging separation. Then, the supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube and 10% (v/v) Tris-base (pH 10.4) was added into the tube. The protein samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). For in vitro phosphorylation assay, Recombinant proteins were expressed and purified using E.coli Transetta (DE3). Recombinant GST-tagged MPK3 (10 μg) was activated by incubation with recombinant GST-MKK5DD (1 μg) in the presence of 50 μM ATP in 50 μL of reaction buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2 and 1mM DTT) at 37 oC for 30 min. Then, GST-LAZY4ΔCCL (~100 μg) was added and reacted in the same reaction buffer with 10 mM ATP at 37 oC for 60 min. Equal volumes of 2x SDS loading buffer were added and boiled at 95 oC for 10 min to stop the reaction. Phosphorylation of LAZY proteins was analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer. For IP-MS assay, data was searched by Sequest HT against the A. thaliana reference proteome using Percolator as PSM validation method. For in vitro phosphorylation assay, data was searched by Sequest HT against purified protein sequences using Fixed Value PSM validator. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lazy, Phosphorylation, Gravitropism, Mkk5, Mpk3

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China

### Submitter
deng zhaoguo

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Haodong
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China


