### Accession
PXD000141

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis ATP-binding Proteome

### Description
Mtb was grown as either an actively growing normal culture or as a hypoxia-induced dormant culture. Whole cell lysates of live bacteria were obtained by mechanical disruption with silica beads. ATP-binding proteins were covalently labeled with desthiobiotin-tagged ATP (ActivX, Thermo Pierce). This chemoproteomic approach profiled the ATP-binding proteins present in either metabolic state. Labeled proteins were enriched via streptavidin affinity chromatography, digested with trypsin and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for the identification of proteins containing a desthiobiotin modification of lysine (K +196 Da). Differential abundance of nucleotide binding proteins between the two growth conditions were quantified using label-free spectral counting and normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF). DATABASE SEARCHING: Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Xcalibur version 2.2 SP1. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version v.27, rev. 11). Mascot and SEQUEST were set up to search the MtbReverse041712 database (7992 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme Trypsin. Parameters for both search engines were set to a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.5 Da.  Oxidation of methionine, iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and the desthiobiotin modification of lysine were specified in Mascot and SEQUEST as variable modifications. PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION AND LABEL-FREE QUANTITATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds. Mascot identifications required ion scores to be greater than the associated identity scores and 50, 65, 65 and 65 for singly, doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. SEQUEST identifications required deltaCn scores of greater than 0.2 and XCorr scores of greater than 1.8, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 for singly, doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Proteins identifications were accepted if they contained at least one identified peptide in at least two biological replicates. Peptide spectra meeting the most minimum requirement were manually inspected for quality. Quantification of proteins was performed on normalized spectral abundance factors for each protein (NSAF). BLAST-BASED SEQUENCE DESCRIPTION:  The most relevant description for each of the sequences was acquired based on the significant BLAST results.  The homologs for the sequences were retrieved using the Blastp algorithm and the nonredundant database of NCBI. The Blast2GO suite was used. GENE ONTOLOGY ANNOTATION:  The Pfam domains were mapped to Gene Ontology (GO) terms using the lookup table provided by Pfam2go (http://www.geneontology.org/external2go/pfam2go).  An in-house script was written to retrieve GO annotations based on the root term as "molecular function" and their distance from the root term. PFAM DOMAIN-BASED ANNOTATION:  The InterPro and Pfam IDs corresponding to the GO term "ATP binding" (GO ID:0005524) were retrieved using the QuickGO (www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/<http://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/>) and InterPro BioMart web services (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/biomart/martview). The ATP-binding associated domains were queried against the ATP-binding proteome data sets according to spectral quality (high, medium, low confidence). Their Pfam and InterPro descriptions, were identified using the InterProscan Web service, which was accessed via the Pipeline Pilot (Accelrys) implementation in the sequence analysis collection.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, remains one of the leading causes of death worldwide despite extensive research, directly observed therapy using multidrug regimens, and the widespread use of a vaccine. The majority of patients harbor the bacterium in a state of metabolic dormancy. New drugs with novel modes of action are needed to target essential metabolic pathways in M. tuberculosis; ATP-competitive enzyme inhibitors are one such class. Previous screening efforts for ATP-competitive enzyme inhibitors identified several classes of lead compounds that demonstrated potent anti-mycobacterial efficacy as well as tolerable levels of toxicity in cell culture. In this report, a probe-based chemoproteomic approach was used to selectively profile the M. tuberculosis ATP-binding proteome in normally growing and hypoxic M. tuberculosis. From these studies, 122 ATP-binding proteins were identified in either metabolic state, and roughly 60% of these are reported to be essential for survival in vitro. These data are available through ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000141. Protein families vital to the survival of the tubercle bacillus during hypoxia emerged from our studies. Specifically, along with members of the DosR regulon, several proteins involved in energy metabolism (Icl/Rv0468 and Mdh/Rv1240) and lipid biosynthesis (UmaA/Rv0469, DesA1/Rv0824c, and DesA2/Rv1094) were found to be differentially abundant in hypoxic versus normal growing cultures. These pathways represent a subset of proteins that may be relevant therapeutic targets for development of novel ATP-competitive antibiotics.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Atp, Abpp, M. tuberculosis

### Affiliations
Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology

### Submitter
Karen Dobos

### Lab Head


