### Accession
PXD021574

### Title
Cysteine oxidation and disulfide formation in the ribosomal exit tunnel

### Description
Understanding the conformational sampling of translation-arrested ribosome nascent chain complexes is key to understand co-translational folding. Up to now, coupling of cysteine oxidation, disulfide bond formation and structure formation in nascent chains has remained elusive. Here, we investigate the eye-lens protein γB-crystallin in the ribosomal exit tunnel. Using mass spectrometry, theoretical simulations, dynamic nuclear polarization-enhanced solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance and cryo-electron microscopy, we show that thiol groups of cysteine residues undergo S-glutathionylation and S-nitrosylation and form non-native disulfide bonds. Thus, covalent modification chemistry occurs already prior to nascent chain release as the ribosome exit tunnel provides sufficient space even for disulfide bond formation which can guide protein folding.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein-samples were initially diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and treated with 10 µg RNAse A (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) for 10 min, followed by the alkylation of free cysteine residues with iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were then digested in solution by the addition of 1 µg trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) and incubated for 3.5 h at 37°C. Proteolytic digests were finally desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and reconstituted in water/acetonitrile 95/5/0.1 (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid. Subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out either on a nanoElute coupled to an Impact II mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA) or an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with the parameters given in Supplementary Tab. 5.  Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 150–2200 m/z (Impact II) / 350–1600 m/z (Fusion Lumos) and sequence information was acquired by a computer-controlled, dynamic method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s and intensity-dependent acquisition speed for MS/MS-spectra of the most abundant candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
The result files were exported to the open MZML format (Impact II) and recalibrated, and database-, PTM- and crosslink searches were performed using the Metamorpheus search engine against a combined database containing the Escherichia coli proteome (obtained from Uniprot, 11/2019), the respective SecM constructs and common contaminants. The search parameters used were as follows: <20 ppm mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions, fully tryptic cleavages with up to two missed cleavages and heavy labelled cysteine, carbamidomethylation (C), gluthathione (C), oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Further modifications were analyzed with GPTMD (common artefacts and biological modifications) and disulfide crosslinks were searched for light and heavy labeled cysteines.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the conformational sampling of translation-arrested ribosome nascent chain complexes is key to understand co-translational folding. Up to now, coupling of cysteine oxidation, disulfide bond formation and structure formation in nascent chains has remained elusive. Here, we investigate the eye-lens protein &#x3b3;B-crystallin in the ribosomal exit tunnel. Using mass spectrometry, theoretical simulations, dynamic nuclear polarization-enhanced solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance and cryo-electron microscopy, we show that thiol groups of cysteine residues undergo S-glutathionylation and S-nitrosylation and form non-native disulfide bonds. Thus, covalent modification chemistry occurs already prior to nascent chain release as the ribosome exit tunnel provides sufficient space even for disulfide bond formation which can guide protein folding.

### Keywords
Cysterine oxidation, Ribosomal exit tunnel, Glutathione, Disulfide formation

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics MPI for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 60438 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPI of Biophysics MPI for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 60438 Frankfurt am Main


