### Accession
PXD018230

### Title
Functional states in tumor-initiating cell differentiation in human colorectal cancer

### Description
Intra-tumor heterogeneity of tumor-initiating cell (TIC) activity drives colorectal cancer (CRC) progression and therapy resistance. Here, we used single-cell mRNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) of patient-derived CRC models to decipher distinct cell subpopulations based on their transcriptional profiles. Cell type-specific expression modules of stem-like, transit amplifying-like, and differentiated CRC cells resemble differentiation states of normal intestinal epithelial cells. Strikingly, identified subpopulations differ in proliferative activity and metabolic state. In summary, we here show at single-cell resolution that transcriptional heterogeneity identifies functional states during TIC differentiation. Targeting transcriptional states associated to cancer cell differentiation might unravel vulnerabilities in human CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed for four LGR5+ patient-derived spheroid cultures. Tumor spheroid cells were stained with Mitotracker, prepared for sorting as described above, and 5x105 cells of MMPlow and MMPhigh were sorted (n=3 independent experiments). Cell pellets (stored at -80 °C) were reconstituted in 100 μl of 0.1 % RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC; cOmplete, Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were lysed by probe-sonication twice for 15 s at 10 % frequency, followed by centrifugation for 30 min at 15,000 g and 4 °C. 10 μg of protein per sample were denatured for 5 min at 95 °C, reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT; 5 mM final concentration; Biomol) for 30 min at 60 °C, and alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA; 15 mM final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 23 °C. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C and 750 rpm, at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:20 with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in ddH2O. Samples were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 0.5 % final concentration; Biosolve Chimie), incubated for another 30 min at 37 °C and 750 rpm and centrifuged for 30 min at 15,000 g and 23 °C. Samples were stored at -20 °C. Peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18; 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm x 2 cm; ThermoFisher) and an analytical column (nanoEase MZ BEH C18; 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm x 25 cm; Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Solvent A was ddH2O (Biosolve Chimie), 0.1 % (v/v) FA (Biosolve Chimie) and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile (ACN; ThermoFisher) in ddH2O, 0.1 % (v/v) FA. Samples were loaded and peptides eluted with a 105 minute gradient via the analytical column as described (Erich et al., Molecular & Cellular Proteomics: MCP 2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) (Cox & Mann, Nature Biotechnology 2008) against the human Uniprot database (20170801_Uniprot_homo-sapiens_canonical_reviewed; 20,214 entries) using the Andromeda search engine with the default search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M)/acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm of MaxQuant. On top, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated with a log-fit enabled. Identification transfer between runs via the ‘matching between runs’ algorithm was allowed with a match time window of 0.3 min. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1 % with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Proteins that were only identified by a modification site, the contaminants, as well as reversed sequences were removed from the data set. The differential expression analysis was performed using limma moderated t-statistics (R package version 3.36.3; one-sample, two-sided) (Ritchie et al., Nucleic Acids Research 2015). Here, data was first normalized based on median LFQ densities per sample. Next, we calculated ratios between MMPhigh and MMPlow cells. Significantly differentially expressed proteins were defined to show a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value <0.05 and an absolute log2-fold change >1.

### Publication Abstract
Intra-tumor heterogeneity of tumor-initiating cell (TIC) activity drives colorectal cancer (CRC) progression and therapy resistance. Here, we used single-cell RNA-sequencing of patient-derived CRC models to decipher distinct cell subpopulations based on their transcriptional profiles. Cell type-specific expression modules of stem-like, transit amplifying-like, and differentiated CRC cells resemble differentiation states of normal intestinal epithelial cells. Strikingly, identified subpopulations differ in proliferative activity and metabolic state. In summary, we here show at single-cell resolution that transcriptional heterogeneity identifies functional states during TIC differentiation. Furthermore, identified expression signatures are linked to patient prognosis. Targeting transcriptional states associated to cancer cell differentiation might unravel novel vulnerabilities in human CRC.

### Keywords
Tumor-initiating cells, Tumor metabolism, Transcriptional programs, Colorectal cancer, Tumor cell differentiation, Tumor heterogeneity, Patient-derived cancer models, Single-cell rna-sequencing

### Affiliations
NCT Dresden
DKFZ

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia R. Ball
NCT Dresden


