### Accession
PXD004797

### Title
Comparative proteomics of purified pathogen vacuoles correlates intracellular replication of Legionella pneumophila with the small GTPase Rap1

### Description
Legionella pneumophila is an opportunistic bacterial pathogen that causes a severe lung infection termed “Legionnaires’ disease”. The pathogen replicates in environmental protozoa as well as in macrophages within a unique membrane-bound compartment, the Legionella-containing-vacuole (LCV). Formation of the pathogen vacuole requires the bacterial Icm/Dot type IV secretion system (T4SS), which translocates ca. 300 effector proteins into host cells, where they subvert pivotal host processes and govern LCV formation. The L. pneumophila “pentuple” mutant lacks 5 gene clusters comprising 12% of the genome and 30% of the effector proteins. The mutant strain replicates in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages but not in Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba. In order to elucidate the host cell proteome defining a replication permissive compartment, we compare here the proteomes of intact LCVs isolated from D. discoideum or murine RAW 264.7 macrophages infected with the L. pneumophila parental strain Lp02 or the “pentuple” mutant. Proteome analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) revealed host proteins specifically localizing to LCVs harbouring strain Lp02 or the “pentuple” mutant, respectively. The small GTPase Rap1 was identified on D. discoideum LCVs containing strain Lp02 but not the “pentuple” mutant and on macrophage LCVs containing either strain. The localization pattern of Rap1 on D. discoideum LCVs was confirmed by fluorescence microscopy, and depletion of Rap1 in A549 epithelial cells by RNA interference significantly reduced the intracellular growth of L. pneumophila. Thus, comparative proteomics identified Rap1 as a novel LCV host component implicated in intracellular replication of L. pneumophila.

### Sample Protocol
After resolution of the purified vacuole samples on a 1D SDS PAGE, the gel lanes have been excised in ten equidistant pieces and were subjected to tryptical cleavage. For the subsequent LC-MS/MS measurements, the digests were separated by reversed phase column chromatography on an EASYnLC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) with self packed columns ((Luna 3μ C18(2) 100A, Phenomenex, Germany)) in a one- column setup. Following loading/ desalting at a flow of 700 nL/min at a maximum of 220 bar of water in 0.1% acetic acid, separation of the peptides was achieved by the application of a binary non-linear 70 min gradient from 5 - 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid. The LC was coupled online to a LTQ-Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) at a spray voltage of 2.4kV. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (r = 30,000) MS/MS data were recorded for the twenty most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not taken into account for MS/MS analysis. The lock mass option was enabled throughout all analyses.

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometric measurement, MS-data was converted into the mzxml format (version 3.1) by ReAdW version 4.3.1 and subsequently subjected to database searching via Sorcerer using Sequest (SageN, Milptas, CA, USA.) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 27, revision 11) without charge state deconvolution and deisotoping performed.  Database searching was performed either with a database of combined entries of Legionella Pneumophila strain Philadelphia-1 NC002942 and Dictyostelium discoides or with a database of combined Legionella Pneumophila strain Philadelphia-1 NC002942 and Mus musculus entries. Both databases were used as target/ decoy databases with a list of common contaminants added (30739 and 64993 entries respectively). Sequest was used assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a search tolerance of 10 ppm for the overview scans. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Sequest as a variable modification. Scaffold (version 3.5.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to filter and validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted when spectra exceeded Xcorr values of 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and quadruply peptides with deltaCN values of more than 0.1. Protein identifications are based on at least 2 unique peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to meet the principle of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Legionella pneumophila</i> is an opportunistic bacterial pathogen that causes a severe lung infection termed "Legionnaires' disease." The pathogen replicates in environmental protozoa as well as in macrophages within a unique membrane-bound compartment, the <i>Legionella</i>-containing-vacuole (LCV). LCV formation requires the bacterial Icm/Dot type IV secretion system, which translocates ca. 300 "effector proteins" into host cells, where they target distinct host factors. The <i>L. pneumophila</i> "pentuple" mutant (&#x394;pentuple) lacks 5 gene clusters (31% of the effector proteins) and replicates in macrophages but not in <i>Dictyostelium discoideum</i> amoeba. To elucidate the host factors defining a replication-permissive compartment, we compare here the proteomes of intact LCVs isolated from <i>D. discoideum</i> or macrophages infected with &#x394;pentuple or the parental strain Lp02. This analysis revealed that the majority of host proteins are shared in <i>D. discoideum</i> or macrophage LCVs containing the mutant or the parental strain, respectively, whereas some proteins preferentially localize to distinct LCVs. The small GTPase Rap1 was identified on <i>D. discoideum</i> LCVs containing strain Lp02 but not the &#x394;pentuple mutant and on macrophage LCVs containing either strain. The localization pattern of active Rap1 on <i>D. discoideum</i> or macrophage LCVs was confirmed by fluorescence microscopy and imaging flow cytometry, and the depletion of Rap1 by RNA interference significantly reduced the intracellular growth of <i>L. pneumophila</i> Thus, comparative proteomics identified Rap1 as a novel LCV host component implicated in intracellular replication of <i>L. pneumophila</i>.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium discoideum, Pathogen vacuole, Small gtpase, Type iv secretion, Phosphoinositide lipid, Proteomics, Bacterial effector protein, Legionella, Host-pathogen interactions, Macrophage, Amoeba

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute of Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


