### Accession
PXD033584

### Title
Tissue sampling and homogenization with NIRL enables spatially resolved cell layer specific proteomic analysis of the murine intestine

### Description
For investigating the molecular physiology and pathophysiology in organs the most exact data will be obtained, if not organ specific cell lines are analysed or the whole organ is homogenized, followed by the analysis of its biomolecules, but if the morphological organisation of the organ can be addressed and in the best case the composition of molecules in single cells of the target organ can be analysed. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) is a technique, which is enabling the selection of specific cells of a tissue for further analysis of their molecules. However, LCM is a time-consuming 2-dimensional technique and optimal results are only obtained, if the tissue is fixed e.g. by formalin. Especially for proteome analysis formalin fixation is reducing the number of identifiable proteins, which is an additional drawback. Recently, it was demonstrated that sampling of fresh-frozen (non-fixed) tissue with an infrared-laser is giving higher yields with respect to the absolute protein amount and number of identifiable proteins than conventional mechanical homogenization of tissues. In this study the applicability of the infrared laser tissue sampling for proteome analysis of different cell layers of murine intestine was investigated, using LC-MS/MS-based differential quantitative bottom-up proteomics. By laser ablation eight consecutive layers of the colon tissue were obtained and analyzed. Beside a clear distinguishability of protein profiles between ascending, descending and transversal colon, we identified in the different intestinal cell layers proteins, which are cell-specific as confirmed with data from the human protein atlas. Thus, for the first time the sampling directly from intact fresh-frozen tissue with 3-dimensional resolution is giving access to the different proteomes of the different cell layers of colon tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling was performed, using a nano second infrared Laser (NIRL).For the study on murine colon, the laser wavelength was set to 2.85 µm. A preliminary study showed a maximum protein amount, determined with BCA tests, at this wavelength for this tissue type. The pulse energy was measured to be 0.9 mJ at sample position, corresponding to a fluence of 18.1 J/cm2 with focal spot dimensions of about dx=125 µm and dy=100 µm in diameter, respectively. Positively charged glass slides (SuperFrost®, microscope slides, R. Langenbrinck GmbH, Emmendingen, Germany) are placed directly over the tissue at the ablation area to trap the aerosol of the tissue with the charged side facing the sample (Figure 4c,d). To increase yield of the trapped aerosol, the beam scanning area was reduced to 1 x 0.5 mm² (Figure 14,d,black arrow). Optimal laser focus positioning was achieved by synchronizing a two-axis scanning mirror in combination with a f-theta scan lens of 100 mm focal length with the laser pulse triggering, utilizing a fast input/output card. The custom-made control software enables high precision placement of the focal laser spot by introducing wait times to let the scanning mirror reach its position and swing out. The integrated monitoring camera with zoom objective was used for calibrating and monitoring lateral spot positioning. Optimal axial positioning of the sample was achieved by observing the dimensions of laser shots on photo paper at different z-positions with reduced laser energy. After each ablation of a layer set, the sample stage was manually shifted laterally (x-direction) for 600 µm to extend the ablation area to about 5 mm². After completion of the sampling, the dried aerosol was dissolved with 100µL of buffer (0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer with 1% sodium deoxycholate) using four pipetting steps with 25 µl to reduce the contact area of the protein solution with the glass surface. The removed glass slide was then replaced with a new one for the next layer. Using this optimized laser setup, two laser ablation experiments were performed in the murine intestine while obtaining the spatial information of the sample:  - In the first experiment, one layer was ablated at ascending (A), transversal (B) and descending (C) colon respectively. - In the second experiment, 8 consecutive layers were ablated. The dissolved aerosols were heated and mixed 10 minutes at 99°C at a rotation speed of 400 rpm using a shaker (ThermoMixC®, Eppendorf SE, Hamburg, Germany). Sonification was performed for 5 pulses at 30% power. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed for 16 hours at 37°C, using 250 ng trypsin. After tryptic digestion, the inhibition of trypsin activity as well as the precipitation of SDC was achieved by the addition of 1% formic acid (FA). Samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 14,000 g. The supernatant was collected, dried in a vacuum concentrator centrifuge (UNIVAPO 100 H, UniEquip, Martinsried, Germany) and stored at -20°C until further use. Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, peptides were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1 % FA. Liquid-chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) measurements were performed on a quadrupole- ion-trap-orbitrap MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) or a uadrupole-orbitrap MS (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides (1/10 of the total protein amount for laser ablated samples and 1 µg per sample for mechanically isolated epithelial cells) were injected to the LC system via an autosampler, purified and desalted using a reversed phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap; 100 μm x 2 cm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and thereafter separated with a reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18; 75 μm x 50 cm, 100 Å pore size, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Trapping was done for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with 99 % solvent A (0.1 % FA) and 1 % solvent B (0.1 % FA in ACN). Separation and elution of peptides were achieved by a linear gradient from 1 to 30 % solvent B in 70 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1,800 V, transferred into the MS and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS measurements were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10, Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany), using the integrated Andromeda algorithm or Proteome Discoverer(Version 2.4,Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), using the  Sequest Algorithm.  For protein identification, measured MS2 spectra were searched against theoretical fragment-spectra of tryptic peptides, generated from a reviewed murine Swiss-Prot FASTA database obtained in February 2020, containing 17,015 entries. All samples were handled as individual experiments. The carbamethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, removal of the initiator methionine at the protein N-terminus and the conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 6,000 Da were identified with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Only peptides with a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage sites were considered. For peptide identification, matching between runs was applied, using a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes between individual runs. The error tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first precursor search and to 4.5 ppm for the following main search. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. A false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold <0.01, using a reverted decoy peptide database approach was set for peptide identification. Label free quantification was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. For quantification, all identified razor and unique peptides were considered. The label minimum ratio count was set to 1.  Protein abundances loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.15.0, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany), log2 transformed and normalized to the total protein amount per sample to compensate for variations in the injected sample amount. For the analysis of the proteomes of consecutive colon layers, one replicate of layer 3 (depth of 234-351 µm) was excluded due to high yields of blood proteins. Hence, for further statistical testing layer three was excluded due to the absence of replicates. For ANOVA and t-testing a p-value cutoff < 0.05 was set. P-value significant proteins with a foldchange difference <1.5 were considered for further analysis after t-testing.  Nonlinear Iterative vertical Least Squares (NIPALS) PCA and hierarchical clustering were performed in the R software environment [Version 4.1.3.]. For Principal component calculation and visualization, the mixOmics package was used in Bioconductor (version 3.14) [Roh17]. Hierarchical clustering was performed based on centered and normalized abundances using the heatmap package. Pearson correlation was applied as a distance metric. Ward.D linkage was applied. Missing data in correlation distances was pairwise complete correlation. To determine the number of distinguishable molecular clusters between different z-layers consensus clustering was applied, using the ConsensusClusterPlus package. Pearson correlation was applied as a distance metric. Ward.D linkage was used Missing data in correlation distances was pairwise complete correlation. The number of subsamples was set to 1,000 M maximum number of 7 clusters, corresponding to the total number of ablation layers was used. Reactome-based [Fab17] Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using the software GSEA (version 4.1, Broad Institute, San Diego, CA, USA), based on log2 transformed, normalized protein abundances. 100 permutations were used. Permutation was performed based on gene sets. A weighted enrichment statistic was applied, using the signal to noise ratio as a metric for ranking genes. No additional normalization was applied within GSEA. Gene sets smaller 15 and bigger 500 were excluded from analysis. For visualization of GSEA results, the Cytoscape environment (version 3.8.2)  was used. The EnrichmentMap (version 3.3)  application was used. Gene sets were considered, if they were identified at an FDR < 0.25 and a p-value < 0.1. For gene set similarity filtering data set edges were set automatically. A combined Jaccard and Overlap metric was used, applying a cutoff of 0.375. for gene set clustering AutoAnnotate (version 1.3) was applied. As a cluster algorithm Markov cluster algorithm (MCL) was used. The gene set similarity coefficient was utilized for edge weighting. Individually analyzes gene sets (leucocyte mediated immunity; keratinocyte/epithelial signatures) were obtained from the molecular signature database (version 3.0). For the enrichment analysis of ANOVA significant proteins, the DAVID functional annotation tool (version 6.8)  was used based on all gene ontology (GO) terms. Terms enriched with a p-value < 0.01 were considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
The compensatory cardiovascular response to hemorrhage includes a baroreceptor-induced activation of the sympathetic nervous system resulting in an attempt to reestablish MAP through peripheral vasoconstriction. If the hypotension is not reversed this compensatory vasoconstriction will progress to a loss of vascular tone known as vascular decompensation. The primary purpose of the present study was to compare the effectiveness of military antishock trousers (MAST) applied during the compensatory and decompensatory stages of hemorrhagic hypotension. MAST pressures of 30, 50, 70, and 90 mm Hg were applied during control, compensation, and decompensation. The results showed that MAST pressures up to 90 mm Hg were ineffective at raising mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) when applied to normotensive dogs; MAP increased 62% when MAST were applied during compensation as the result of a significant augmentation of cardiac output (stroke volume and heart rate) with no change in TPR; and a modest increase in MAP from 40 to 55 mm Hg occurred when MAST pressure was increased to 70 mm Hg during decompensation, which was accounted for entirely on the basis of an increased total peripheral resistance with no significant change in CO.

### Keywords
3d, Mouse, Laser-ablstion, Lc-ms/ms, Colon

### Affiliations
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hartmut Schlüter
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf


