### Accession
PXD004812

### Title
Protein profiling of 6-OHDA induced PD Model treated by TBN

### Description
Parkinson's disease (PD) listed as the second most common neurodegenerative disease. 2-[[(1,1-Dimethylethyl)oxidoimino]-methyl]-3,5,6-trimethylpyrazine (TBN), a novel nitrone derivative of tetramethylpyrazine, has shown benefits for the treatment both in vitro and in vivo, TBN protects and rescues dopaminergic neurons from MPP(+) and MPTP/6-OHDA-induced damage by reducing ROS and increasing cellular antioxidative defense capability. Here, we investigate the proteome changes in the 6-OHDA induced PD rat model and the rescue effects after treated by TBN.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics study was performed as per our previously published method with slight modifications. In brief, substantia nigra from 6-OHDA induced PD rat brain was separated. Tissues in each group were lysed with 8 M urea in 0.1 M PBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein (100 μg) in each group was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37 °C followed by 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature and was digested with trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega) at 37 °C for 12 h. TMT 3-plex reagents were used for peptide labeling as per the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT-129, TMT-130, and TMT-131 were used for the sham group, vehicle-treated group, and TBN-treated group, respectively. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, UltiMate 3000 UHPLC; Thermo Scientific) was performed for the TMT-labeled peptide separation. An XBridge BEH300 C18 column (1 ml/min, 4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 μm, Waters, MA, USA) was used. Column temperature was maintained at 45°C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min, and detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min in 50 tubes, combined into 20 groups, and were dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were separated by 120-min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.300 μl/min with an EASY-nLC 1000 system that was directly interfaced with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75-μm inner diameter, 150-mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of ddH2O with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 3.0 software; there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (350–1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 3-s data-dependent MS/MS scans in an ion-routing multipole at 38% normalized collision energy (HCD). The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against selected databases using the Proteome Discovery searching algorithm (version 1.4).

### Data Protocol
As previously described, the proteins identified in this study were classified by Panther Classification System (http://go.pantherdb.org/) and gathered as molecular function, cellular component, or biological process. The enrichment analysis was performed using an online WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt; Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN). Statistical significance of pathways was determined on the basis of a P value < 0.0001 and the presence of at least two target genes in the wiki pathway. For the protein–protein interaction analysis, we used STRING database version 10.0 (http://string-db.org) with a medium confidence threshold of 0.4. The interaction network was mapped by Cytoscape (3.2.0). Proteins with ratios > 1.20 were considered upregulated (colored in red) and proteins with ratios < 0.83 were set as downregulated (colored in green).

### Publication Abstract
Neural crest cells constitute a unique population of progenitor cells with extensive stem cell capacities able to navigate throughout various environments in the embryo and are a source of multiple cell types, including neurons, glia, melanocytes, smooth muscles, endocrine cells, cardiac cells, and also skeletal and supportive tissues in the head. Neural crest cells are not restricted to the embryo but persist as well in adult tissues where they provide a reservoir of stem cells with great therapeutic promise. Many fundamental questions in cell, developmental, and stem cell biology can be addressed using this system. During the last decades there has been an increased availability of elaborated techniques, animal models, and molecular tools to tackle neural crest cell development. However, these approaches are often very challenging and difficult to establish and they are not adapted for rapid functional investigations of mechanisms driving cell migration and differentiation. In addition, they are not adequate for collecting pure populations of neural crest cells usable in large scale analyses and for stem cell studies. Transferring and adapting the neural crest system in tissue culture may then represent an attractive alternative, opening up numerous prospects. Here we describe a simple method for establishing primary cultures of neural crest cells derived from trunk neural tubes using the avian embryo as a source of cells. This protocol is suited for producing pure populations of neural crest cells that can be processed for cytological, cellular, and functional approaches aimed at characterizing their phenotype, behavior, and potential. &#xa9; 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC. Basic Protocol: Primary cultures of avian trunk neural crest cells Support Protocol: Adaptations for immunofluorescence labeling and videomicroscopy.

### Keywords
Tbn, Rat model, Parkinson's disease, 6-ohda

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Insitute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Insitute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


