### Accession
PXD033910

### Title
Elucidation of the role of murine lncRNA LL35 in hepatocytes by LC-MSMS

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play important roles in the regulation of many biological processes in the cell like transcription, translation, splicing, transport, etc. More than 10K lncRNAs are predicted in human, but functions for the majority remain unknown. LncRNAs may contribute to the development of multiple diseases that makes them perspective diagnostic and prognostic markers as well as drug targets [1]. Murine lncRNA Falcor/LL35 is a proposed functional analog of human lncRNA DEANR1, which is predominantly expressed in murine lungs and liver, intestine and pancreas [2, 3]. While the participation of LL35 in LL35–Foxa2 (transcription factor) regulatory loop during regeneration after lung injury was previously described by Swarr et al. [2], its functional role in murine liver remains unknown. In our work we focused on revealing the role of murine lncRNA LL35 in hepatocytes and in mouse liver. We analyzed changes in proteome of AML12 (normal hepatocytes) cell line on the 2nd day after LL35 depletion.  [1] Morlando, M., Ballarino, M., & Fatica, A. (2015). Long non-coding RNAs: New players in hematopoiesis and leukemia. Frontiers in Medicine, Vol. 2. [2] Swarr, D. T., Herriges, M., Li, S., Morley, M., Fernandes, S., Sridharan, A., … Morrisey, E. E. (2019). The long noncoding RNA Falcor regulates Foxa2 expression to maintain lung epithelial homeostasis and promote regeneration. Genes & Development, 33(11-12), 656–668.  [3] Sergeeva, O. V, Korinfskaya, S. A., Kurochkin, I. I., & Zatsepin, T. S. (2019). Long Noncoding RNA LL35 / Falcor Regulates Expression of Transcription Factor Foxa2 in Hepatocytes in Normal and Fibrotic Mouse Liver. Acta Naturae,  11(42), 66–74.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation AML12 cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Gibco, MA, USA), 10% FBS (Gibco, MA USA), 2mM L-glutamine, 1% penicillin and 1% streptomycin (10,000 U/mL, Gibco, MA, USA) at 37oC and 5% CO2. Cells were split when they reached 80% confluency. For LL35 knockdown we used a previously described [3] mix of 5 antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) at a final concentration of 20 nM for each ASO. ASO specific to Firefly Luciferase gene was used as a control. For the proteome analysis experiment cells were cultivated in 6-well plate and transfected with ASOs using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were collected 48 hours after transfection, washed twice with 1X PBS and processed for further LC/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20x0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GL Sciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed (1) fused-silica column 300x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in a loading solution (98% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–35% solution B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 105 min; 35-55% B for 18 min, 55-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was reequilibrated with solution A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 10 min. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time – 30 msec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with HCD collision energy 29%, max injection time – 30 msec, AGC target – 1x105. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.  1. Kovalchuk, S. I., Jensen, O. N., and Rogowska-Wrzesinska, A. (2019) FlashPack: Fast and Simple Preparation of Ultrahigh-performance Capillary Columns for LC-MS. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 18, 383-390

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using in MaxQuant 2.0.3.1 (MQ) 1 and Perseus 2. The data was searched against Mus musculus Uniprot Tremble database, containing canonical and isoform proteins, version from 23.03.18 MaxQuant search was performed with the default parameter set, including Trypsin/p protease specificity, max 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation, Protein N-term acetylation and NQ deamidation as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, max 5 modifications per peptide, 1% PSM and protein FDR. The following options were turned on: second peptide, maxLFQ, match between runs. All runs were analyzed as independent experiments and processed in Perseus.  In Perseus the protein group results were filtered for contaminants, reverse and “identified only by site” proteins. Only the proteins with maxLFQ values in at least 3 out of 6 LC-MS runs were used. For them, missing values were imputed from normal distribution with 0.3 intensity distribution sigma width and 1.8 intensity distribution center downshift. Two-sample t-test with Permutation based FDR 5% was applied to search for significantly changing proteins.   1. Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Cox, J., The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature protocols 2016, 11 (12), 2301-2319. 2. Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M. Y.; Geiger, T.; Mann, M.; Cox, J., The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature methods 2016, 13 (9), 731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Glucose and lipid metabolism are crucial functional systems in eukaryotes. A large number of experimental studies both in animal models and humans have shown that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play an important role in glucose and lipid metabolism. Previously, human lncRNA DEANR1/linc00261 was described as a tumor suppressor that regulates a variety of biological processes such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, glucose metabolism and tumorigenesis. Here we report that murine lncRNA Falcor/LL35, a proposed functional analog of human DEANR1/linc00261, is predominantly expressed in murine normal hepatocytes and downregulated in HCC and after partial hepatectomy. The application of high-throughput approaches such as RNA-seq, LC-MS proteomics, lipidomics and metabolomics analysis allowed changes to be found in the transcriptome, proteome, lipidome and metabolome of hepatocytes after LL35 depletion. We revealed that LL35 is involved in the regulation of glycolysis and lipid biosynthesis in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, LL35 affects Notch and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathways in normal hepatocytes. All observed changes result in the decrease in the proliferation and migration of hepatocytes. We demonstrated similar phenotype changes between murine LL35 and human linc00261 depletion in vitro and in vivo that opens the opportunity to translate results for LL35 from a liver murine model to possible functions of human lncRNA linc00261.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Aml12 cells, Murine lncrna ll35

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskye Gory 1, 119991 Moscow, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Timofei S. Zatsepin
Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskye Gory 1, 119991 Moscow, Russia


