### Accession
PXD000811

### Title
Mouse kidney glomerular extracellular matrix LC-MSMS

### Description
Across the spectrum of human disease there are significant changes in the composition and organisation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Furthermore, disease severity can vary according to race and sex, yet mechanisms for these variations are unclear. Using the kidney glomerulus as a model system, we tested the hypothesis that genetic background and sex influence composition and organisation of ECM. We characterised ECM from healthy mice with different predisposition to glomerular disease using global microarray, discovery proteomics and electron microscopy. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed unique strain and sex dependent glomerular ECM signatures with novel ECM proteins, which relate to glomerular dysfunction with leakage of macromolecules into the glomerular filtrate. In addition, we found striking structural changes in basement membranes in disease-susceptible mice. These findings were not explained by mutations in known ECM or glomerular genes. Pathway analysis of merged transcriptomic and proteomic datasets identified potential ECM regulatory pathways involving inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases, LXR/RXR, NRF2, notch and CDK5. These pathways may therefore alter ECM and confer susceptibility to disease.

### Sample Protocol
The glomeruli of eighteen-week-old male and female B6 and FVB mice (n=3 in each group) were isolated through the Dynabead-based isolation method (Takemoto et al, 2002). All steps were carried out at 4oC to minimize proteolysis. Pure glomerular isolates from three mouse kidneys were incubated for 30 minutes in extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 25 mM EDTA, 25 μg/ml leupeptin, 25 μg/ml aprotinin and 0.5 mM AEBSF) to solubilize cellular proteins, and samples were then centrifuged at 14000 × g for 10 minutes to yield fraction 1. The remaining pellet was incubated for 30 minutes in alkaline detergent buffer (20 mM NH4OH and 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS) to further solubilize cellular proteins and to disrupt cell–ECM interactions. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 × g for 10 minutes to yield fraction 2. The remaining pellet was incubated for 30 minutes in a deoxyribonuclease (DNase) buffer (10 μg/ml DNase I (Roche, Burgess Hill, UK) in PBS) to degrade DNA. The sample was centrifuged at 14000 × g for 10 minutes to yield fraction 3, and the final pellet was re-suspended in reducing sample buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v) sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), 0.004% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 8% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) to yield the ECM fraction. Samples were heat denatured at 70oC for 20 minutes. Protein samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie staining. Gel lanes were sliced and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as described previously (Humphries et al, 2009). Liquid chromatography–tandem MS analysis was performed using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance liquid chromatography system (Waters, Elstree, UK) coupled offline to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Desalted peptides were separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250mm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.7 μm particle size, 130 Å pore size; Waters) using a 45-min linear gradient from 1% to 25% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK). Peak list files were searched against a modified version of the Uniprot mouse database (version 3.70; release date, 3 May 2011), containing ten additional contaminant and reagent sequences of non-mouse origin, using Mascot (version 2.2.06; Matrix Science) (Perkins et al, 1999). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and hydroxylation of proline and lysine were allowed as variable modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 0.4 Da and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS datasets were validated using rigorous statistical algorithms at both the peptide and protein level (Keller et al, 2002) (Nesvizhskii et al, 2003) implemented in Scaffold (version 3.6.5; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Protein identifications were accepted upon assignment of at least two unique validated peptides with ≥90% probability, resulting in ≥99% probability at the protein level. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of 0.1% for all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Glomerular disease often features altered histologic patterns of extracellular matrix (ECM). Despite this, the potential complexities of the glomerular ECM in both health and disease are poorly understood. To explore whether genetic background and sex determine glomerular ECM composition, we investigated two mouse strains, FVB and B6, using RNA microarrays of isolated glomeruli combined with proteomic glomerular ECM analyses. These studies, undertaken in healthy young adult animals, revealed unique strain- and sex-dependent glomerular ECM signatures, which correlated with variations in levels of albuminuria and known predisposition to progressive nephropathy. Among the variation, we observed changes in netrin 4, fibroblast growth factor 2, tenascin C, collagen 1, meprin 1-&#x3b1;, and meprin 1-&#x3b2;. Differences in protein abundance were validated by quantitative immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis, and the collective differences were not explained by mutations in known ECM or glomerular disease genes. Within the distinct signatures, we discovered a core set of structural ECM proteins that form multiple protein-protein interactions and are conserved from mouse to man. Furthermore, we found striking ultrastructural changes in glomerular basement membranes in FVB mice. Pathway analysis of merged transcriptomic and proteomic datasets identified potential ECM regulatory pathways involving inhibition of matrix metalloproteases, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2, notch, and cyclin-dependent kinase 5. These pathways may therefore alter ECM and confer susceptibility to disease.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Glomerular, Extracellular matrix, Kidney

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences and Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,  University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Faculty of Human and Medical Science

### Submitter
M Randles

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences and Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,  University of Manchester, Manchester, UK


