### Accession
PXD005255

### Title
Bacteroides fragilis outer membrane vesicles

### Description
Number of publications show that intestinal microflora vesicles secretion is essential for the maintaining homeostasis. Conducted comprehensive genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic studies of vesicles determine the nature and the basic mechanisms of bacterial influence to the host. The role of the vesicles to a greater extent is defined as carriers of virulence factors or enzymes determining the nutritional function. In addition some bacterial vesicles have a special mission. B.fragilis vesicles are providing anti-inflammatory effect on the colon immune cells. However there is no information about possible role of vesicles secreted by ETBF, contributing bowel disease development and colon cancer. To determine possible effects of ETBF vesicles to the host compared with NTBF, we performed comprehensive proteome and for the first time metabolome analysis and reconstructed pathways for vesicles of both strains with subsequent confirmation of the activity of one of the main pathway by fluxome analysis. A detailed analysis of the vesicles allowed us to discover a new quality of ETBF vesicles as intelligent systems capable of absorbing and processing of exogenous substrates. We believe that this property allows them to maintain stability for a long time and implement mechanisms of pathogenicity.

### Sample Protocol
The isolated OMVs and cells from ETBF and NTBF were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer (1:1) containing CHAPS and separated by SDS-PAGE. 40 µg of each (NTBF and ETBF) OMV samples and 80-90 µg of each cells lysate from ETBF and NTBF were boiled for 10 min prior to electrophoresis. Gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue stain. Gel were cut into small (1 × 1 mm) pieces and transferred into sample tubes. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) at 50○ C for 30 min and afterwards alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. After alkylation, gel samples were stained with 50% ACN (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) and dehydrated by addition of 100% ACN. After removal 100% ACN, the samples were subjected to the in-gel trypsin digestion. The digestion buffer contained 13 ng/µl trypsin (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer). The trypsin digestion proceeded overnight at 37○ C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel by adding two volumes of 0.5% TFA into the samples (incubation during1 h), and, then, two volumes of 50% ACN (incubation during 1 h). Finally, the extracted peptides were dried in vacuum and redissolved in 3% ACN with 0.1% FA solution prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files with WIFF and .D file format were converted to the Mascot generic format (MGF file format) using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter version 1.3 and Compass Data Analysis 4.2 (Build 383.1) respectively. The proteins identification was carried out using Mascot Search Engine version 2.5.1.The Mascot searches were performed with the following parameters: tryptic-specific peptides, maximum of one missed cleavages, a peptide charge state limited to 1+,2+ and 3+, a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, variable modifications caused by Oxidation(M) and Propionamide(C). The decoy search strategy to calculate FDR was used. The score threshold was calculated using Mascot. Individual ions score higher than score threshold indicate identity or extensive homology with p < 0.05 and FDR < 5%. A peptide was identified if its rank was 1 and score higher than score threshold. A protein was identified if has 2 and more identified unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous studies are devoted to the intestinal microbiota and intercellular communication maintaining homeostasis. In this regard, vesicles secreted by bacteria represent one of the most popular topics for research. For example, the outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) of Bacteroides fragilis play an important nutritional role with respect to other microorganisms and promote anti-inflammatory effects on immune cells. However, toxigenic B. fragilis (ETBF) contributes to bowel disease, even causing colon cancer. If nontoxigenic B. fragilis (NTBF) vesicles exert a beneficial effect on the intestine, it is likely that ETBF vesicles can be utilized for potential pathogenic implementation. To confirm this possibility, we performed comparative proteomic HPLC-MS/MS analysis of vesicles isolated from ETBF and NTBF. Furthermore, we performed, for the first time, HPLC-MS/MS and GS-MS comparative metabolomic analysis for the vesicles isolated from both strains with subsequent reconstruction of the vesicle metabolic pathways. We utilized fluxomic experiments to validate the reconstructed biochemical reaction activities and finally observed considerable difference in the vesicle proteome and metabolome profiles. Compared with NTBF OMVs, metabolic activity of ETBF OMVs provides their similarity to micro reactors that are likely to be used for long-term persistence and implementing pathogenic potential in the host.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Bacteroides fragilis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Scientific Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation
Laboratory of proteomic analysis of Scientific Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Ivan Butenko

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Laboratory of proteomic analysis of Scientific Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Moscow, Russia


