### Accession
PXD015067

### Title
Meta-genomic and –proteomic insights into photoautotrophic and heterotrophic interactions in a Synechococcus culture

### Description
Microbial photoautotroph-heterotroph interactions underlie marine food webs and shape ecosystem diversity and structure in upper ocean environments. However, the high complexity of in situ ecosystems renders it difficult to study these interactions. Two-member co-culture systems of picocyanobacteria and single heterotrophic bacterial strains have been thoroughly investigated. However, in situ interactions comprise far more diverse heterotrophic bacterial associations with single photoautotrophic organisms. Here, bacterial community composition, lifestyle preference, and genomic- and proteomic-level metabolic characteristics were investigated for an open ocean Synechococcus ecotype and its associated heterotrophs over 91 days of co-cultivation. The associated heterotrophic bacterial assembly mostly constituted five classes including Flavobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Phycisphaerae, Gammaproteobacteria, and Alphaproteobacteria. The seven most abundant taxa/genera comprised >90% of the total heterotrophic bacterial community, and five of these displayed distinct lifestyle preferences (free-living or attached) and responses to Synechococcus growth phases. Six high-quality genomes from the co-culture system were reconstructed inclusive of Synechococcus and the five dominant heterotrophic bacterial populations. The only primary producer of the co-culture system, Synechococcus, displayed metabolic processes primarily involved in inorganic nutrient uptake, photosynthesis, and organic matter biosynthesis and release. Two of the flavobacterial populations, Muricauda and Winogradskyella, and an SM1A02 population, displayed preferences for initial degradation of complex compounds and biopolymers, as evinced by high abundances of TBDT, glycoside hydrolase, and peptidases proteins. In contrast, the alphaproteobacterium Oricola sp. population mainly utilized low molecular weight DOM, including Flavobacteria metabolism byproducts, through ABC, TRAP, and TTT transport systems. Polysaccharide-utilization loci present in the flavobacterial genomes encoded similar trans-membrane protein complexes as Sus/cellulosome and may influence their lifestyle preferences and close associations with phytoplankton. The heterotrophic bacterial populations exhibited complementary mechanisms for degrading Synechococcus-derived organic matter and driving nutrient cycling. In addition to nutrient exchange, removal of reactive oxygen species and vitamin trafficking also contributed to the maintenance of the Synechococcus / heterotroph co-culture system and the interactions shaping the system.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate 120 mL liquid cultures were centrifuged (3,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C). The supernatant was then filtered through 0.22 μm pore size filter unit (Sterivex-GV, Millipore) and subjected to exoproteome analysis. The centrifugation pellet was then collected to analyze the entire cellular proteomes. Pellets were washed with 0.2 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), cells were added to STD buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and then incubated in a 99°C water bath for 5 min. To improve cell lysis, samples were sonicated for 10 s in 15 s intervals over 3 min. After centrifugation at 16,000 x g and 4°C over 30 min, the supernatants were transferred to new tubes for subsequent analysis. Proteins in the remaining mixtures were concentrated and purified via precipitation with trichloroacetic acid. Protein concentrations were determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein digestion was performed using a standard two-step in-solution digestion protocol. Briefly, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min, then diluted by adding 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate to a urea concentration below 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added to the solution at a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for a first round of overnight digestion, and then again at a 1:100 ratio for a second round of digestion over 4 h. After trypsin digestion, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), and then directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The column was resolved using a gradient comprising solvents A and B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), with an increase from 6% to 23% of solvent B over 26 min, 23% to 35% over 8 min and then increasing to 80% over 3 min, followed by maintaining at 80% for the last 3 min. All of the above were conducted at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The recovered peptides were then analyzed on an NSI source linked to a tandem mass spectrometer (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) Mass spectrometer coupled online to the UPLC using a 2.0 kV electrospray voltage. The intact peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 with a m/z scan ranging from 350 to 1,800. Peptides were then chosen for MS/MS analysis using an NCE setting of 28, followed by detection of the fragments with the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. The recovered MS/MS data were then processed using the Maxquant search engine software program (v.1.5.2.8). The tandem mass spectra were searched against a database comprising all of the predicted ORFs from the two metagenomes that were concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was used as the cleavage enzyme and up to two missing cleavages were allowed for the data set.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial photoautotroph-heterotroph interactions underlie marine food webs and shape ecosystem diversity and structure in upper ocean environments. Here, bacterial community composition, lifestyle preference, and genomic- and proteomic-level metabolic characteristics were investigated for an open ocean <i>Synechococcus</i> ecotype and its associated heterotrophs over 91&#x2009;days of cocultivation. The associated heterotrophic bacterial assembly mostly constituted five classes, including <i>Flavobacteria</i>, <i>Bacteroidetes</i>, <i>Phycisphaerae</i>, <i>Gammaproteobacteria</i>, and <i>Alphaproteobacteria</i> The seven most abundant taxa/genera comprised &gt;90% of the total heterotrophic bacterial community, and five of these displayed distinct lifestyle preferences (free-living or attached) and responses to <i>Synechococcus</i> growth phases. Six high-quality genomes, including <i>Synechococcus</i> and the five dominant heterotrophic bacteria, were reconstructed. The only primary producer of the coculture system, <i>Synechococcus</i>, displayed metabolic processes primarily involved in inorganic nutrient uptake, photosynthesis, and organic matter biosynthesis and release. Two of the flavobacterial populations, <i>Muricauda</i> and <i>Winogradskyella</i>, and an SM1A02 population, displayed preferences for initial degradation of complex compounds and biopolymers, as evinced by high abundances of TonB-dependent transporters (TBDTs), glycoside hydrolase, and peptidase proteins. Polysaccharide utilization loci present in the flavobacterial genomes influence their lifestyle preferences and close associations with phytoplankton. In contrast, the alphaproteobacterium <i>Oricola</i> sp. population mainly utilized low-molecular-weight dissolved organic carbon (DOC) through ATP-binding cassette (ABC), tripartite ATP-independent periplasmic (TRAP), and tripartite tricarboxylate transporter (TTT) transport systems. The heterotrophic bacterial populations exhibited complementary mechanisms for degrading <i>Synechococcus-</i>derived organic matter and driving nutrient cycling. In addition to nutrient exchange, removal of reactive oxygen species and vitamin trafficking might also contribute to the maintenance of the <i>Synechococcus</i>-heterotroph coculture system and the interactions shaping the system.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The high complexity of <i>in situ</i> ecosystems renders it difficult to study marine microbial photoautotroph-heterotroph interactions. Two-member coculture systems of picocyanobacteria and single heterotrophic bacterial strains have been thoroughly investigated. However, <i>in situ</i> interactions comprise far more diverse heterotrophic bacterial associations with single photoautotrophic organisms. In the present study, combined metagenomic and metaproteomic data supplied the metabolic potentials and activities of uncultured dominant bacterial populations in the coculture system. The results of this study shed light on the nature of interactions between photoautotrophs and heterotrophs, improving our understanding of the complexity of <i>in situ</i> environments.

### Keywords
Synechococcus culture; exoproteome; metaproteome

### Affiliations
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Yu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qiang Zheng
Xiamen University


