### Accession
PXD013832

### Title
Comprehensive cell surface proteomics defines markers of classical, intermediate and non-classical monocytes

### Description
Monocytes are a critical component of the cellular innate immune system, and can be subdivided into classical, intermediate and non-classical subsets on the basis of surface CD14 and CD16 expression. Classical monocytes play the canonical role of phagocytosis, and account for the majority of circulating cells. Intermediate and non-classical cells are known to exhibit varying levels of phagocytosis and cytokine secretion, and are differentially expanded in certain pathological states. Characterisation of cell surface proteins expressed by each subset is informative not only to improve understanding of phenotype, but also to provide biological insight into function. Here we use highly multiplexed Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT)-based mass spectrometry with selective cell surface biotinylation to characterise the classical monocyte surface proteome, then interrogate the phenotypic differences between each monocyte subset to identify novel protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profiling was performed as previously described. The total number of monocytes biotinylated was dependent on the yield from enrichment procedures detailed above, typically in the range of 105-106 cells for intermediate and non-classical monocytes, and 107 for classical monocytes. Precise sorted counts were collected during each enrichment from the Influx or Aria III cell sorter. Each of the three donated samples was biotinylated and labelled separately, combining at the final stage prior to TMT analysis. Briefly, for of each enriched monocyte subset sample, surface sialic acid residues were oxidized with sodium meta-periodate (Thermo) and biotinylated with aminooxy-biotin (Biotium). After quenching, cells were incubated in 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 lysis buffer (10mM Tris HCl, 1.6% Triton, 150mM NaCl). Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) and washed extensively. Captured protein was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested on-bead with trypsin (Promega) in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for 3 hours. Tryptic peptides were collected and the whole sample labelled using TMT reagents following dilution in 200mM HEPES pH 8.5 adjusted to a final 30% acetonitrile concentration (v/v). To ensure analysis of each cell type in a 1:1:1 ratio, a fraction of each labelled peptide sample was combined in proportion to the number of cells collected for each subset. Labelling was as follows; classical monocytes donation 1 (126), intermediate monocytes donation 1 (127N), non-classical monocytes donation 1(127C), classical monocytes donation 2 (128N), intermediate monocytes donation 2 (128C), non-classical monocytes donation 2 (129N), classical monocytes donation 3 (129C), intermediate monocytes donation 3 (130N), non-classical monocytes donation 3 (130C). The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine, and TMT-labelled samples combined in a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 (all subsets) or 1:1:1 (Classical only) ratio. Labelled peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness.  Offline fractionation was performed with modifcations as previously described. Briefly, 10 mg of PolySulfethyl A bulk material (Nest Group Inc) was loaded on to a fritted 200 l tip in 100% Methanol using a vacuum manifold. SCX material was conditioned slowly with 1ml SCX buffer A (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% Acetonitrile), then 0.5 ml SCX buffer B (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 350mM KCl, 30% Acetonitrile) then 2ml SCX buffer A. Dried peptides were resuspended in 500 ul SCX buffer A and added to the tip at a flow rate of ~150 ul/min, followed by a 150 ul wash with SCX buffer A. Fractions were eluted in 150 ul buffer at increasing K+ concentrations (10, 25, 40, 60, 90, 150 mM KCl), vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness then desalted using StageTips. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. An unfractionated singleshot was analysed initially to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel, thus avoiding the need for excessive electronic normalization. As all normalisation factors were >0.33 and <3.0, data for each singleshot experiment was analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. For monocyte subset analysis, 2µl of fractionated peptide was initially analysed by mass spectrometry, followed by the remainder of the sample having observed satisfactory chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzXML format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.   A combined database was constructed from the human Uniprot database (26th January, 2017), and common contaminants such as porcine trypsin. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.   To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously. This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm, though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.   Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described previously. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion. Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance. An isolation specificity filter was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation. Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 135 (9plex) or 45 (3plex) across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel.   For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed. For further analysis and display in figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalized signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein.   Proteins were filtered to include those most likely to be present at the cell surface with high confidence. These contained proteins with the Gene Ontology (GO) terms of ‘plasma membrane’, ‘cell surface’, ‘extracellular’ or with a short 4- or 5-part GO cellular compartment term that included ‘integral to membrane’, but with no subcellular assignment.

### Publication Abstract
Monocytes are a critical component of the cellular innate immune system, and can be subdivided into classical, intermediate and non-classical subsets on the basis of surface CD14 and CD16 expression. Classical monocytes play the canonical role of phagocytosis, and account for the majority of circulating cells. Intermediate and non-classical cells are known to exhibit varying levels of phagocytosis and cytokine secretion, and are differentially expanded in certain pathological states. Characterisation of cell surface proteins expressed by each subset is informative not only to improve understanding of phenotype, but may also provide biological insights into function. Here we use highly multiplexed Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT)-based mass spectrometry with selective cell surface biotinylation to characterise the classical monocyte surface proteome, then interrogate the phenotypic differences between each monocyte subset to identify novel protein markers.

### Keywords
Blood cell, Quantitative proteomics, Monocyte, Tandem mass tag, Plasma membrane, Classical monocyte, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


