### Accession
PXD039959

### Title
TBC1D2B undergoes phase separation and mediates autophagy initiation

### Description
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers from the ATG8 family regulate autophagy initiation and progression in mammalian cells. Their interaction with LC3-interacting region (LIR) containing proteins promotes cargo sequestration, phagophore assembly, or even fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes. Previously, we have shown that RabGAP proteins from the TBC family directly bind to LC3/GABARAP proteins. In the present study, we focus on the function of TBC1D2B. We show that TBC1D2B contains a functional canonical LIR motif and acts at an early stage of autophagy by binding to both LC3/GABARAP proteins and ATG5 conjugation machinery. Subsequently, TBC1D2B is degraded by autophagy. TBC1D2B condensates into liquid droplets upon autophagy induction. Our study suggests that phase separation is an underlying mechanism of TBC1D2B-dependent autophagy induction, which serves as an assembly platform for further cargo sequestration.

### Sample Protocol
Inducible Hela cells expressing iTAP-TBC1D2B were grown on SILAC media containing either L-arginine and L-lysine (light) or L-arginine [13C615N4] and L-lysine [13C6-15N2] (heavy) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) [38]. Following 24 hours of incubation with doxycycline or DMSO, cells were washed with PBS and combined by scraping from light and heavy conditions. Lysates were processed as described for the HA-agarose beads immunoprecipitation. Bound proteins were eluted in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT, heated at 70 °C for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min, and loaded onto 4–12% gradient SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) before in-gel trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from gel and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips [39].Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analyzed on a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) fitted with a 20 cm, 75 µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 3-µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch). The column was maintained at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted in a non-linear gradient of 4–40% acetonitrile over 240 min and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan MS spectra (300–2000 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 × 106. Up to 10 of the most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 2 Th window for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 25 ms and an AGC target value of 5 × 103. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state > 6 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s to minimize the acquisition of fragment spectra representing already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 with default parameters [40]. Acquired spectra were searched against the human database (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (Sep 2012), and a collection of common contaminants (“contaminants.fasta” provided with MaxQuant) using the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant [41], [42]. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 p.p.m. in MS mode, 20 p.p.m. in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to three miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy [42]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers XXX [43], [44]. For further analysis, Perseus v1.6.6.0 was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The log fold changes were calculated using Student’s t-test with the Benjamin-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers from the ATG8 family regulate autophagy initiation and progression in mammalian cells. Their interaction with LC3-interacting&#xa0;region (LIR)&#xa0;containing proteins promotes cargo sequestration, phagophore assembly, or even fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes. Previously, we have shown that RabGAP proteins from the TBC family directly bind to LC3/GABARAP&#xa0;proteins. In the present study, we focus on the function of TBC1D2B. We show that TBC1D2B contains a functional canonical LIR motif and acts at an early stage of autophagy by binding to both LC3/GABARAP&#xa0;and ATG12 conjugation complexes. Subsequently, TBC1D2B is degraded by autophagy. TBC1D2B condensates into liquid droplets upon autophagy induction. Our study suggests that phase separation is an underlying mechanism of TBC1D2B-dependent autophagy induction.

### Keywords
Autophagy conjugation complex, Phagophore formation, Atg8-related proteins, Gtpase-activating protein, Tbc1d2b, Liquid-liquid phase separation, Autophagy

### Affiliations
institute of biochemistry 2 (IBC2)
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue Straße 15, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Fraunhofer Institute of Translational Medicine and Pharmacology, Carl-von-Noorden-Platz 9, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Marina Hoffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue Straße 15, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Fraunhofer Institute of Translational Medicine and Pharmacology, Carl-von-Noorden-Platz 9, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


