### Accession
PXD037341

### Title
Tuberculosis diagnostic biomarker signature by proteomics and metabolomics

### Description
: Tuberculosis (TB) is a transmissible disease listed as one of the 10 leading causes of death worldwide (10 million infected in 2019). A swift and precise diagnosis is essential to forestall its transmission, for which is crucial the discovery of effective diagnostic biomarkers. In this study, we aimed to discover molecular biomarkers for the early diagnosis of tuberculosis. Two independent cohorts comprising 29 and 34 subjects were assayed by proteomics, and 49 were included for metabolomic analysis. All subjects were arranged into 3 experimental groups – healthy controls (Controls), Latent TB infection (LTBI) and TB patients. LC-MS/MS blood serum protein and metabolite levels were submitted to univariate, multivariate and ROC analysis. From the 149 proteins quantified in the discovery set, 25 were found to be differentially abundant between Controls and TB patients. The AUC, specificity and sensitivity, determined by ROC statistical analysis of the model composed by four of these proteins considering both proteomic sets, were 0.96; 93% and 91%, respectively. The five metabolites (9-methyluric acid, indole-3-lactic acid, trans-3-indoleacrylic acid, hexanoylglycine and N-acetyl-L-leucine) that better discriminate the control and TB patient groups (VIP > 1.75) from a total of 92 metabolites quantified in both ionization modes, were submitted to ROC analysis. An AUC=1 was determined with all samples being correctly assigned to the respective experimental group. An integrated ROC analysis enrolling 1 protein and 4 metabolites was also performed for the common control and TB patients in the proteomic and metabolomic groups. This combined signature has correctly assigned the 12 controls and 12 patients used only for prediction (AUC=1, specificity=100% and sensitivity=100%). This multi-omics approach has revealed a biomarker signature for tuberculosis diagnosis that could be potentially used for developing a point-of-care diagnosis clinical test.

### Sample Protocol
Individuals were included and divided into three experimental groups according to their clinical characteristics: 1. Healthy individuals with a negative IGRA test (Control Group); 2. Healthy, latently infected individuals who tested positive for the IGRA test (LTBI Group); 3. Patients diagnosed with pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis (TB Group). For the proteomic assay, participants were randomly divided into two sets: Discovery set to identify possible biomarkers and Validation set to test the putative biomarkers. For the metabolomic study the two cohorts were merged. Collected blood was allowed to clot and the serum was immunodepleted from the six most abundant proteins. The protein extract was digested with trypsin after reduction and alkylation. Tryptic peptide mixtures were desalted by C18 microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). After retention time adjustment, quantification was performed for all proteins in the library file that were identified from ProteinPilotTM searches. Peptides’ confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach, and those that met the 1 % FDR threshold in at least three biological replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 or 6 minutes, for discovery and validation sets respectively, with 100 ppm XIC width.  The levels of the proteins were estimated by summing all the filtered transitions from all the filtered peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total intensity obtained for samples.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB) is a transmissible disease listed as one of the 10 leading causes of death worldwide (10 million infected in 2019). A swift and precise diagnosis is essential to forestall its transmission, for which the discovery of effective diagnostic biomarkers is crucial. In this study, we aimed to discover molecular biomarkers for the early diagnosis of tuberculosis. Two independent cohorts comprising 29 and 34 subjects were assayed by proteomics, and 49 were included for metabolomic analysis. All subjects were arranged into three experimental groups&#x2014;healthy controls (controls), latent TB infection (LTBI), and TB patients. LC-MS/MS blood serum protein and metabolite levels were submitted to univariate, multivariate, and ROC analysis. From the 149 proteins quantified in the discovery set, 25 were found to be differentially abundant between controls and TB patients. The AUC, specificity, and sensitivity, determined by ROC statistical analysis of the model composed of four of these proteins considering both proteomic sets, were 0.96, 93%, and 91%, respectively. The five metabolites (9-methyluric acid, indole-3-lactic acid, trans-3-indoleacrylic acid, hexanoylglycine, and N-acetyl-L-leucine) that better discriminate the control and TB patient groups (VIP &gt; 1.75) from a total of 92 metabolites quantified in both ionization modes were submitted to ROC analysis. An AUC = 1 was determined, with all samples being correctly assigned to the respective experimental group. An integrated ROC analysis enrolling one protein and four metabolites was also performed for the common control and TB patients in the proteomic and metabolomic groups. This combined signature correctly assigned the 12 controls and 12 patients used only for prediction (AUC = 1, specificity = 100%, and sensitivity = 100%). This multiomics approach revealed a biomarker signature for tuberculosis diagnosis that could be potentially used for developing a point-of-care diagnosis clinical test.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis; diagnosis; biomarkers; multiomics; mass-spectrometry; blood serum

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Non-Model Organisms Laboratory ITQB NOVA
ITQB NOVA

### Submitter
Ana Varela Coelho

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Varela Coelho
Proteomics of Non-Model Organisms Laboratory ITQB NOVA


