### Accession
PXD006498

### Title
N6-methyl adenosine (m6A) recruits and repels proteins to regulate mRNA homeostasis

### Description
RNA modifications are integral to regulation of RNA metabolism. One such abundant mRNA modification is m6A, which impacts various aspects of RNA metabolism including splicing, transport and degradation. Current knowledge about proteins recruited to m6A to carry out these molecular processes is still limited. Here we describe a comprehensive and systematic mass spectrometry-based screening of m6A interactors in various cell types and species. Amongst the main findings, we identified G3BP1 as a protein, which is repelled by m6A and which positively regulates mRNA stability in an m6A regulated manner.  Furthermore, we identified FMR1 as a novel, RNA sequence context dependent m6A reader, thus revealing a connection between an mRNA modification and an autism spectrum disorder. Collectively, our data represents a rich resource for the community and sheds further light on the complex interplay between m6A, m6A interactors and mRNA homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates for protein pulldowns and also RNA pulldowns were prepared according to the following protocol. The cells were harvested by trypsin and washed twice with chilled PBS. Then the cell pellet was lysed in  whole cell lysate buffer (50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8; 150 mM NaCl; 1% NP-40; 0.5 mM DTT; 10% Glycerol; and protease inhibitor cocktail) for 90 min 4 degrees on a rotating wheel. The lysate was spun down and the supernatant was used as cell lysate. FASP protocol was used for the processing of whole cell proteome samples.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using MaxQuant software suite. For SILAC-labeling based experiments, raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.1 with default settings and Arg10/Lys8, Arg6/Lys4, Arg0/Lys0 (Heavy, medium-heavy or light labels), and match between runs was enabled (Cox and Mann, 2008). The Swisprot curated or Uniprot database was used for identification. Normalized ratios from MaxQuant output tables were plotted for the forward and reverse pull-downs. Outliers were identified independently in the forward and reverse pull-downs using boxplot statistics (threshold: 1.5 x the interquartile range (IQR)). Proteins were considered significant if they were identified as outliers in both experiments.

### Publication Abstract
RNA modifications are integral to the regulation of RNA metabolism. One abundant mRNA modification is N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A), which affects various aspects of RNA metabolism, including splicing, translation and degradation. Current knowledge about the proteins recruited to m<sup>6</sup>A to carry out these molecular processes is still limited. Here we describe comprehensive and systematic mass-spectrometry-based screening of m<sup>6</sup>A interactors in various cell types and sequence contexts. Among the main findings, we identified G3BP1 as a protein that is repelled by m<sup>6</sup>A and positively regulates mRNA stability in an m<sup>6</sup>A-regulated manner. Furthermore, we identified FMR1 as a sequence-context-dependent m<sup>6</sup>A reader, thus revealing a connection between an mRNA modification and an autism spectrum disorder. Collectively, our data represent a rich resource and shed further light on the complex interplay among m<sup>6</sup>A, m<sup>6</sup>A interactors and mRNA homeostasis.

### Keywords
Mrna homeostasis, Interaction proteomics, G3bp1, Fmr1, M6a

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen 6525, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen 6525, the Netherlands.


