### Accession
PXD040660

### Title
An epitranscriptomic mechanism regulating chlorophyll biosynthesis in Arabidopsis

### Description
Light modulates expression of nuclear-encoded chloroplast proteins to promote chlorophyll biosynthesis and photosynthesis in plants. Photoregulatory mechanisms regulating transcription and protein stability of nuclear-encoded chloroplast proteins have been extensively studied, but how photoresponsive mRNA metabolism affecting chloroplast proteins remains not well understood.  We performed a systematic analysis of the photoresponsive transcriptomes, m6A epitranscriptomes, translatomes, and proteomes in Arabidopsis, leading to a hypothesis that the blue light receptor cryptochromes activate the RNA methyltransferase, FIONA 1 (FIO1), to increase RNA methylation, translation of the nuclear-encoded chlorophyll synthesis enzymes (CSEs), and chlorophyll synthesis. We further demonstrate that the photoresponsive CRY2-interacting protein, SPA1, acts as a chaperone to mediate co-condensation of the CRY2/FIO1 complex, activating the FIO1 methyltransferase activity. This finding demonstrates a previously unknown photoregulatory mechanism controlling chlorophyll biosynthesis in plants.

### Sample Protocol
200 mg of fresh seedling powder was extracted with lysis buffer (1% SDC, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1X protease inhibitor), 200ug of protein was reduced with DTT and IAA. The digestion was carried out at 37 ℃ for 14h using trypsin/lysine C mix. Protein digests were directly desalted via homemade C18 StageTips. The instrument was LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an easy nLC-1000 UPLC. 2 μg of desalted and dried peptides were loaded at 2 μL/min onto the analytical column (omics high resolution series monolithic capillary HPLC columns, 75 μM x 50 cm, Kyoto Monotech) and separated with a linear gradient of 120 min. The flow rate was controlled at 600 nL min-1 and the column temperature was kept at 50 ℃. A linear gradient was applied for the peptide separation. It started with 5% mobile phase B (100% ACN), raised to 8% phase B in 4 min, then increased to 20% phase B in 76 min. The percentage of phase B was later on increased to 30% in 30min, and finally reached 90% in another 2 min, and maintained at 90% for 8 min. The mass spectrometer was operated under data independent acquisition mode. Key parameters were set as follows: 1, MS scan range 350–1500 Da; resolution 120,000; AGC target 4e5; maximum injection time 50 ms; 2, HCD-MS/MS resolution 30,000; AGC target 2e5; collision energy 32; 3, HRMS1-DIA method was applied according to publication (Xuan, Bateman et al. 2020) with minor modifications that 3 MS1 scans were interspersed with 20 DIA MS/MS variable windows (in total 60 DIA MS/MS scans).

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut default parameters (BGS Factory Settings (default)) were used to analyze the DIA raw data. Peptide retention times were automatically aligned according to the iRT peptides. Precursor and protein thresholds were set as 1.0% and 5% FDR, respectively. Decoy database was generated by mutated strategy. The average peak area of the top three peptides with FDR less than 1.0% was used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Light regulates chlorophyll homeostasis and photosynthesis via various molecular mechanisms in plants. The light regulation of transcription and protein stability of nuclear-encoded chloroplast proteins have been extensively studied, but how light regulation of mRNA metabolism affects abundance of nuclear-encoded chloroplast proteins and chlorophyll homeostasis remains poorly understood. Here we show that the blue light receptor cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) and the METTL16-type m<sup>6</sup>A writer FIONA1 (FIO1) regulate chlorophyll homeostasis in response to blue light. In contrast to the CRY2-mediated photo-condensation of the mRNA adenosine methylase (MTA), photoexcited CRY2 co-condenses FIO1 only in the presence of the CRY2-signalling protein SUPPRESSOR of PHYTOCHROME A (SPA1). CRY2 and SPA1 synergistically or additively activate the RNA methyltransferase activity of FIO1 in vitro, whereas CRY2 and FIO1, but not MTA, are required for the light-induced methylation and translation of the mRNAs encoding multiple chlorophyll homeostasis regulators in vivo. Our study demonstrates that the light-induced liquid-liquid phase separation of the photoreceptor/writer complexes is commonly involved in the regulation of photoresponsive changes of mRNA methylation, whereas the different photo-condensation mechanisms of the CRY/FIO1 and CRY/MTA complexes explain, at least partially, the writer-specific functions in plant photomorphogenesis.

### Keywords
Chlorophyll, Fiona, Light, M6a

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
xueyang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xeuyang Zhang
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


