### Accession
PXD013937

### Title
Proteome of follicular Fluid from lean and overweight/obese women with PCOS and that of healthy controls

### Description
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is typically characterized by oligo or anovulation, hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovarian morphology, affecting 5-20% of women of reproductive age [1]. It has drawn significant attention as a major cause of anovulatory infertility and the syndrome of metabolic, reproductive and obstetrical disorders [2 ,+]. Due to heterogeneous clinical features and unclear pathogenesis of PCOS, the diagnosis and treatment strategies remain a matter of debate. To better understand the complex follicular development environment in PCOS, we conducted a TMT-based quantitative proteomic study to compare the composition of proteins, pathways and molecular functions of FF from lean and overweight/obese women with PCOS and that of healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
All participants underwent controlled ovarian stimulation using a combination of recombinant FSH and GnRH antagonist/ a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist protocol with hCG trigger, as described previously [200]. The FF was collected by transvaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration, 34 to 36 hours after administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (10000 IU). Only clear FF samples without macroscopically blood contamination were included. After oocyte isolation, the FF was centrifuged at 2000r for 10 min to remove cells and insoluble particles. The supernatant was separated and stored at -80 ℃ for further use. The FF sample was thawed and removed of any possible cellular debris by centrifugation at 12,000 g, 4 °C for 10 min. Then, three individual samples from group II with equal amounts of protein from subgroups were mixed to obtain three Po patients, three Pn patients and three control pooled samples. ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Kit (BIO-RAD) was used to remove the highly abundant proteins. Protein concentrations after depletion were determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein concentration assay (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The digestion of protein was first reduced using 5mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and subsequently alkylated by 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the darkness. The sample was diluted with 100mM TEAB to the urea concentration less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) for first digestion overnight and at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) for second digestion for 4 hours. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted using Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was solubilized with 0.5 M TEAB and labelled using TMT kit (ThermoFisher, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Po samples 1,2 and 3 were labeled 127N, 127C and 128N and Pn samples 1, 2 and 3 were labelled 128C, 129N and 129C. Control samples 1, 2 and 3 were labelled 130N, 130C and 131.  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (250 mm length, 5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter,) according to the manufacturer's instruction. In brief, the peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile at pH 9.0 into 60 fractions for 60 min. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and were vacuum freeze-dried for subsequent operations. The tryptic peptides dissolved in solvent A (aqueous solution with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) were loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient was set at an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (aqueous solution with 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were then subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched using Maxquant (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched using the SwissProt Human database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to less than 1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set at greater than 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pcos, Tmt

### Affiliations
Shengjing Hospital of China medical University
shengjing hospital of China medical University

### Submitter
Mengwei Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Xinyi
Shengjing Hospital of China medical University


