### Accession
PXD037247

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of human brain fibroblast-secreted molecules

### Description
Our study showed that fibroblasts significantly attenuated blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption in an in vitro intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) model. Since fibroblasts and brain microvascular endothelial cells were not in direct contact in this model, we reasoned that fibroblasts did so by secreting molecules with BBB-protective function. Here, we further screened fibroblast-secreted molecules in this in vitro ICH model by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblast-conditioned medium and the control medium (without fibroblast-secreted molecules) were concentrated using Amicon Ultra centrifuge filters (MWCO 10 kDa, Millipore, Z677108). Proteins in the concentrated media were separated in gradient SDS-PADE. Due to high levels of hemoglobin in the system, hemoglobin bands were cut off from the gel. The remaining gel pieces were pooled into an upper (>56kDa) sample and a lower (<58kDa) sample. Proteins in the samples were digested using an in-gel trypsin digestion protocol. The enzymatic peptides were loaded into a reversed-phase column, and directly eluted into the Thermo-Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Proxeon Easy NanoLC system (Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was used to acquire MS data.  A survey MS scan was acquired first, and then the top 10 ions in the MS scan were selected for following CID MS/MS analysis.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired by Orbitrap at the resolutions of 120,000 and 15,000, respectively. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification and modification characterization were performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) with Mascot (Matrix Science 2.7) and UniProt database.  The spectra of possible modified peptides were inspected further to verify the accuracy of the assignments.

### Publication Abstract
The function of fibroblasts in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) remains elusive. By targeting Col1&#x3b1;1, a fibroblast-specific marker, we generate mice with ablated Col1&#x3b1;1<sup>+</sup> fibroblasts. These mutants show exacerbated blood-brain barrier (BBB) damage, enlarged injury volume, and worse neurological function, highlighting a beneficial role of Col1&#x3b1;1<sup>+</sup> fibroblasts in ICH. Echoing these findings, fibroblasts significantly decrease endothelial permeability in an in&#xa0;vitro ICH model. Next, we demonstrate that fibroblasts promote BBB integrity in ICH mainly via up-regulating tight junction proteins without affecting transcytosis-associated proteins, indicating a paracellular rather than transcellular mechanism. A subsequent mechanistic study reveals that the BBB-protective effect of fibroblasts is partially mediated by TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 2 (TIMP2). Furthermore, we find that exogenous TIMP2 attenuates BBB disruption in these mutants after ICH. These results suggest that Col1&#x3b1;1<sup>+</sup> fibroblasts repair BBB damage in ICH via the paracellular pathway in a TIMP2-dependent manner, and that Col1&#x3b1;1<sup>+</sup> fibroblasts and TIMP2 may be targeted in ICH treatment.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Brain fibroblasts

### Affiliations
University of South Florida
University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology

### Submitter
Yao Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Yao Yao
University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology


