### Accession
PXD003702

### Title
Aortic Aneurysm iTRAQ HiRIEF proteomics

### Description
Conducted proteomics on samples from patients with aortic aneurysm and from non-dilated controls. Furthermore, we investigated both patients with bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) and also the more normal tricuspid aortic valves (TAV). The aim was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind the higher propensity of BAV patients to develop aorta dilation and consequent aortic aneurysm.

### Sample Protocol
Clinical samples were collected from ascending aorta tissue, and were processed using FASP with trypsin, iTRAQ and HiRIEF before LC-MS on a Q exactive instrument.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using Sequest/Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 against the Swissprot human database (canonical and isoform) version 2015-12. Oxidation of Methionine was used as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and iTRAQ8plex on peptide N-terminus and on Lysines used as static modifications. Isobaric tag based quantitative analysis was done using the "Reporter Ions Quantifier" node in PD.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with a bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) are at significantly higher risk of developing aortic complications than individuals with tricuspid aortic valves (TAV) and defective signaling during the embryonic development and/or life time exposure to abnormal hemodynamic have been proposed as underlying factors. However, an explanation for the molecular mechanisms of aortopathy in BAV has not yet been provided. We combined proteomics, RNA analyses, immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy to identify molecular differences in samples of non-dilated ascending aortas from BAV (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;62) and TAV (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;54) patients. Proteomic analysis was also performed for dilated aortas (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;6 BAV and N&#x2009;=&#x2009;5 TAV) to gain further insight into the aortopathy of BAV. Our results collectively showed the molecular signature of an endothelial/epithelial-mesenchymal (EndMT/EMT) transition-like process, associated with instability of intimal cell junctions and activation of RHOA pathway in the intima and media layers of ascending aorta in BAV patients. We propose that an improper regulation of EndMT/EMT during the spatiotemporally related embryogenesis of semilunar valves and ascending aorta in BAV individuals may result in aortic immaturity and instability prior to dilation. Exasperation of EndMT/EMT state in post embryonic life and/or exposure to non-physiological hemodynamic could lead to the aneurysm of ascending aorta in BAV individuals.

### Keywords
Hirief, Human, Bicuspid, Q exactive, Aneurysm, Valves, Itraq, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden


