### Accession
PXD040311

### Title
SECRETORY PROTEOMIC RESPONSES OF ENDOMETRIAL EPITHELIAL CELLS TO TROPHOBLAST DERIVED  EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES

### Description
Synchronized cross talk between embryo and endometrium during pre-implantation period is critical for establishment of pregnancy. Extracellular vesicels(EVs) of both embryo and endometrial origin are known to be integral in regulating embryo maternal communication during this time. However, exact molecular signalling pathways or factors that regulate the embryo endometrial communication during pre-conception period remains elusive. Here in this study extracellular vesicles from trophoblast cells were shown to modulate endometrial epithelial cell secretome in favour of embryo implantation and embryo development.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture supernatant samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid deoxycholate (TCA-DOC) overnight. Approximate protein quantities were estimated based on the size of the pellets. The pellets were then solubilized in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), and 20 mM methylamine buffer. Protein reduction was performed with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) by incubating 1 h at room temperature. Protein alkylation was performed with10 mM chloroacetamide by incubating 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Next, protease LysC (Wako) was added to an enzyme:substrate ratio (E:S) of 1:50, and the samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were then diluted five times with 100 mM ABC, and trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was added at 1:50 E:S ratio and incubated overnight at room temperature. After digestion, the samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a concentration of 1%, and samples were desalted on in-house made C18 StageTips. The samples were reconstituted in 0.5% TFA, and peptide concentrations were determined using a Pierce colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, 1 µg of protein was injected into an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was eluted at 250 nl/min from the trap to a 75 µm ID x 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch). The separation gradient was 2-35% B for 60 min and 40-100% B for 5 min (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA). The eluted peptides were sprayed to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV (applied through liquid-junction). The MS was operated with a top-5 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=70 000 at 200 m/z was followed by five higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 5 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R=17 500. The MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 5e4 with an injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (versions 1.6.15.0 and 2.0.3.0). Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, wheras cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was enabled with LFQ, and the protein minimum ratio count was set to 1. Search was performed against Homo sapiens and Bos taurus reference proteomes, using the tryptic digestion rule. The peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Synchronized crosstalk between the embryo and endometrium during the periconception period is integral to pregnancy establishment. Increasing evidence suggests that the exchange of extracellular vesicles (EVs) of both embryonic and endometrial origin is a critical component of embryo-maternal communication during peri-implantation. Here, we investigated whether embryonic signals in the form of EVs can modulate the endometrial epithelial cell secretome. Receptive endometrial analog RL95-2 cells were supplemented with trophoblast analog JAr cell-derived EVs, and the secretory protein changes occurring in the RL95-2 cells were analyzed using mass spectrometry. EVs of non-trophoblastic origin (HEK 293 cells) were used as the control EV source to supplement endometrial cells. Trophoblast cell-derived EVs enriched endometrial epithelial cell secretions with proteins that support embryo development, attachment, or implantation, whereas control EVs were unable to induce the same effect. The present study suggests that embryonic signals in the form of EVs may prime receptive endometrial epithelial cells to enrich their secretory proteome with critical proteomic molecules with functional importance for periconception milieu formation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Embryo, Epithelial cells, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Secretome, Endometrium, Trophoblast cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Kreutzwaldi 62, 51006, Tartu, Estonia
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences,  Estonian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
SUBHASHINI MUHANDIRAM MUHANDIRAM RALALAGE

### Lab Head
Dr Alireza Fazeli
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Kreutzwaldi 62, 51006, Tartu, Estonia


