### Accession
PXD001607

### Title
Proteome profiling of sea star epidermal secretions

### Description
Marine organisms represent a rich source for discovering natural products and materials that could inspire the development of novel molecules or materials for a high variety of industrial applications. Among them are sea stars, emblematic animals of the seashore. These organisms rely on epidermal secretions to cope with their benthic life. Their integument produces a mucus, which represents the first barrier against invaders; and their tube feet produce adhesive secretions to pry open mussels and attach strongly but temporarily to rocks. In this study, we investigate for the first time the protein content of mucous and adhesive secretions from the sea star Asterias rubens. These secretomes were analysed using tandem mass spectrometry and resulting MS/MS data were searched against in silico translated tube foot transcriptome. Tube foot transcripts coding for proteins identified in the two secretions were then functionally annotated by similarity searches against NCBI nr database.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 4 independent samples of mucus (~10 mg each) and 4 idependent samples of adhesive footprints (~1 mg each) in a 1.5 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) containing 7 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), 20 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) and 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT), and incubated for 1 h at 60°C under agitation. The sulfhydryl groups of the proteins were then carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide used in a 2.5-fold excess (w/w) to DTT in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. The reaction was stopped by adding mercaptoethanol (βMSH) in the same quantity as iodoacetamide. The suspension was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was measured using the Non-Interfering Protein Assay Kit (Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany) with bovine serum albumin as a protein standard. For each sample, 50 µg of proteins were precipitated in 80% acetone overnight at -20°C. After 15 min centrifugation at 13,000 rpm and acetone evaporation, the resulting pellet was submitted to overnight enzymatic digestion using modified porcine trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/50 at 37 °C in 25mM NH4HCO3. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v). Tryptic peptides were analyzed by reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Eksigent Ultra Plus nano-LC 2D HPLC system connected to a quadrupole time-of-flight TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Briefly, after injection, peptide mixtures were transferred onto the analytical C18-nanocapillary HPLC column (C18 Acclaim PepMap100, 75 µm I.D. × 25 cm, 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient: 2-35% solvent B in A (from 0 to 12 min), 35-90% solvent B in A (from 12 to 14 min), 90% solvent B in A (from 14 to 19 min), 90-2% solvent B in A (from 19 to 20 min) and 2% solvent B in A (from 20 to 50 min), with a total runtime of 50 min including mobile phase equilibration. Solvents were prepared as follows, mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile/98% of 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water, and mobile phase B: 98% acetonitrile/2% of 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water. MS data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives). Ionisation was obtained with an ion spray voltage of 2.6 kV, curtain gas set at 15 PSI and ion source gaz at 4PSI. For data-dependent acquisition, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 50 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 100 counts per second and with a 2 + to 4 + charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 1.85 sec. A rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of ± 10 eV. Peaklists were created using mascot distiller 2.3.2 using default parameters and exported as mgf files.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched for protein candidates against the six open reading frame (ORFs) of the tube foot transcriptome using MASCOT 2.2.07 (Matrix Sciences, Boston, USA). The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to ±0.05 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidized methionine and deamidated asparagine were set as variable modifications. The maximum expectation value for accepting individual peptide ion scores [-10*Log(p)] was set to ≤0.01, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event. The FDR was estimated at peptide level using the decoy database option of MASCOT and the emPAI (exponentially modified Protein Abundance Index) was calculated to give an evaluation of absolute protein abundance in the samples (23). This index was normalized across samples by calculating the following percentage:  Normalized emPAI = (emPAIprotein/emPAItotal) × 100 where emPAIprotein and emPAItotal are, respectively, the emPAI for a given protein and the sum of the emPAI of all the identified proteins within a  sample.

### Publication Abstract
Sea stars rely on epidermal secretions to cope with their benthic life. Their integument produces a mucus, which represents the first barrier against invaders; and their tube feet produce adhesive secretions to pry open mussels and attach strongly but temporarily to rocks. In this study, we combined high-throughput sequencing of expressed mRNA and mass-spectrometry-based identification of proteins to establish the first proteome of mucous and adhesive secretions from the sea star Asterias rubens. We show that the two secretions differ significantly, the major adhesive proteins being only present in trace amounts in the mucus secretion. Except for 41 proteins which were present in both secretions, a total of 34 and 244 proteins were identified as specific of adhesive secretions and mucus, respectively. We discuss the role of some of these proteins in the adhesion of sea stars as well as in their protection against oxygen reactive species and microorganisms. In addition, 58% of the proteins identified in adhesive secretions did not present significant similarity to other known proteins, revealing a list of potential novel sea star adhesive proteins uncharacterized so far. The panel of proteins identified in this study offers unprecedented opportunities for the development of sea star-inspired biomimetic materials.

### Keywords
Sea stars, Proteome, Mucus, Adhesive

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biology of Marine Organisms and Biomimetics Institute for Biosciences University of Mons Belgium
University of Mons

### Submitter
Elise Hennebert

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Eeckhaut
Laboratory of Biology of Marine Organisms and Biomimetics Institute for Biosciences University of Mons Belgium


