### Accession
PXD012582

### Title
Indoxyl sulfate and p-cresyl sulfate directly promote vascular calcification via activation of inflammation and coagulation pathways

### Description
Vascular calcification contributes to high cardiovascular mortality in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients. An association between the uremic toxins indoxyl sulfate (IS) and p-cresyl sulfate (PCS) and cardiovascular disease has been suggested. This study provides strong etiological evidence for indoxyl sulfate and p-cresyl sulfate as major contributors to vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease patients. Continuous exposure to indoxyl sulfate or p-cresyl sulfate in rats with chronic kidney disease promotes moderate to severe calcification in the aorta and peripheral vessels. Unbiased proteomic analyses of arterial samples coupled to functional bioinformatics annotation analysis revealed that calcification events were associated with acute phase response signaling, coagulation and glucometabolic signaling pathways, while escape from toxin-induced calcification was linked with liver X receptors and farnesoid X/liver X receptor signaling pathways. Activation of inflammation and coagulation pathways in the arterial wall plays a pivotal role in toxin-induced calcification and strongly associates with hyperglycemia and insulin resistance. These findings reveal new perspectives to establish novel therapeutic targets to prevent, halt progression or cure vascular calcification.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of aorta tissues from Rat were extracted using 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer. After centrifugation (18000 g, 4°C, 20 minutes), the determination of the protein concentration in the supernatant was done using RCDC kit (Bio-Rad). Equal amount of 100 µg of proteins from each sample were reduced and alkylated by TCEP (Tris-2-Carboxyethyl phosphine) and MMTS (5-methyl-methanoethiosulphate) respectively, before in-solution trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides from each sample were labelled using iTRAQ reagents 8plex following the manufacturer's instructions. In this study 3 experiments were performed: Experiment 1: (Aorta_Rat_8plex_IS_PCS_23 02 17): vehicle exposed CKD rats versus IS and PCS exposed (7 weeks) CKD rats (with calcified aorta). The samples were itraq labelled as follows: 113 to 116 for vehicle exposed CKD rats, tags 117 to 118 for IS exposed CKD rats, 119 to 121 for PCS exposed CKD rats. Experiment 2: (Aorta_Rat_8plex_Non_Calcified_05_09-17): vehicle exposed CKD rats versus IS and PCS exposed (7 weeks) CKD rats (with non-calcified aorta). These non-calcified samples were itraq tagged as follows: 113 to 116 for vehicle exposed CKD rats, tags 117 to 118 for IS exposed CKD rats, 119 to 121 for PCS exposed CKD rats. Experiment 3: (Aorta_Rat_IS_PCS_301018): vehicle exposed CKD rats versus IS and PCS exposed (4 days) CKD rats (with non-calcified aorta). In this experiment we used 2 x 8plex. In plex1, the samples are tagged as follows: 113 to 115 vehicle exposed CKD rats, 116 to 118 for IS exposed CKD rats and 119 to 121 PCS exposed CKD rats. In plex2, the samples are tagged as follows: 113 to 115 vehicle exposed CKD rats, 116 to 118 for PCS exposed CKD rats and 119 to 121 for IS exposed CKD rats. The mixed peptides from each 8plex experiment were first fractionated on strong cationic exchange chromatography column (1 mm x 150 mm polysulfoethyl Aspartamide (Dionex)). The 10 SCX fractions obtained are secondly separated on a nano-LC C18 column (200 Å, 2 μm, 75 μm × 25 cm). The nano-LC at flow rate of 300 nL/min, is coupled online with a nano-ESI source to a QExactive™-Plus Orbitrap (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer with a capillary at 1.7 KV. The duration of every single run was 150 min. Data dependent acquisition (DDA, top 20) in positive ion mode was performed for a selected mass range of 350 to 1800 m/z and using an orbitrap mass analyser at MS1 level 140,000 resolution and MS2 level 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 Software (ThermoScientific) using Sequest HT as search engine against Rattus norvegicus (UP000002494) Uniprot/SwissProt database (2017) with threshold of confidence above 99% (false discovery rate less than 1%). Search parameters were set as followed: trypsin as enzyme; peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01 Da; variable modifications, oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y); fixed modifications of methylthio (C) (MMTS), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-term), and iTRAQ 8-plex (K). The list of identified proteins containing iTRAQ ratios of expression levels over control sample was generated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hyperglycemia, P-cresyl sulfate, Indoxyl sulfate, Coagulation, Vascular calcification, Chronic kidney disease, Inflammation, Itraq-8plex

### Affiliations
Labo Pathophysiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp. Belgium
VIB-UAntwerp Center for Molecular Neurology 

### Submitter
Abdelkrim Azmi

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick C. D’Haese
Labo Pathophysiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp. Belgium


