### Accession
PXD019690

### Title
Neuronal metabolic rewiring promotesresilience to neurodegeneration caused by mitochondrial dysfunction

### Description
Neurodegeneration in mitochondrial disorders is considered irreversible because of limited metabolic plasticity in neurons, yet the cell-autonomous implications of mitochondrial dysfunction for neuronal metabolism in vivo are poorly understood. Here, we profiled the cell-specific proteome of Purkinje neurons undergoing progressive OXPHOS deficiency caused by disrupted mitochondria fusion dynamics. We found that mitochondrial dysfunction triggers a profound rewiring of the proteomic landscape culminating in the sequential activation of precise metabolic programs preceding cell death. Surprisingly, we identified a marked induction of pyruvate carboxylase (PCx) and other key anaplerotic enzymes involved in replenishing intermediates into the TCA cycle. Suppression of PCx aggravated neurodegeneration, showing that anaplerosis is protective in OXPHOS-deficient neurons. Restoration of mitochondrial fusion in end-stage degenerating neurons fully reversed these metabolic hallmarks thereby preventing cell death. Our findings identify a previously unappreciated pathway conferring resilience to mitochondrial dysfunction and show that neurodegeneration can be reversed even at advanced disease stages.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen neuronal pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 10 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl), by heat-ing the solution at 95°C for 10 min and sonicating for 10min (30s pulse / 30s pause cycles) on Bio-ruptor (Diagnode). Samples were diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 and mixed with 300 ng of Trypsin gold (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C to achieve complete digestion. On the following day, samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 20000 g. The supernatant was diluted with 0.1% formic acid and the solution was desalted using home-made STAGEtips (75). Samples were dried in a SpeedVac apparatus (Eppendorf concentrator plus 5305) at 45°C and the peptides were suspended with 0.1% formic acid. All the samples were prepared at the same time by the same person. For the analysis of the astrocyte samples, four micrograms of desalted peptides were la-belled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex cat. No 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent. For TMT labelling, 0.8 mg of TMT reagent was re-suspended with 70 µL of anhydrous ACN, dried peptides were reconstituted in 9 µL 0.1M TEAB to which 7 µL TMT reagent in ACN was added to a final ACN concentration of 43.75%, after 60 min of in-cubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, resuspended in 200 µL 0.1% FA, split into two, and desalted using home-made STAGEtips. One of the two halves was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters cat. no SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 96 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3min, followed by 8 min of 95% buffer B; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicar-bonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passed (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (76)using the integrated Andromeda search engine (77). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the mouse reference proteome (proteome ID UP000000589, downloaded May 2017 from UniProt) in addition to the sequences of Cre recombinase and YFP from Aequorea victoria. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cyste-ine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein iden-tification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was per-formed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second pep-tide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (78) was performed us-ing an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. LFQ intensities were filtered for at least two valid values in at least one genotype group per time point and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Analysis of the label-free quantification results was performed with the Perseus computation platform (79) and R (80). Differential expression analysis was performed using the two-sided moderated t-test from the limma package (81). Exploratory data analysis was performed using ggplot, FactoMineR, factoextra, GGally and pheatmap. TMT based proteomics data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43. Raw proteomics data was searched against the human proteome database from Uniprot, downloaded in September 2018. The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential ex-pression analysis was performed using limma in R

### Publication Abstract
Neurodegeneration in mitochondrial disorders is considered irreversible because of limited metabolic plasticity in neurons, yet the cell-autonomous implications of mitochondrial dysfunction for neuronal metabolism in vivo are poorly understood. Here, we profiled the cell-specific proteome of Purkinje neurons undergoing progressive OXPHOS deficiency caused by disrupted mitochondrial fusion dynamics. We found that mitochondrial dysfunction triggers a profound rewiring of the proteomic landscape, culminating in the sequential activation of precise metabolic programs preceding cell death. Unexpectedly, we identified a marked induction of pyruvate carboxylase (PCx) and other anaplerotic enzymes involved in replenishing tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. Suppression of PCx aggravated oxidative stress and neurodegeneration, showing that anaplerosis is protective in OXPHOS-deficient neurons. Restoration of mitochondrial fusion in end-stage degenerating neurons fully reversed these metabolic hallmarks, thereby preventing cell death. Our findings identify a previously unappreciated pathway conferring resilience to mitochondrial dysfunction and show that neurodegeneration can be reversed even at advanced disease stages.

### Keywords
Mitofusin 2, Purkinje  neurons, Labe-free, Tmt, Anaplerosis

### Affiliations
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.


