### Accession
PXD004356

### Title
Defining the interactome of human adenine nucleotide translocases

### Description
Adenine nucleotide translocases (ANT in mammals, AAC in yeast) mediate the 1:1 electrogenic exchange of ADP into and ATP out of the mitochondrial matrix and is thus a required component of the oxidative phosphorylation machinery. Originally modeled to function in isolation, the major isoform in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, AAC2, was recently demonstrated to associate with a number of protein complexes, including other mitochondrial solute carriers, higher order respiratory complexes (termed supercomplexes), and itself. As very little is known about the mammalian ANT interactome, we sought to define it using a proteomics-based approach. Here, we show that human ANT1 and ANT2, like yeast AAC2, do not function in isolation but have numerous binding partners including the respiratory supercomplex, Despite the differences in the organization of respiratory supercomplexes in yeast and mammals, wherein the latter additionally involves Complex I, the capacity of both AACs and ANTs to associate with it suggests an evolutionarily conserved interaction that has a functional importance.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were solubilized with 1.5% digitonin and the clarified supernatant used for non-denaturing immunoprecipitations. IP eluates were resolved by SDS-PAGE for in-gel digestion and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Gel digests form each of the interactome were analyzed on Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy nLC II liquid chromatography system. Data acquired in a data dependent mode by selecting top 10 most intese precursor ions and subjected to HCD fragmentation. Both and MS and MS/MS spectra acquired at high resolution, 120K and 30K at 400 m/z respectively and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
All raw files corresponding to each SILAC experiment were searched together using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) (25059623). The raw data was processed and searched against Human Refseq 73 protein database by including a known contaminants using a built-in Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant. The following search parameters were used for the database searches. Strict trypsin specificity to K or R of C-terminal of a peptide by allowing two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set as seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (42.010565 Da)), protein N-terminal acetylation (15.994915 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Quantification of SILAC (Heavy (13C6, 15N4) and light (13C6. 15N2)) pairs was performed by enabling multiplicity of 2 and to ensure reliable quantification the ratio count was set as a minimum of 2. For the absolute quantification purpose iBAQ option was enabled. First search and main search peptide mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm respectively. 20 ppm MS/MS mass tolerance was applied. 1% PSM, peptide and protein level false discovery rate (FDR) was applied for the identification by enabling revert decoy database search. The generated output protein, peptide, evidence tables were used for the downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ant2, Proteomics, Ant1 interactome

### Affiliations
Steven M Claypool, Department of Physiology, Johns HopkinsUniversity School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Steven Claypool

### Lab Head
Dr Steven M Claypool
Steven M Claypool, Department of Physiology, Johns HopkinsUniversity School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


