### Accession
PXD008174

### Title
microRNA-4331 promotes TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage via targeting RB1, up-regulating IL1RAP, and activating p38 MAPK pathway in vitro

### Description
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a member of the coronaviridae family, could cause fatal diarrhea of piglets and result in numerous economic losses. Previous studies demonstrated that TGEV infection could lead to mitochondrial damage and up-regulate miR-4331 level. So miR-4331 may play an important regulatory role in the control of mitochondrial function. To explore the potential role of miR-4331 in mitochondrial damage, we adopted a strategy consisting of quantitative proteomic analysis of porcine kidney (PK-15) cells in response to miR-4331 and TGEV infection. Eventually, 69 differentially expressed proteins were gained. The target of miR-4331 was identified. The effects of miR-4331 and its target RB1 on mitochondrial Ca2+ level, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP), p38 MAPK signaling pathway were investigated. The results showed that miR-4331 elevated mitochondrial Ca2+ level, reduced MMP, targets Retinoblastoma 1 (RB1), up-regulated IL1RAP, and induced activation of p38 MAPK pathway during TGEV infection. RB1 was identified as the direct targets of miR-4331 and down-regulated IL1RAP, suppressed the activation of p38 MPAK, and attenuated TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage. In addition, IL1RAP played a positive role in activating p38 MAPK signaling and negative role in TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage. The data indicate that miR-4331 aggravates TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage by repressing expression of RB1, promoting IL1RAP, and activating p38 MAPK pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale for Proteomics—In order to investigating the effect of miR-4331 on mitochondrial damage in response to TGEV infection, PK-15 cells were transfected with 100 nM miR-4331 mimics or negative control using Lipofectamine 3000 and infected with TGEV at an MOI of 1.0 at 24 h post-transfection (hpt). The cells were collected for quantitative proteomic analysis at 24 h post-infection (hpi). Two biological replicates were performed. To evaluate the transfection efficiency, the miR-4331 level was measured by qRT-PCR. Reverse transcription reactions and qRT-PCR were performed as described previously(17). The relative quantification of miRNAs was normalized to U6 using the two-ddCt method (18). Protein Isolation, Digestion, and Labeling with TMT—The PK-15 cells were sonicated on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 min at 4℃. The clarified supernatant was collected. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 ℃ and centrifuged at 4℃ for 10 min. The precipitate was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). 100 μg protein of each sample was digested with trypsin. The two control samples and two treatment samples were respectively labeled with TMT (126, 127,129, and 130).  LC−MS/MS—The samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). Briefly, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Then the Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of LC-MS/MS Data—MS/MS data were analyzed by Mascot (version 2.3.0) according to a previously described protocol[17]. Briefly, raw MS data files were processed using the LC/MS software Proteome Discoverer (Thermo scientific™ software) and converted into the MASCOT generic format (mgf) files. Mascot software performed peak generation, precursor mass recalibration, extraction of TMT 6-plex reporter ions intensity and calculation of TMT 6plex reporter ions intensity ratios. For each MS/MS spectra, top 10 most intense peaks in every 100 Da window were extracted for database search. Then Mascot search was performed by searching tandem mass spectra against Uniprot Sus scrofa database (UniProt release 2015_04, 26054 entries) (http://www.uniprot.org) concatenated with reversed decoy database and protein sequences of common contaminants. Cleavage enzyme was specified as trypsin/P, maximum number of missing cleavages was set to 2. Mass tolerance for precursor ion was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance for MS/MS ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamyiodomethylation on Cys and TMT6plex (N-term) and TMT6plex (K) were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Mascot software assembled the peptide/protein groups, calculated false discovery rates, filter the identifications. Protein quantification was set to use only unique peptides bearing any modification. The median ratio of TMT 6-plex reporter intensity of unique peptides was set as protein relative abundance changes. In this study, we prepared two duplicate samples. For each protein, we set the average ratio calculated from two duplicate samples as the final quantitation of protein. Student’s test was explored to calculate differential significance degree of protein relative abundance changes. T test p value less than 0.05 was considered significantly differentially. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD006864 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) [18].  Bioinformatic Analysis of Differentially Expressed Proteins—Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate proteins pathways. The Wolf Psort database (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) was used to predict subcellular localization.  Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions—The differentially expressed protein name identifiers (Uniprot accession) were searched against the STRING database (version 10.0) for protein-protein interactions [19].  Vector Construction—To overexpress RB1 and IL1RAP, the full-length sequences of RB1 and IL1RAP were obtained by PCR from PK-15 cells and cloned into plasmid pCI-neo (Promega, USA). The constructions were respectively named pCI-neo-RB1 and pCI-neo-IL1RAP. The primer sequences are shown in supplemental S1.  Western Blot Analysis—PK-15 cells were treated with RIPA lysis buffer containing phenylmethyl sulfonylfluoride (PMSF). The proteins were separated using 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred onto the polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane. The membrane was blocked with 5% BSA for 2 h at room temperature and then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 ℃. The HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were used to incubate the membrane for 1 h at room temperature.  Reverse Transcription PCR and real-time PCR—Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol (Invitrogen, US). 2 μg of total RNA was treated with DNase I (Fermentas, Germany) for 30 min at 37 ℃ and reversely transcribed using the First-strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, US). The cDNA was used as the template for real-time PCR. The real-time PCR was performed on Bio-Rad iQ5 Real-Time PCR System (Bio-Rad, USA). The reverse transcription primers and real-time PCR primers are shown in supplemental S1.

### Publication Abstract
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a member of the coronaviridae family, could cause fatal diarrhea of piglets and result in numerous economic losses. Previous studies demonstrated that TGEV infection could lead to mitochondrial damage and upregulate miR-4331 level. So miR-4331 may play an important regulatory role in the control of mitochondrial function. To explore the potential role of miR-4331 in mitochondrial damage, we adopted a strategy consisting of quantitative proteomic analysis of porcine kidney (PK-15) cells in response to miR-4331 and TGEV infection. Eventually, 69 differentially expressed proteins were gained. The target of miR-4331 was identified. The effects of miR-4331 and its target RB1 on mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> level, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP), p38 MAPK signaling pathway were investigated. The results showed that miR-4331 elevated mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> level, reduced MMP, targets Retinoblastoma 1 (RB1), upregulated IL1RAP, and induced activation of p38 MAPK pathway during TGEV infection. RB1 was identified as the direct targets of miR-4331 and downregulated IL1RAP, suppressed the activation of p38 MPAK, and attenuated TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage. In addition, IL1RAP played a positive role in activating p38 MAPK signaling and negative role in TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage. The data indicate that miR-4331 aggravates TGEV-induced mitochondrial damage by repressing expression of RB1, promoting IL1RAP, and activating p38 MAPK pathway.

### Keywords
Micror-4331; mitochondrial damage; proteomics; transmissible gastroenteritis virus; rb1; il1rap; p38 mapk

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R. China
PTM

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Huang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R. China


