### Accession
PXD023366

### Title
Single-cell quantitative proteomic analysis of oocyte maturation revealed high heterogeneities in human in vitro matured oocytes

### Description
In this study we investigated the protein expression patterns during human oocyte in vitro and in vivo maturation (IVO) by single-cell quantitative proteomic analysis of 36 human oocytes. Among 2,094 proteins quantified in 34 oocytes (GV: 11 oocytes, IVM: 12 oocytes, IVO: 11 oocytes), 224 were differential between IVO and GV oocytes during in vivo maturation, and 61 between IVM and IVO oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Each human oocyte was lysed in 10ul lysis buffer containing 0.02% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA) and stored on ice for 10 min. 1ul 50 mM DTT was added to a final concentration of 5mM and incubated at 60°C for 40 min. Following reduction, 3ul of 33 mM IAA solution in 167 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to alkylate sulfhydryl groups by incubating for 40 min in the dark at room temperature. To avoid adhesion loss, a high concentration of trypsin (2ul, 100ng/ul) 55 was added and incubated at 37 °C for 5 h. The digestion was stopped by adding 0.5 µL of formic acid for 30 min at 37 °C to cleave RapiGest SF. Finally, peptides were desalted by StageTips (ThermoFisher Scientific, SP301) and dried with a SpeedVac concentrator before MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed using Maxquant 54, 56, 57 (version 1.2.2.5) for feature detection, database searching, and protein quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB human database (downloaded in July 18, 2018 containing 76,117 sequences) with N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. The peptide mass tolerances of the first search and main search (recalibrated) were <20 and 6 ppm, respectively. The match tolerance for MS/MS search were 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was 6 amino acids. The allowed missed cleavages for each peptide was 2. Both peptides and proteins were filtered with a maximum FDR of 0.01. To increase peptide/protein identification, the MBR feature with a match window of 0.7 min was used. Label free quantification (LFQ) were used to estimate protein abundance according to previous procedure 54. Both unique and razor peptides were selected for protein quantification. Other unmentioned parameters were the default settings of the Maxquant software.

### Publication Abstract
Oocyte maturation is pertinent to the success of in&#xa0;vitro maturation (IVM), which is used to overcome female infertility, and produced over 5000 live births worldwide. However, the quality of human IVM oocytes has not been investigated at single-cell proteome level. Here, we quantified 2094 proteins in human oocytes during in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo maturation (IVO) by single-cell proteomic analysis and identified 176 differential proteins between IVO and germinal vesicle oocytes and 45 between IVM and IVO oocytes including maternal effect proteins, with potential contribution to the clinically observed decreased fertilization, implantation, and birth rates using human IVM oocytes. IVM and IVO oocytes showed separate clusters in principal component analysis, with higher inter-cell variability among IVM oocytes, and have little correlation between mRNA and protein changes during maturation. The patients with the most aberrantly expressed proteins in IVM oocytes had the lowest level of estradiol per mature follicle on trigger day. Our data provide a rich resource to evaluate effect of IVM on oocyte quality and study mechanism of oocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Single cell proteomics, Human oocyte maturation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, People's Republic of China.
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Xiaofei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, People's Republic of China.


