### Accession
PXD013759

### Title
Defining the NSD2 interactome: PARP1 PARylation reduces NSD2 histone methyltransferase activity and impedes chromatin binding

### Description
NSD2 is a histone methyltransferase that specifically dimethylates histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36me2), a modification associated with gene activation. Dramatic overexpression of NSD2 in t(4;14) multiple myeloma (MM) and an activating mutation of NSD2 discovered in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are significantly associated with altered gene activation, transcription and DNA damage repair. The partner proteins through which NSD2 may influence critical cellular processes remain poorly defined. In this study, we utilized proximity-based labelling (BioID) combined with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to identify high confidence NSD2 interacting partners in MM cells.

### Sample Protocol
Study 1: Identification of NSD2 interacting partners by BioID. TKO NSD2-low cell line, which was derived from the t(4;14)+ KMS11 multiple myeloma cell line was transduced with retrovirus encoding a BirA tagged version of NSD2. The resulting TKO cell line stably expressed NSD2-BirA and mimicked high expression of NSD2 in t(4;14)+ MM. These TKO+NSD2-BirA cells were cultured in media supplemented with biotin for the BirA domain to biotinylate proteins that are in close proximity to NSD2. NSD2 and its biotinylated partners were extracted in SDS-containing lysis buffer, captured and subsequently analyzed by nanocapillary liquid chromatography mass spectrometry.  Study 2: Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to capture NSD2 interaction partners. We developed a BirA control to eliminate nonspecific proteins from the screen. A BirA ligase along with a C-terminal nuclear localization signal peptide was cloned into a retrovirus vector and stably transduced into the TKO cell line. The control cell line was then used to perform comparative quantification of biotinylated proteins in the NSD2-BirA experiment versus BirA alone. Three biological replicates of TKO expressing NSD2-BirA or BirA control were cultured in media supplemented with biotin. Same numbers of cells were harvested and lysed. The same amount of total protein was used for affinity capture to ensure highly comparable conditions. Each sample was analyzed in technical triplicate for protein identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
study 1: Mascot searching was performed for BioID protein identification. Raw files were converted to .mgf as input. Human Swiss_Prot AC 2018_02 database (20,317 sequences) was used for the search. Trypsin was used as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation on N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as static modification. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. study 2: Proteome Discoverer (v2.1; Thermo) was used for identification and peptide quantification. A spectrum selector was used to import spectrum from .raw files. The Sequest HT search engine was used to cross reference identified peptides against human Uniprot fasta database. The mass tolerance was set to be 10 ppm for precursors and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation on N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as static modification. Trypsin was set as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. The precursor ion area detector in Proteome Discoverer v2.1 was used for quantification.  In total, 2955 peptides were identified. Each protein was considered identified when at least two unique peptides were identified with at least two independent peptide spectral matches observed from the biological replicates. In total, 52 proteins were identified by 270 peptides. For differential expression analysis, all peptide intensities were standardized across all measures of the peptide. For each protein, each peptide species was treated as an independent set of observations on the protein. Standardized peptide intensities were tested for differential expression using a hierarchical linear model with technical replicates nested within biological replicates. The resulting F test probabilities were then corrected for multiple testing with a false discovery rate of 5%. All statistical analyses were done using a custom script for SAS 9.4 (Cary, NC).

### Publication Abstract
NSD2 is a histone methyltransferase that specifically dimethylates histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36me2), a modification associated with gene activation. Dramatic overexpression of NSD2 in t(4;14) multiple myeloma (MM) and an activating mutation of NSD2 discovered in acute lymphoblastic leukemia are significantly associated with altered gene activation, transcription, and DNA damage repair. The partner proteins through which NSD2 may influence critical cellular processes remain poorly defined. In this study, we utilized proximity-based labeling (BioID) combined with label-free quantitative MS to identify high confidence NSD2 interacting partners in MM cells. The top 24 proteins identified were involved in maintaining chromatin structure, transcriptional regulation, RNA pre-spliceosome assembly, and DNA damage. Among these, an important DNA damage regulator, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1), was discovered. PARP1 and NSD2 have been found to be recruited to DNA double strand breaks upon damage and H3K36me2 marks are enriched at damage sites. We demonstrate that PARP1 regulates NSD2 via PARylation upon oxidative stress. <i>In vitro</i> assays suggest the PARylation significantly reduces NSD2 histone methyltransferase activity. Furthermore, PARylation of NSD2 inhibits its ability to bind to nucleosomes and further get recruited at NSD2-regulated genes, suggesting PARP1 regulates NSD2 localization and H3K36me2 balance. This work provides clear evidence of cross-talk between PARylation and histone methylation and offers new directions to characterize NSD2 function in DNA damage response, transcriptional regulation, and other pathways.

### Keywords
Bioid, Nsd2, Multiple myeloma, Lc-ms/ms, Interacting partners, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biosciences, and the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL USA 60208
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Xiaoxiao Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Neil L Kelleher
Department of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biosciences, and the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL USA 60208


