### Accession
PXD015024

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Whole Saliva in Chronic Periodontitis

### Description
Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease resulting from a dysbiosis of the dental biofilm and a dysregulated host response in susceptible individuals. It is characterized by periodontal attachment destruction, bone resorption, and eventual tooth loss. Salivary biomarkers have been sought to predict and prevent periodontitis. This comparative study analyzed the salivary proteome of 30 individuals with chronic periodontitis (CP) and 10 with periodontal health (PH), and correlated specific proteins with clinical parameters of disease by using mass spectrometry. Stimulated whole saliva was obtained and pooled for 5 healthy controls and 15 CP patients, precipitated with TCA, digested enzymatically with trypsin and analyzed by an LTQ Orbitrap Velos equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. A wide range of salivary proteins of various functions was significantly reduced in CP individuals, whereas salivary acidic proline-rich phosphoprotein, submaxillary gland androgen-regulated protein, histatin, fatty acid-binding protein, thioredoxin, and cystatin were predominant in diseased patients and correlated significantly with signs of periodontal attachment loss and inflammation. Specific salivary proteins were associated with PH and CP. These differences in salivary proteome profiles may contribute to the identification of disease indicators or signatures and the improvement of periodontal diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva samples were pooled for pairs of individuals with the same clinical features so that a total of 5 saliva pools from 10 PH individuals and 15 saliva pools from 30 CP patients were processed and analyzed. The proteins were precipitated with 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2h at 4°C and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min. Supernatants were separated, washed with 100 μL of acetone, and then vortex and centrifuged at 20 000 x g for 10 min. This procedure was repeated 3 times. After that, samples were re-suspended in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Samples were analyzed through Qubit™ Fluorometer (Invitrogen Life Technologies, São Paulo, SP, Brazil) to measure the total protein concentration.  Ten micrograms of proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (1 h at 30 °C), alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature), diluted 1:10 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, and digested with trypsin (V5113, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:50 ratio for 18 h at 35 °C. To stop trypsin digestion, the samples were acidified until a final concentration of 0,1% TFA. For the desalination, samples were cleaned in C18 microcolumns (Harvard apparatus), dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (pH 8.0) for quantification in Qubit and LC-MS/MS analyses. Two micrograms of peptides were pre-fractionated in C18 column (Column: 20cm, 75 μm ID, 3 μm spheres Reprosil Pur C18, Dr. Maish/ Trap-column: 3 cm, 200 μm ID, 5 μm spheres Reprosil Pur C18, Dr. Maish) along 2 h of the gradient (5% to 40% B/100 min; 40% to 95% B/13 min; 95% B/7 min) in the n-LC Proxeon EASY-II system (Thermo Scientific).  The solvents composition for chromatography were solvent A, made of 95% H2O/5% acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0.1% FA, and solvent B, 95% ACN/5% H2O/0.1% FA. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates in the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. For data acquisition, Full MS scan was acquired at 30 000 of resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer using a dynamic exclusion list of 90 s and a spray voltage of 2.5 kV. For MS2 spectra we select the 10 most intense ions for collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap (7500 of resolution) using a normalized collision energy of 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software and spectral data were searched using the UniProt/SwissProt database limited to the human proteome set (April 2018). The parameters used were: full-tryptic search space, two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as dynamic modifications. For label-free quantification, we use the extraction ion chromatography approach. Significant differences between groups in protein levels were evaluated by the Student t-test, whereas differences in presence or absence of a protein between clinical groups were evaluated by the Chi-square test. Correlation analysis between periodontal clinical parameters and normalized levels of salivary proteins was carried out for all samples using the Pearson coefficient correlation. Protein-protein interaction network analysis was done by STRING software version 11.0 and the meaning of network edges were through molecular action with high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease resulting from a dysbiosis of the dental biofilm and a dysregulated host response in susceptible individuals. It is characterized by periodontal attachment destruction, bone resorption and eventual tooth loss. Salivary biomarkers have been sought to predict and prevent periodontitis. This comparative study analyzed the salivary proteome of individuals with chronic periodontitis (CP) and periodontal health (PH) and correlated specific proteins with clinical parameters of disease by using mass spectrometry. Stimulated whole saliva was obtained 10 PH and 30 CP patients and pooled into 5 healthy control samples and 15 CP samples. After precipitation with TCA, samples were digested enzymatically with trypsin and analyzed by a LTQ Orbitrap Velos equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. A wide range of salivary proteins of various functions was significantly reduced in CP individuals, whereas salivary acidic proline-rich phosphoprotein, submaxillary gland androgen-regulated protein, histatin-1, fatty acid binding protein, thioredoxin and cystatin-SA were predominant in diseased patients and correlated significantly with signs of periodontal attachment loss and inflammation. In conclusion, few specific salivary proteins were associated with CP. These findings may contribute to the identification of disease indicators or signatures for the improvement of periodontal diagnosis. SIGNIFICANCE: Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease that results in periodontal attachment destruction, bone resorption and eventual tooth loss. Salivary biomarkers have been sought to predict periodontitis. The analysis of the salivary proteome of individuals with chronic periodontitis indicated that several proteins of various functions were significantly reduced in these individuals, except for salivary acidic proline-rich phosphoprotein, submaxillary gland androgen-regulated protein, histatin, fatty acid binding protein, thioredoxin and cystatin. Differences in salivary proteome profiles between periodontal health and periodontitis may contribute to the identification of disease indicators and to the improvement of periodontal diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Saliva; periodontitis; periodontal health; proteome; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Cesar Sousa Nogueira
UFRJ


