### Accession
PXD005656

### Title
Human naive T-cell secretome, activated and non-activated

### Description
In vitro culture of 2 separate sets of naive human T cells (from 2 adult male donors), activated using CD3 and CD28 antibodies. Secretome collection at 48 hours after activation. The same cell cultures not activated and sampled at the exact same time served as 'not-activated control'.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture supernatants were harvested after centrifuging cells and cellular debris. Proteins in supernatant were reduced and alkylated (DTT and iodoacetamide) and separated over C4 HPLC. For each sample, 13 HPLC fractions were separately digested with trypsin (O/N, 37C) and resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by on-line C18 LC MS/MS in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by PEAKS 8.0 (BioInformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) and by ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1 (ThermFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
The Human Proteome Project (HPP) aims to discover high-stringency data for all proteins encoded by the human genome. Currently, &#x223c;18% of the proteins in the human proteome (the missing proteins) do not have high-stringency evidence (for example, mass spectrometry) confirming their existence, while much additional information is available about many of these missing proteins. Here, we present MissingProteinPedia as a community resource to accelerate the discovery and understanding of these missing proteins.

### Keywords
Human, T-cell, Interleukin-9, Secretome

### Affiliations
Delft University of Technology
Antwerp University

### Submitter
Peter Verhaert

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Verhaert
Antwerp University


