### Accession
PXD021272

### Title
A proteomic map of SUP-T1 cells

### Description
CD4+ T cells (T helper cells) are cytokine-producing adaptive immune cells that activate or regulate the responses of different immune cells. They are known to play crucial roles in antibody class switching in B cells, neutrophil recruitment and activation of macrophages and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. The activation and functional status of CD4+ T cells is important for adequate responses to pathogen infections but has also been associated with auto-immune disorders and survival in several cancers.  In the current study, we carried out proteomic profiling of SUP-T1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
SUP-T1 human T lymphoblast cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cell lysates of SUP-T1 was reconstituted in 300 µl lysis buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). It was sonicated three times for 10 sec on ice, followed by heating at 90°C for 5 min. Protein lysate of 200 µg was considered for trypsin digestion where it was reduced by incubating in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 20 minutes and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 10 minutes. This was followed by acetone precipitation for 6 hours where the pellet was dissolved in 50mM TEABC. The lysate was then subjected for digestion using L-(tosylamido-2-phenyl) ethyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK) treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ, USA) at a final concentration of 1:20 (w/w) at 37°C overnight (~16 hrs). The samples were then subjected to strong cation exchange-based fractionation. The digested peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer Version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using Sequest and Mascot search algorithm against Human RefSeq 81 protein database, including common contaminants. The search parameters included Carbamidomethyl (C) as static modifications, and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. The data were searched against decoy database with a 1 % FDR cut off at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
CD4+ T cells (T helper cells) are cytokine-producing adaptive immune cells that activate or regulate the responses of various immune cells. The activation and functional status of CD4+ T cells is important for adequate responses to pathogen infections but has also been associated with auto-immune disorders and survival in several cancers. In the current study, we carried out a label-free high-resolution FTMS-based proteomic profiling of resting and T cell receptor-activated (72 h) primary human CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood of healthy donors as well as SUP-T1 cells. We identified 5237 proteins, of which significant alterations in the levels of 1119 proteins were observed between resting and activated CD4+ T cells. In addition to identifying several known T-cell activation-related processes altered expression of several stimulatory/inhibitory immune checkpoint markers between resting and activated CD4+ T cells were observed. Network analysis further revealed several known and novel regulatory hubs of CD4+ T cell activation, including IFNG, IRF1, FOXP3, AURKA, and RIOK2. Comparison of primary CD4+ T cell proteomic profiles with human lymphoblastic cell lines revealed a substantial overlap, while comparison with mouse CD+ T cell data suggested interspecies proteomic differences. The current dataset will serve as a valuable resource to the scientific community to compare and analyze the CD4+ proteome.

### Keywords
T lymphocytes, Systems biology, Adaptive immunity, Label-free quantitation, Cd4+ t helper cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
NTNU
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

### Submitter
Richard K. Kandasamy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard K. Kandasamy
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway


