### Accession
PXD037417

### Title
Analysis of proteome change in Nicotiana benthamiana infected with rice stripe virus

### Description
To reveal the global changes of the proteome change due to RSV infection, a label-free quantitation proteomics approach was performed using leaves from RSV-infected and mock-infected N. benthamiana at 10 dpi.

### Sample Protocol
Sixty N. benthamiana plants were divided into 6 groups, each group contained 10 plants. Three groups were inoculated with RSV, while the other 3 groups were mock-inoculated. The upper 3 leaves were harvested for proteome analysis. Proteins of leaves were extracted and then digested into peptides with trypsin. The peptides were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used for MS/MS data processing. The N. benthamiana database (https://solgenomics.net/ftp/genomes/Nicotiana_benthamiana/) and RSV encoded protein sequences concatenated with reverse decoy database was were used for MS/MS data search.

### Publication Abstract
Rice stripe virus (RSV) is one of the most devastating viruses affecting rice production. During virus infection, ubiquitination plays an important role in the dynamic regulation of host defenses. We combined the ubiquitomics approach with the label-free quantitation proteomics approach to investigate potential ubiquitination status changes of <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> infected with RSV. Bioinformatics analyses were performed to elucidate potential associations between proteins with differentially ubiquitinated sites (DUSs) and various cellular components/pathways during virus infection. In total, 399 DUSs in 313 proteins were identified and quantified, among them 244 ubiquitinated lysine (Kub) sites in 186 proteins were up-regulated and 155 Kub sites in 127 proteins were down-regulated at 10 days after RSV infection. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses indicated that proteins with up-regulated Kub sites were significantly enriched in the ribosome. Silencing of 3-isopropylmalate dehydratase large subunit through virus-induced gene silencing delayed RSV infection, while silencing of mRNA-decapping enzyme-like protein promoted RSV symptom in the late stage of infection. Moreover, ubiquitination was observed in all seven RSV-encoded proteins. Our study supplied the comprehensive analysis of the ubiquitination changes in <i>N. benthamiana</i> after RSV infection, which is helpful for understanding RSV pathogenesis and RSV-host interactions.

### Keywords
Rice stripe virus, Nicotiana benthamiana, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Yu Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xueping Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China


