### Accession
PXD013617

### Title
Characterization under quasi-native conditions of the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase from Capsicum annuum L.

### Description
Chromoplasts are typical plastids of fruits and flowers, deriving from chloroplasts through complex processes of re-organisation and recycling. Since this transition leads to the production of reactive species, chromoplasts are characteristic sites for biosynthesis and accumulation of carotenoids and other antioxidants. Here, we have analysed the chromoplast membranes from  Capsicum annuum L. fruits, finding a significant expression of the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase. This enzyme was isolated by a very mild procedure allowing its analyses under quasi-native conditions. The isolated complex appeared as a red coloured homo-trimer, suggesting the retention of at least one of the typical carotenoids from C. annuum. Moreover, the protein complex was co-purified with a non-proteinaceous fraction of carotenoid aggregates carrying a high molecular weight and separable only by Size Exclusion Chromatography. This last finding suggested a relationship between the carotenoids synthesis on chromoplast membranes and the presence of organised carotenoids aggregates typical for chromoplasts. Further MS analyses also provided important hints on the interactome network associated to the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase, confirming its functional relevance during ripening. Results are discussed in the frame of the primary role played by carotenoids in quenching the growing oxidative stress during fruits ripening.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Plant material Capsicum annuum L. (Red Bell Pepper) were grown in green houses at the constant temperature of 25 °C under natural illumination and at 60% of relative air humidity.  2.2. Isolation and solubilisation of chromoplast membranes Chromoplast membranes were isolated at 4°C in the dark by modifying a procedure for thylakoid membranes isolation from leaves (Haniewicz et al. 2013). Briefly, 100 g of fruits were washed in distilled water and dried in paper towels. Seeds and placenta tissues were carefully removed. Weighed fruits were mixed in a ratio 1:1 (g/mL) with Grinding Buffer (GB - 50 mM MES pH 6.5; 10 mM MgCl2·6H2O; 10 mM CaCl2·2H2O) and blended for 15''. The resulting suspension was filtered with a filter composed of two muslin layers with an interposed layer of cotton. The suspension was subsequently centrifuged at 5000 g for 10' at 4°C and the obtained pellet was resuspended in a small volume of Resuspension Buffer (50 mM Na phosphate pH 7.8). The obtained suspension was homogenized on ice and membranes were solubilised for 20' under slow stirring at 4°C in 20 mM n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (β-DDM). After a subsequent centrifugation step (at 30000 g for 10' at 4°C), the pellet was discharged and the supernatant was used for further purification.  2.3. Anion Exchange Chromatography The obtained supernatant was filtered with a 0.45 µm filter and loaded on to a 5 mL anion-exchange chromatography column (QHP - Hiload HP, GE healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) previously equilibrated in Washing Buffer (20 mM Na Phosphate pH 7.4; 0.015% (w/v) β-DDM) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. After injection, washing was performed at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min until the absorbance was stable to zero for 5 column volumes. Finally, the bound components were eluted in a 70 mL gradient of 0-100% Elution Buffer C (20 mM Na phosphate pH 7.4, 2 M NaCl).  2.4 Size Exclusion Chromatography A pool of the peak fractions was subsequently subjected to Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC). The protein sample was loaded on a gel ﬁltration column (Superose 6 10/30 GL, GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with Washing Buffer (20 mM Phosphate Buffer pH 7.4; 0.015% (w/v) β-DDM). The molecular weight of complexes was estimated by plotting the elution volume of the main peaks versus the logarithm of the molecular weight of the standard proteins (Gel Filtration Standard, Biorad) using a polynomial regression curve fit - second order (Farci et al. 2016).  2.5 Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) with a 10% (w/v) separating and a 4% (w/v) stacking gel was used as described in (Farci et al. 2016). Before loading, samples were subjected to denaturation by using Rotiload (Roth) or a home-made loading buffer (3.75 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8; 5% (w/v) SDS; 15% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol; 30% (w/v) glycerol; 0.3% (w/v) bromophenol blue). In both cases, samples were boiled for 5' and subsequently centrifuged for 5'. Separation was performed at 100 V for 2 h and, after electrophoretic separation, gels were removed, washed in distilled water, and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250. Blue Native-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) was carried out using 3–12% (w/v) continuous gradient gels, according to (Haniewicz et al. 2015; Farci et al. 2017). Samples were mixed 1:3 in native loading buffer (50 mM Bis-Tris pH7.2, 6 N HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 10% w/v Glycerol, 0.001% Ponceau S final concentrations). Electrophoresis was carried out at 205 V for 5 h at 4 °C.   2.6. Mass Spectrometry analysis Bands from the BN- and SDS-PAGE were excised, subjected to trypsin digestion and processed as reported in (Farci et al. 2016; Collu et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.30) with Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) against a species specific database (Uniprot Capsicum Annum, 75326 entries, 2018_07_13) with a database of common contaminants appended. The proteingroups.txt table was then filtered to remove reverse entries, common contaminants and any proteins that did not meet a minimum Andromeda score of 40. Finally, for each dataset a relative scale of representativity was established defining an index of contribution (ratio) calculated between a given entry and the highest iBAQ in the dataset. A cutoff was applied excluding all the ratio with index below 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Chromoplasts are typical plastids of fruits and flowers, deriving from chloroplasts through complex processes of re-organization and recycling. Since this transition leads to the production of reactive species, chromoplasts are characteristic sites for biosynthesis and accumulation of carotenoids and other antioxidants. Here, we have analysed the chromoplast membranes from Capsicum annuum L. fruits, finding a significant expression of the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase. This enzyme was isolated by a very mild procedure allowing its analyses under quasi-native conditions. The isolated complex appeared as a red coloured homo-trimer, suggesting the retention of at least one of the typical carotenoids from C. annuum. Moreover, the protein complex was co-purified with a non-proteinaceous fraction of carotenoid aggregates carrying a high molecular weight and separable only by Size Exclusion Chromatography. This last finding suggested a relationship between the carotenoids synthesis on chromoplast membranes, the presence, and storage of organised carotenoids aggregates typical for chromoplasts. Further MS analyses also provided important hints on the interactome network associated to the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase, confirming its functional relevance during ripening. Results are discussed in the frame of the primary role played by carotenoids in quenching the growing oxidative stress during fruits ripening.

### Keywords
Membrane protein complex, Oxidative stress, Capsanthin/capsorubin synthase, Carotenoids, Chromoplast, Red bell pepper, Fruit ripening

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Physiology Laboratory of Photobiology and Plant Physiology  Faculty of Agriculture and Biology  Warsaw University of Life Sciences Nowoursynowska Str. 159 02776 Warsaw Poland
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Domenica Farci
Department of Plant Physiology Laboratory of Photobiology and Plant Physiology  Faculty of Agriculture and Biology  Warsaw University of Life Sciences Nowoursynowska Str. 159 02776 Warsaw Poland


