### Accession
PXD040945

### Title
Identification and functional characterization of NCoR1-interacting proteins associated with mitochondrial biogenesis

### Description
This study was designed to identify putative NCoR1-interacting proteins that might regulate the mitochondrial biogenesis process. To do that, MEF cells were transiently transfected with plasmid expressing either pcDNA-GFP-FLAG (control) or pCMX-NCoR1-FLAG and subjected to co-IP and identification of interacting proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (LTQ Velos Orbitrap).

### Sample Protocol
MEF cells were seeded in 100 mm Petri dishes and transfected with pcDNA-GFP-FLAG (control) or pCMX-NCoR1-FLAG. Cells were harvested 48 h after transfection using lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.9, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100) supplemented with 1 mM sodium fluoride (NaF), 1 mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitor (SigmaFast, SigmaAldrich) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Cells were centrifuged at 14,000 x g, for 15 min, 4°C. Protein concentration was measured using the colorimetric assay described by Bradford (1976), and about 1-2 mg of protein was used in each co-IP experiment. For NCoR1 immunoprecipitation, 4 µg of anti-NCoR1 antibody (Abcam, ab3482) or 4 µg of anti-Rabbit IgG as an internal control was added. Samples were incubated with Protein A/G Magnetic beads (Pierce #88803) overnight, at 4°C, under rotation. The resin was washed in lysis buffer, the bound proteins were eluted in 0.1 M glycine buffer, pH 2.2, and samples were prepared for mass spectrometry experiment. Co-IP samples were treated with urea (8 M), followed by protein reduction with dithiothreitol (5 mM for 25 min at 56°C) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (14 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark). For protein digestion, urea was diluted to a final concentration of 1.6 M and calcium chloride (1 mM) was added for trypsin digestion during 16 h at 37°C (1 µg of trypsin). The peptides derived from the trypsin-digested samples were desalted by stage-tips, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in formic acid (0.1%). An aliquot of 4.5 μL (~2 µg peptides) of whole MEF extracts and 3.0 μL of NCoR1 immunoprecipitation were analyzed on an ETD enabled Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to the EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides from MEF extracts and NCoR1 immunoprecipitation were separated by a 2–30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 173 min and 30 min, respectively. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the source temperature was 275 °C. All instrument methods were set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 10E6. The resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000 and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s, and a repeat count of 1. Activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed with MaxQuant v.1.5 against the Mouse Uniprot SwissProt (release June, 2018, 61204 sequences, 27622288 residues) using the Andromeda search engine. As search parameters, a tolerance of 6 ppm was considered for precursor ions (MS search) and 0.5 Da for fragment ions (MS/MS search), with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A maximum of 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) was set for both protein and peptide identification. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm implemented in MaxQuant environment, with 1 minimal ratio count and a 2 min window for matching between runs. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus v1.5 software, available at MaxQuant package. First, reverse and only identified by site entries were excluded from further analysis. Label-free quantiﬁcation was performed using the spectral protein intensities (LFQ). Exclusive and common proteins are represented as Venn diagram performed by InteractiVenn tool. For the analyses of diﬀerentially expressed proteins, minimum of 2 valid values in each group were considered and the t-test was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are organelles known primarily for generating ATP via the oxidative phosphorylation process. Environmental signals are sensed by whole organisms or cells and markedly affect this process, leading to alterations in gene transcription and, consequently, changes in mitochondrial function and biogenesis. The expression of mitochondrial genes is finely regulated by nuclear transcription factors, including nuclear receptors and their coregulators. Among the best-known coregulators is the nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (NCoR1). Muscle-specific knockout of NCoR1 in mice induces an oxidative phenotype, improving glucose and fatty acid metabolism. However, the mechanism by which NCoR1 is regulated remains elusive. In this work, we identified the poly(A)-binding protein 4 (PABPC4) as a new NCoR1 interactor. Unexpectedly, we found that silencing of PABPC4 induced an oxidative phenotype in both C2C12 and MEF cells, as indicated by increased oxygen consumption, mitochondria content, and reduced lactate production. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that PABPC4 silencing increased the ubiquitination and consequent degradation of NCoR1, leading to the derepression of PPAR-regulated genes. As a consequence, cells with PABPC4 silencing had a greater capacity to metabolize lipids, reduced intracellular lipid droplets, and reduced cell death. Interestingly, in conditions known to induce mitochondrial function and biogenesis, both mRNA expression and PABPC4 protein content were markedly reduced. Our study, therefore, suggests that the lowering of PABPC4 expression may represent an adaptive event required to induce mitochondrial activity in response to metabolic stress in skeletal muscle cells. As such, the NCoR1-PABPC4 interface might be a new road to the treatment of metabolic diseases.

### Keywords
Ncor1, Mitochondria, Co-ip, Biogenesis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Obesity and Comorbidities Research Center (OCRC), Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology (IB), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Leonardo Silveira
Obesity and Comorbidities Research Center (OCRC), Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology (IB), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil


