### Accession
PXD022848

### Title
Proteomic investigation of organic residues from ancient Baħrija pottery reveals dietary habits during Maltese Bronze Age

### Description
The impressive increase of performance and versatility of the MS-instrumentation, which today represents an indispensable tool in proteomics, has determined a considerable growth of the so-called paleoproteomics as interdisciplinary approach, which involve chemists, archaeologists, and evolutionary biologists. Archaeological proteins residues can inform us about production, use, state and preservation of a material, about evolutionary and ecological divergences, dietary habits and past cultures. This paper reports the results of the characterization of proteins extracted from the pottery of the Maltese site of Baħrija, the guide-site for the local Iron Age (11th-8th century BCE). Proteomic data here reported confirm that one the major issue of these kind of studies is represented by contamination of animal and human agents that may complicate endogenous protein identification and authentication. In this context, the lack of archaeozoological and paleobotanical data for the settlement at Baħrija makes the outcomes of the proteomic analysis even more relevant in terms of contributing to reconstruction foodways and dietary habits of that ancient community. Particularly, our data revealed that wheat turned out to be a cereal used in the diet of the ancient community of Bahrija.

### Sample Protocol
Nine samples (three of tableware and six of coarse ware) were extracted from vessels related to the Late Borg in-Nadur style and Bahrija style from the Peet excavation. Before sampling, dust was removed from the ceramic fragments using a brush with a soft bristle. The nine samples were cut and ground using an agate mortar and pestle until an impalpable powder was obtained and inserted in 1.5 ml Eppendorf. All the equipment was cleaned with 2-propanol and MilliQ® water between the preparation of one sample and the next. To maximize the protein extraction, the powder of each sample (between 30 mg and 200 mg) was divided into two aliquots and processed as follows: - the first aliquot was treated in acidic conditions, pH=2 (0.1 % of TFA, and 4% of SDS) for 30 min at 95°C; - the second one was used for the extraction of protein content in alkaline reducing conditions, pH=8.5 (4% SDS, Tris/HCl 100mM, and 0.1 M dithiothreitol, DTT) for 30 min at 95°C.  Protein extracts were desalted and purified from non-protein contaminants using the PlusOne 2-D Clean-Up kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), and then dissolved in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.3) at a concentration of about 1 µg/µL.  The obtained pellets were dissolved in 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.3) and DTT 0.1 M to reduce the proteins (3 h, room temperature). The protein concentration for each extract was determined by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Milan, Italy). Finally, samples were alkylated with 0,2 M IAA (1 h, in the dark at 20°C) and digested by porcine trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-substrate ratio of 1:50 (overnight, 37°C). The resulting peptide mixture solutions were dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf) re-dissolved in 50 µL of 5% FA filtered by ultracentrifugation (750 µL, 0.2 µm Nonsterile Micro-Centrifugal Filters, Sepachrom, Rho, Milan) and analyzed by UHPLC/high-resolution nanoESI-MS/MS. To minimize contamination, protein extraction and sample handling were performed in a laboratory “clean room” dedicated to ancient protein analysis and using dedicated chemicals, lab glassware, and equipment. Surfaces and equipment were washed with 50% 2-propanol before the use. Non-latex gloves were used. Two modern control samples (bovine milk and wheat flour) were also prepared. Modern control samples were processed and analyzed by proteomics on the same way of archaeological samples.  Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry data were acquired via a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim ®Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min at 40°C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 65% in 85 min, 65% to 95% in 5 min, finishing by holding 95% B 5 min, 95% to 5% in 10 min and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 15 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using the following parameters: source voltage, 1.75 kV; ion transfer tube temperature, 275 °C; m/z range 200-1600 (Resolution @ 200 m/z: 120 K). Tandem MS was performed with low-resolution in the ion trap for those precursors with charge state 2÷4; HCD fragmentation: normalized C.E. of 35. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option. MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Moreover, a blank laboratory extraction was carried out and analyzed under the same experimental conditions used for ancient samples. No proteins were identified by database search in blank laboratory extract. To avoid cross-contamination with other biological samples all solvents were prepared freshly and ancient samples were not processed or analyzed in one batch with modern references. To avoid carryover during nLC-MS/MS runs, from three to five blank runs were performed before each analysis using the same gradient program. Spectra acquired in the last blank run were searched against the SwissProt database without species origin restrictions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search, protein identification, and deamidation calculation nLC-MS/MS data were analyzed and searched against the comprehensive (all species) SwissProt protein sequences database (January 2019 release, containing 558475 entries) using integrated PEAKS De Novo sequencing software (v. 10.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada) and the Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.5.1). The first step of database search was carried out using the following parameters: 1) semi-tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; 2) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; 3) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set to 15 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR). The Mascot score and PEAKS score thresholds for Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were set to obtain for each database search FDR values, for PSMs, Peptide sequences, and Proteins identified, below the 1.0% value. Finally, all the protein hits obtained by these two approaches were processed by using the inChorus function of PEAKS. Each peptide identified is reported with a percentage confidence score (InChorus score) which reflects the probability that the peptide-spectrum match is correct. The percentage score is calculated by the empirical calculation used in Peptide-ProphetTM. The protein score is also reported as a percentage score, calculated by adding the score of peptides identifying a given protein up to a weighted sum. The PeptideProphetTM method is then applied to the weighted sum scores of all proteins to convert to a probability score. Only protein hits with a minimum of InChorus protein score of 50%, sequence coverage above 5% and at least two unique peptides, both having an individual InChorus score above the threshold of 50%, were considered valid. Proteins belonging to the same species identified by the same peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony (groups of parsimony). Proteins from different species identified by the same peptides were also grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony and reported as multispecies identification. MS raw data were also processed by MaxQuant (MQ) software 1.6.3.4 (https://www.maxquant.org/) in order to further investigate about deamidation level of the proteins identified. In this search, a more specific database from Uniprot (Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL), which included the proteins identified in the PEAKS search, was used. A database including all the milk proteins from the Bovidae family and a database including all the proteins from Triticum was used for the potentially milk-containing samples (100041M, 100051A, and 100051D) and wheat containing-samples respectively (100087C, 100087D, 100088B, and 100088D). Moreover, the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP) contaminant database was enabled in the database search. Database search was carried out using the following parameters: i) full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; ii) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; iii) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form as variable modifications, hydroxyproline oxidation, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Match type was “match from and to”. The decoy mode was “revert”. PSM, Protein and Site decoy fraction FDR were set at 0.01 as threshold for peptide and protein identifications. Minimum score for modified and unmodified peptides was set at 40. All the other parameters were set as default. The principles of parsimony were still applied. An estimation of the percentage of deamidation for each sample was calculated with the aid of a freely available command-line script for Python 2.x (https://github.com/dblyon/deamidation), which use the MaxQuant “evidence.txt” file. The calculations were done separately for potentially original peptides and potential contaminants peptides as previously reported in Mackie et al. 2018.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based approaches have been successfully applied for identifying ancient proteins in bones and other tissues. On the contrary, there are relatively few examples of the successful recovery and identification of archeological protein residues from ceramic artifacts; this is because ceramics contain much lower levels of proteins which are extensively degraded by diagenetic effects. In this paper, we report the results of the characterization of proteins extracted from pottery of the Maltese site of Ba&#x127;rija, the guide-site for the Ba&#x127;rija period (half of 9th-second half of eighth century BCE), recently identified as the final part of the Bor&#x121; in-Nadur culture. Proteomic data here reported confirm that one of&#xa0;the major issue of these kind of studies is represented by contamination of animal and human agents that may complicate endogenous protein identification and authentication. The samples tested included a small group&#xa0;of ceramic forms, namely three tableware and six coarse ware thought to have been used in food preparation and/or storage. In this context, the limited availability of paleobotanical and archeozoological analyses may be compensated by the outcomes of the first proteomics profiling which, even if obtained on a limited&#xa0;selection of vessels, revealed&#xa0;the centrality of wheat in the diet of the ancient community of Ba&#x127;rija. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;PXD022848&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;.

### Keywords
Ancient food proteins, Paleoproteomic, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Deamidation

### Affiliations
University of Catania
Department of Chemical Sciences - University of Catania

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry (LOMS)
Department of Chemical Sciences - University of Catania


