### Accession
PXD038664

### Title
Gendering Prehistory Through Science. Women and Early Social Complexity in Copper Age Iberia.

### Description
Given the absence of written records, the main source of information available to analyze gender inequalities in early complex societies is the human body itself. And yet, for decades, archaeologists have struggled with the identification of the sex of poorly preserved human remains. Here we present an exceptional case study that shows how ground-breaking new scientific methods may address this problem. Through the analysis of sexually dimorphic amelogenin peptides in tooth enamel by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we establish that the most socially prominent person of the Iberian Copper Age (c. 3200-2300 cal BC) was not male, as previously thought, but female. The meticulous anthropological, contextual and comparative analysis of this woman, discovered in 2008 at Valencina, Spain, reveals that she was a leading social figure at a time where no male attained a remotely comparable social position. Only other women, buried a short time after in the Montelirio tholos, part of the same burial area, appear to have enjoyed a similarly high social position. Our results invite to reconsider established interpretations about the political role of women at the onset of early social complexity, while at the same time questions traditionally-held views of the past and naïve assumptions concerning the determination of sex and gender through grave goods alone. Furthermore, this study anticipates the profound changes that newly-developed scientific methods may bring to prehistoric archaeology and the study of human social evolution.

### Sample Protocol
The sample for peptide extraction from human tooth enamel was prepared using a previously described protocol17, 18. In brief, a c. 2 x 2 mm area of the tooth enamel was first abraded using sandpaper, subsequently washed with hydrogen peroxide and rinsed with MS grade water. The abraded part was immersed in hydrochloric acid, etched for two minutes and the resulted solution was discarded; a second etch was performed and further processed for analysis. C18 ZipTips were used for the peptide clean-up procedure. After eluting the peptides with elution buffer, the sample was dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 30% formic acid containing four synthetic standard peptides (10 fM, Supplementary Table S1) for internal quality control. 10 µL Eluent A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) were added.  A Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray ion source (Nanospray FlexTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a stainless-steel nano bore emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were employed at the Institute for Analytical Chemistry of the University of Vienna. LC-MS conditions were an adapted version of a recently published method15.

### Data Protocol
The software Skyline (version 20.1.0.7955) was employed to monitor high-quality peptide candidates in a filtering step. Isotope distribution proportions were monitored via the Skyline idotp score, with an applied cut-off of >0.95 and a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. In order to monitor retention time shifts and confirm peptide identification, retention time differences Δt between mean AMELX/AMELY precursor ion retention times and mean retention times of closest synthetic standard peptide precursor ions were calculated. The data that meet defined quality threshold (Mass tolerance 5ppm, Skyline idotp score > 0.95 for Enamelin and AMELX/AMELY, Δt < 4min) were interpreted as providing reliable results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gender archaeology, Iberia, Lc-ms/ms, Copper age, Enamel peptides

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090 Vienna, Austria  Joint Metabolome Facility, University and Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090 Vienna, Austria  Joint Metabolome Facility, University and Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090 Vienna, Austria


