### Accession
PXD009666

### Title
Proteomic response of diffuse midline glioma to HDAC inhibition reveals adjuvant anti-EBP50 therapy as novel therapeutic concept.

### Description
Diffuse midline glioma (DMG) is an aggressive pediatric tumor localized in the brainstem. The median survival after diagnosis is less than one year. Surgical resection is not possible due to the critical localization of the tumor and radiation therapy alone or in combination with chemotherapy show only minimal benefit. In 80% of cases, DIPGs are harbor genetic abnormalities such as a K27M mutation in histone H3, suggesting drugs targeting epigenetic anomalies might be efficient. Indeed, Grasso et al. (Nature Medicine, 2015) have shown that the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat (PS) affects glioma cell growth in vitro and in vivo. PS is currently undergoing phase 1 clinical trials.  To better understand the mechanism of action of PS on tumor cells, we performed a proteomic analysis by comparing DMG cells treated with panobinostat to control cells. We identified 2 proteins in PS-treated cells: EBP50 (or NHERF-1) and IRSp53 (or BAIAP2). EBP50 protein is implicated in invasion (Kislin et al. Neoplasia, 2009) but it can also act like a tumor suppressor on glioblastoma (Molina et al. Cancer Research, 2010). There is a dual role of the protein which depends on its localization in the cell: when localized at the cell membrane, EBP50 acts as a tumor suppressor, but has oncogenic properties when present in the cytoplasm or nucleus. Using electron microscopy combined with immunofluorescence, we could validate expression of EBP50 in all cellular compartments.  IRSp53 is implicated in proliferation of tumor cells (Liu P.S. Oncogene, 2010) and may have an important role during migration and invasion (Funato et al., Cancer Research 2004).  To elucidate the role of the two proteins in DIPG, we investigated effects of gene knockdown by siRNA and stable overexpression using lentiviruses.  For each protein, we found a significant diminution of proliferation, migration and invasion and an increase in apoptosis cells were transfected with siRNAs. In contrast, overexpression of EBP50 did not have any effect on cells. Our results suggest that the two proteins induced by PS treatment are implicated in tumor progression and might constitute novel additional therapeutic targets, especially as adjuvant treatment together with PS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Homo sapiens database (70 371 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release 2016_06) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Peptide identifications were accepted if their FDR value was less than 1.0%, while protein identifications had the same and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with a tolerance mass of 10 ppm and a time tolerance of 300 s. Protein ratios were median normalized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis., Ebp50, Ezrin-radixin-moesin binding protein 50, Diffuse midline glioma, Hdac inhibition, Dmg

### Affiliations
Univ Bordeaux, U1035 INSERM, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hagedorn
Univ Bordeaux, U1035 INSERM, France


