### Accession
PXD010595

### Title
ProteomeTools – Part II -  Prosit: proteome-wide prediction of peptide tandem mass spectra by deep learning

### Description
"The ProteomeTools project aims to derive molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical and life science research. Here, we describe the second iteration of the generation and multimodal LC-MS/MS analysis of >220,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing nearly all canonical human gene products. This resource will be extended to 1.4 million peptides and all data will be made available to the public in ProteomicsDB."

### Sample Protocol
"Tryptic peptides were individually synthesized by solid phase synthesis, combined into pools of ~1,000 peptides and measured on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. For each peptide pool, an inclusion list was generated to target peptides for fragmentation in further LC-MS experiments using five fragmentation methods (HCD, CID, ETD, EThCD, ETciD ) with ion trap or Orbitrap readout and HCD spectra were recorded at 6 different collision energies."

### Data Protocol
LC-MS runs were individually anaysed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30.

### Publication Abstract
In mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, the identification and quantification of peptides and proteins heavily rely on sequence database searching or spectral library matching. The lack of accurate predictive models for fragment ion intensities impairs the realization of the full potential of these approaches. Here, we extended the ProteomeTools synthetic peptide library to 550,000 tryptic peptides and 21&#x2009;million high-quality tandem mass spectra. We trained a deep neural network, termed Prosit, resulting in chromatographic retention time and fragment ion intensity predictions that exceed the quality of the experimental data. Integrating Prosit into database search pipelines led to more identifications at &gt;10&#xd7; lower false discovery rates. We show the general applicability of Prosit by predicting spectra for proteases other than trypsin, generating spectral libraries for data-independent acquisition and improving the analysis of metaproteomes. Prosit is integrated into ProteomicsDB, allowing search result re-scoring and custom spectral library generation for any organism on the basis of peptide sequence alone.

### Keywords
['Fusion lumos', 'Proteome tools"', 'Peptide standards', 'Proteometools', '"synthetic peptides']

### Affiliations
['"Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany"', 'Technical University of Munich']

### Submitter
['Daniel Zolg']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': '"Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany"', 'email': 'kuster@tum.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Bernhard Kuster', 'id': '111860100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[fractionation method]: ['no fractionation']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos;AC=MS:1002731']
comment[separation]: ['NT=High-performance liquid chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000565']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=Variable;TA=M']

