### Accession
PXD042243

### Title
Design of a mucin-selective protease for targeted degradation of cancer-associated mucins

### Description
Targeted protein degradation is an emerging strategy for the elimination of classically undruggable proteins. Here, to expand the landscape of targetable substrates, we designed degraders that achieve substrate selectivity via recognition of a discrete peptide- and glycan- motif and achieve cell-type selectivity via antigen-driven cell surface binding. We applied this approach to mucins, O-glycosylated proteins that drive cancer progression through biophysical and immunological mechanisms. Engineering of a bacterial mucin-selective protease yielded a variant for fusion to a cancer antigen-binding nanobody. The resulting conjugate selectively degraded mucins on cancer cells, promoted cell death in culture models of mucin-driven growth and survival, and reduced tumor growth in murine models of breast cancer progression. This work establishes a blueprint for the development of biologics that degrade specific glycoproteins on target cells.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinantly expressed MUC16, podocalyxin, CD43, and PSGL-1 were purchased from R&D Systems (5609-MU, 1658-PD, 9680-CD, 3345-PS, respectively). All recombinant mucin-domain glycoproteins were reconstituted in ultrapure water (Pierce) to a concentration of 1 mg/mL. A fraction (1 µg; 1 µL) of each recombinant glycoprotein was digested with ddStcEW366A at a 1:1 enzyme-to-substrate (E:S) ratio. For sialidase-treated samples, 1 µL of sialoEXO (Genovis) was added to 39 µL of ultrapure water, and 1 µL of this dilution was added to the reaction vial, per manufacturer instructions. The reaction was brought to a total volume of 12 µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and allowed to react overnight at 37 °C. Control reactions were incubated at 37 °C overnight in a solution containing buffer only. The following day, the volume was increased to 19 µL with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. PNGaseF (1 µL; Promega) was added to 99 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1 µL of this reaction was added to each mucinase reaction vial. De-N-glycosylation reactions were incubated for 8-12 h at 37 °C. Reduction and alkylation were performed according to ProteaseMax (Promega) protocols. Briefly, the solution was diluted to 93.5 µL with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, 1 µL of 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the samples were incubated at 56 °C for 20 min, followed by the addition of 2.7 µL of 0.55 M iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Digestion was completed by adding sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:20 E:S ratio overnight at 37 °C and quenched by adding 0.3 µL of glacial acetic acid. C18 clean-up was performed using 1 mL StrataX columns (Phenomenex). Each column was wet with 1 mL of acetonitrile once, followed by one 1 mL rinse of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). The samples were diluted to 1 mL in buffer A and loaded through the column, then rinsed with buffer A. Finally, the samples were eluted with three rinses of 100 µL of buffer B (0.5% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and dried by SpeedVac. The samples were reconstituted in 10 µL of buffer A for MS analysis.  TAILS methods were adapted from previous TAILS publications38,70 and protocols available at the Overall group website, https://clip.ubc.ca/resources/protocols-and-sops/ (Bench Protocol v5.6).

### Data Protocol
HCD-pd-ETD raw files were searched using Byonic by ProteinMetrics against directed databases containing the recombinant protein of interest. Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, meaning non-tryptic cleavage was permitted at either the N- or C-terminus of a detected peptide but not both. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 m/z for HCD MS2s, 0.35 m/z for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-term acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. O-glycans were also set as variable modifications (common 2), using the “O-glycan 6 most common” database. Cysteine carbaminomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. All peptides were manually validated and/or sequenced using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HCD was used to confirm that the peptides were glycosylated and ETD spectra were used for site-localization of glycosylation sites.  To further confirm ddStcEW366A cleavage sites, HCD-pd-EThcD raw files were searched using O-Pair in MetaMorpheus against directed databases containing the recombinant protein of interest69. Search parameters included an “O-glycopeptide search” using the “Oglycan.gdb” database. The top 50 candidates were kept, using HCD-pd-EThcD fragmentation, with a maximum of 4 glycans allowed. Semi-trypsin cleavage specificity was selected with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, and a peptide length of 5-60. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s and 20 ppm for all MS2s. Cysteine carbaminomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications. O-Pair results were filtered for results with a Q value of less than 0.01. All raw data files were processed in batch using MaxQuant71, where the Andromeda search engine72 was used to search the entire human proteome downloaded from Uniprot (reviewed, 20428 entries). Cleavage specificity was set to “semi-specific free N-terminus” with ArgC specificity. The NEM modification of cysteine had to be created, with an addition of C6H7O2N (125.0478 Da)73, and was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation methionine was set as a variable modification, with 5 maximum modifications per peptide. The experiment type was set to Reporter ion MS2 with 16-plex TMT modifications selected (user defined modifications added for both Lys and N-terminal labeling). The reporter ion mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter PIF score was set to 0.75. Defaults were used for the remaining settings, including PSM and protein FDR thresholds of 0.01 and 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm for first search MS1 tolerance, main search MS1 tolerance, and MS2 product ion tolerance, respectively. “Match between runs” and “second peptide” options were not enabled. Quantified peptides were then processed in Perseus74. Contaminants and reverse hits were removed, and signal in all relevant TMT channels of at least one condition was required to retain protein identifications. Significance calculations for TAILS comparisons were performed using a two-tailed t-test with multiple testing corrections performed using a permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations, an FDR of 0.05 and an S0 value of 2.  The four proteins specifically degraded by StcE as compared to PBS (CD99L2, TNFRSF1B, CD55, CD46) were manually searched for regions with a high density of predicted mucin-type O-glycosylation using NetOGlyc-4.016. To account for phosphorylated residues incorrectly predicted as glycosylated residues, phosphorylation was annotated using PhosphoSitePlus75.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation is an emerging strategy for the elimination of classically undruggable proteins. Here, to expand the landscape of targetable substrates, we designed degraders that achieve substrate selectivity via recognition of a discrete peptide and glycan motif and achieve cell-type selectivity via antigen-driven cell-surface binding. We applied this approach to mucins, O-glycosylated proteins that drive cancer progression through biophysical and immunological mechanisms. Engineering of a bacterial mucin-selective protease yielded a variant for fusion to a cancer antigen-binding nanobody. The resulting conjugate selectively degraded mucins on cancer cells, promoted cell death in culture models of mucin-driven growth and survival, and reduced tumor growth in mouse models of breast cancer progression. This work establishes a blueprint for the development of biologics that degrade specific protein glycoforms on target cells.

### Keywords
Mucins, Targeted degradation, Glycoprotease, Tails

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn R. Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University


