### Accession
PXD011319

### Title
Chemical Genetic Identification of Cyclin-G-associated kinase (GAK) Substrates Reveals its Role in Regulating Na+/K+-ATPase and Sipa1L1 in Neurons

### Description
Recent genetic evidence implicates the serine/threonine kinase cyclin G-associated kinase (GAK) as a Parkinson’s disease risk.  However, its role in neuronal function and many downstream effectors remain unclear.  Employing a chemical genetics method, we show here that the sodium potassium pump (Na+/K+-ATPase) is a GAK target in the brain.  We further show that GAK modulates Na+/K+-ATPase at a novel site affecting both pump localization and function.  Whole-cell patch clamp recordings from CA1 pyramidal cells in GAK conditional knockout mice show a larger change in resting membrane potential when exposed to the Na+/K+-ATPase blocker, ouabain, indicating altered Na+/K+-ATPase function in GAK knockouts.  Additionally, we show that GAK-deficient neurons have enlarged dendritic spines and we identify the spine associated protein Sipa1L1 (or SPAR) as a GAK target, which may contribute to this effect.  Our results reveal novel functions of GAK in neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Substrate labelling: Mice were euthanized with cervical dislocation.  Brains were washed in cold PBS and immediately transferred to ice cold lysis buffer (10 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 0.25% Nonidet P-40).  Brains were minced and lysed by sonication and lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min.  The protein concentration of the supernatant was measured by BCA assay (Pierce) and diluted to 10-20 μg/μl in the same lysis buffer.  Into 100 μl of supernatant, ~10 μg of purified GAK kinase (either His tag purified from SF21 cells or freshly immunoprecipitated from HEK 293T cells on HA beads (30 μl resin volume)), 10 μM protein kinase C inhibitor (Bisindolylmaleimide I – Calbiochem), 1 μM cyclic AMP- dependent protein kinase inhibitor peptide, 3 mM GTP, 100 μM ATP and 0.5 mM Furfuryl-ATP-γ-S was added for labelling reaction.  PKC inhibitor and GTP were used to reduce background.  Substrates were labelled for 1-2 hours at 30°C on a nutator.  Covalent capture: Covalent capture of thiophosphorylated substrate proteins was performed as described (Hertz et al., 2010) except for the following modifications.  The labelled brain lysates were denatured by adding 60% by volume solid urea, 1M TCEP to 10 mM and incubating at 55°C for 1 hour.  Proteins were then digested by diluting the urea to 2M by addition of 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), adding additional TCEP to 10 mM final, 0.5M EDTA to 1 mM, and trypsin (Promega) 1:20 by weight.  The labelled lysates were digested for 16 hours at 37°C, acidified to 0.5% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA), and desalted by using a sep pak C18 column (Waters) eluting into 1 ml 50% acetonitrile 0.1%TFA. The desalted peptides were dried using a speed vacuum to 40 μl. The pH of the peptides was adjusted by adding 40 μl of 200 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 75 μl acetonitrile and brought to pH 7.0 by addition of 10% NaOH. The peptide solution was then added to 100 μl iodoacetyl beads (Pierce) equilibrated with 200 mM HEPES pH 7.0 and incubated with end-over-end rotation at room temperature in the dark for 16 hours.  The beads were then added to small disposable columns, washed with H2O, 5M NaCl, 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and 10 mM DTT, followed by elution with 100 μl and 200 μl (300 μl total) 1 mg/mL oxone (Sigma), desalted and concentrated on a 10 μl zip tip (Millipore) eluting into 60 μl total volume and dried using vacuum centrifugation. The phosphopeptides were re-suspended in 35ul 1% TFA, sonicated and injected 3 times with 10ul each (using different fragmentation technique each time). They were separated a 50 cm, 75 μm I.D. Pepmap column over a 1 hour acetonitrile gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur software and the instrument ran in data dependent acquisition mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS using either HCD, CID or MSA as fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done using MaxQuant (v 1.3.0.5) and the protein search engine Andromeda utilizing the Uniprot database of mus musculus (dated 08Jan2016). Match between runs was applied to raw files originating from the same sample but were acquired using different fragmentation methods.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin G-associated kinase (GAK) is a ubiquitous serine/threonine kinase that facilitates clathrin uncoating during vesicle trafficking. GAK phosphorylates a coat adaptor component, AP2M1, to help achieve this function. GAK is also implicated in Parkinson's disease through genome-wide association studies. However, GAK's role in mammalian neurons remains unclear, and insight may come from identification of further substrates. Employing a chemical genetics method, we show here that the sodium potassium pump (Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase) &#x3b1;-subunit Atp1a3 is a GAK target and that GAK regulates Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase trafficking to the plasma membrane. Whole-cell patch clamp recordings from CA1 pyramidal neurons in GAK conditional knockout mice show a larger change in resting membrane potential when exposed to the Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase blocker ouabain, indicating compromised Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase function in GAK knockouts. Our results suggest a modulatory role for GAK via phosphoregulation of substrates such as Atp1a3 during cargo trafficking.

### Keywords
Gak, Sodium potassium pump, Cyclin-g-associated kinase, Atp1a3

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute (UK)

### Submitter
Noreen Eder

### Lab Head
Dr Sila Ultanir
Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute (UK)


