### Accession
PXD002678

### Title
Gluten-specific antibodies of celiac disease gut plasma cells recognize long proteolytic fragments that typically harbor T-cell epitopes

### Description
This study aimed to identify proteolytic fragments of gluten proteins recognized by recombinant IgG1 monoclonal antibodies generated from single IgA plasma cells of celiac disease lesions. Peptides bound by monoclonal antibodies in complex gut-enzyme digests of gluten treated with the deamidating enzyme transglutaminase 2, were identified by mass spectrometry after antibody pull-down with protein G beads. The antibody bound peptides were long deamidated peptide fragments that contained the substrate recognition sequence of transglutaminase 2. Characteristically, the fragments contained epitopes with the sequence QPEQPFP and variants thereof in multiple copies, and they typically also harbored many different gluten T-cell epitopes. In the pull-down setting where antibodies were immobilized on a solid phase, peptide fragments with multivalent display of epitopes were targeted. This scenario resembles the situation of the B-cell receptor on the surface of B cells. Conceivably, B cells of celiac disease patients select gluten epitopes that are repeated multiple times in long peptide fragments generated by gut digestive enzymes. As the fragments also contain many different T-cell epitopes, this will lead to generation of strong antibody responses by effective presentation of several distinct T-cell epitopes and establishment of T-cell help to B cells.

### Sample Protocol
40 µg human monoclonal antibodies (hmAb) was incubated with synthetic peptides or pooled gel filtration fractions of TG2-treated gliadin for 20 minutes at room temperature (RT). For enrichment, Dynabeads Protein G  were added to the samples and incubated for 20 minutes at RT (125 µg beads/µg IgG). After washing with 5x500 µl PBS/0.1% octylglucoside, the bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA for 10 min at RT. A rotavirus specific hmAb  was used as negative control. Peptides pulled down from complex gliadin fractions were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex) or EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific)).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with the software MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 using Andromeda to search against a Triticum aestivum database (total of 4722 entries) extracted from the UniprotKB database release September 2013 (European Bioinformatics Institute). In all searches the digestion enzyme specificity was set as none and pyro-glu (N-term Q), deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications. For analysis of Q Exactive data, the mass error tolerance for MS scans was first searched with an error window of 20 ppm and then with a main search error of 6 ppm. Mass tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate of 1% and a PEP score of 0.1 were used.

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to identify proteolytic fragments of gluten proteins recognized by recombinant IgG1 monoclonal antibodies generated from single IgA plasma cells of celiac disease lesions. Peptides bound by monoclonal antibodies in complex gut-enzyme digests of gluten treated with the deamidating enzyme transglutaminase 2, were identified by mass spectrometry after antibody pull-down with protein G beads. The antibody bound peptides were long deamidated peptide fragments that contained the substrate recognition sequence of transglutaminase 2. Characteristically, the fragments contained epitopes with the sequence QPEQPFP and variants thereof in multiple copies, and they typically also harbored many different gluten T-cell epitopes. In the pull-down setting where antibodies were immobilized on a solid phase, peptide fragments with multivalent display of epitopes were targeted. This scenario resembles the situation of the B-cell receptor on the surface of B cells. Conceivably, B cells of celiac disease patients select gluten epitopes that are repeated multiple times in long peptide fragments generated by gut digestive enzymes. As the fragments also contain many different T-cell epitopes, this will lead to generation of strong antibody responses by effective presentation of several distinct T-cell epitopes and establishment of T-cell help to B cells.

### Keywords
Celiac disease, Lc-msms, Gliadin, Monoclonal antibodies, Epitopes

### Affiliations
Centre for Immune Regulation, University of Oslo
1. Centre for Immune Regulation and Department of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital - Rikshospitalet, 0424 Oslo, Norway  2. Proteomics Core Facility, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, 0424 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Siri Dørum

### Lab Head
Dr Gustavo A. de Souza
1. Centre for Immune Regulation and Department of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital - Rikshospitalet, 0424 Oslo, Norway  2. Proteomics Core Facility, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, 0424 Oslo, Norway


