### Accession
PXD041320

### Title
In planta deglycosylation improves the SARS-CoV-2 neutralization activity of recombinant ACE2-Fc

### Description
The ectodomain of human ACE2-Fc was transiently expressed in leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana plants and protein A and SEC purified. SEC-purified ACE2-Fc was sequentially digested with chymotrypsin and trypsin and the glycopeptides were subjected to LC-ESI-MS analysis using the LC-OTMS, Orbitrap Exploris 480 from Thermo Scientific.

### Sample Protocol
Nicotiana benthamiana grown on soil in a growth chamber, with 16h light/8h dark at 24°C and 50% humidity. Leaves infiltrated with agrobacteria (strain UIA 143, pMP90) carrying the plasmid for protein expression (expression vector pEAQ-HT) were harvested 3 to 4 days after infiltration. Leaf material was either directly processed or stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Detection was performed with an Orbitap MS (Exploris 480, Thermo) equipped with the standard H-ESI source in positive ion, DDA mode (= switching to MSMS mode for eluting peaks). MS-scans were recorded (range: 350-2500 Da) and the 8 highest peaks were selected for fragmentation. Instrument calibration was performed using Pierce FlexMix Calibration Solution (Thermo Scientific). The possible glycopeptides were identified as sets of peaks consisting of the peptide moiety and the attached N-glycan varying in the number of HexNAc units, hexose, pentose, sialic acid and deoxyhexose residues. The theoretical masses of these glycopeptides were determined with a spread sheet using the monoisotopic masses for amino acids and monosaccharides. Manual glycopeptide searches were made using FreeStyle 1.8 (Thermo). For quantification of the different glycoforms the peak intensities of the deconvoluted spectra were compared (annotation was done using the in-house made software Glyco-parser github.com/lucaz88/Freestyle_parser)"

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infects human cells via binding of the viral spike glycoprotein to its main cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The spike protein-ACE2 receptor interaction is therefore a major target for the development of therapeutic or prophylactic drugs to combat coronavirus infections. Various engineered soluble ACE2 variants (decoys) have been designed and shown to exhibit virus neutralization capacity in cell-based assays and <i>in vivo</i> models. Human ACE2 is heavily glycosylated and some of its glycans impair binding to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Therefore, glycan-engineered recombinant soluble ACE2 variants might display enhanced virus-neutralization potencies. Here, we transiently co-expressed the extracellular domain of ACE2 fused to human Fc (ACE2-Fc) with a bacterial endoglycosidase in <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> to produce ACE2-Fc decorated with N-glycans consisting of single GlcNAc residues. The endoglycosidase was targeted to the Golgi apparatus with the intention to avoid any interference of glycan removal with concomitant ACE2-Fc protein folding and quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum. The <i>in vivo</i> deglycosylated ACE2-Fc carrying single GlcNAc residues displayed increased affinity to the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 as well as improved virus neutralization activity and thus is a promising drug candidate to block coronavirus infection.

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Glycoprotein, Glycosylation, Recombinant protein

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna, Vienna, Austria
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna

### Submitter
Richard Strasser

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Strasser
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna, Vienna, Austria


