### Accession
PXD014199

### Title
Phosphorylation of multiple proteins involved in ciliogenesis by Tau Tubulin kinase 2

### Description
Abstract Primary cilia are organelles necessary for proper implementation of developmental and homeostasis processes. To initiate their assembly, coordinated actions of multiple proteins are needed. Tau tubulin kinase 2 (TTBK2) is a key player in the cilium assembly pathway, controlling final step of cilia initiation. The function of TTBK2 in ciliogenesisis critically dependent on its kinase activity, however, precise mechanism of action of this kinase is so far incompletely understood, in part due to very limited information about its relevant substrates. In this study we identify CEP83, CEP89, CCDC92, Rabin8 and DVL3 as substrates of TTBK2 kinase activity. Further, we characterise a set of phosphosites of the newly identified substrates and CEP164, induced by TTBK2 in vitro and in vivo and show that TTBK2 preferentially phosphorylates examined substrates at intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs).  Intriguingly, we further show that identified TTBK2 phosphosites and consensus sequence delineated from those are distinct from motifs previously assigned to TTBK2. Finally, we address functional relevance of selected phosphorylations of CEP164 and provide evidence that the examined TTBK2-induced phosphorylations of CEP164 are relevant for the process of cilia formation. In summary, our work provides important insight into substrates-TTBK2 kinase relationship and suggests that multiple phosphorylation of IDRs is probably involved in the control of ciliogenesis in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cep164 N-, M- and C- terminal fragment, CEP83, CEP89, CCDC92, Rabin8, DVL3 coding plasmids fused to FLAG tag and FLAG-TTBK2 WT and kinase dead variant (KD) were used for production of proteins for in vitro and TTBK2 autophosphorylation experiments, GFP-TTBK2 WT was used for coexpression for in vivo experiments.  To purify protein of interest, each expression plasmid was transfected to HEK293T cells, either individually (in vitro kinase assay) or in combination with TTBK2 expression vector (in vivo). Immunoprecipitates were separated on SDS-PAGE. Corresponding 1D bands were excised and after trypsin digestion 1/10 of the sample was directly analyzed. The rest of sample was used for phosphopeptide analysis. Sample was diluted with acidified acetonitrile solution. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Pierce Magnetic Titanium Dioxide Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to manufacturer protocol and eluted into LC-MS vial. LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer with ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device; ESI Source Solutions) and Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source installed. Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm) by 65 min long gradient. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 6 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one micro scan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. High resolution (resolution 15 000 at 400 m/z) HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000. Normalized collision energy was 32% for HCD spectra. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z. Part of LC-MS/MS analyses were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid with ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device; ESI Source Solutions) and Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source installed. Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm) by 65 min long gradient. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy. The resolution of the survey scan (350-2000 m/z) was 60 000 (400 m/z), and a target value of 4×105 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 50 ms. High resolution (resolution 30 000 at 400 m/z) HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000. Normalized collision energy was 30% for HCD spectra. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience; version 2.4.1 or higher) search engine utilization. MS/MS ion searches were done against in-house database containing expected protein of interest with additional sequences from cRAP database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 7 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation of C as fixed modification, no enzyme specifity was selected. The phosphoRS (version 3.1) feature was used for preliminary phosphorylation localization. Final phosphosite assignment (including inspection of phosphorylations with ambiguous localization) was performed by manual evaluation of the fragmentation spectra of the individual phosphopeptides. Quantitative information was assessed and manually validated in Skyline software (Skyline daily 3.6.1.10230). Normalization of the data was performed using a set of phosphopeptide standards (added to the sample prior phosphoenrichment step; MS PhosphoMix 1, 2, 3 Light, Sigma) in combination with summed peak area of non-phosphorylated peptides identified in analyses of samples without phosphoenrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Primary cilia are organelles necessary for proper implementation of developmental and homeostasis processes. To initiate their assembly, coordinated actions of multiple proteins are needed. Tau tubulin kinase 2 (TTBK2) is a key player in the cilium assembly pathway, controlling the final step of cilia initiation. The function of TTBK2 in ciliogenesis is critically dependent on its kinase activity; however, the precise mechanism of TTBK2 action has so far not been fully understood due to the very limited information about its relevant substrates. In this study, we demonstrate that CEP83, CEP89, CCDC92, Rabin8, and DVL3 are substrates of TTBK2 kinase activity. Further, we characterize a set of phosphosites of those substrates and CEP164 induced by TTBK2 in vitro and in vivo. Intriguingly, we further show that identified TTBK2 phosphosites and consensus sequence delineated from those are distinct from motifs previously assigned to TTBK2. Finally, we show that TTBK2 is also required for efficient phosphorylation of many S/T sites in CEP164 and provide evidence that TTBK2-induced phosphorylations of CEP164 modulate its function, which in turn seems relevant for the process of cilia formation. In summary, our work provides important insight into the substrates-TTBK2 kinase relationship and suggests that phosphorylation of substrates on multiple sites by TTBK2 is probably involved in the control of ciliogenesis in human cells.

### Keywords
Cep89, Phosphorylation, Rabin8, Cep83, Cep164, Dvl3, Ttbk2, Mass spectrometry, Ccdc92

### Affiliations
CEITEC MU
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Proteomics Core facility, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Katerina Hanakova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Proteomics Core facility, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


