### Accession
PXD019551

### Title
Drosophila NFS1.R77 is required for differential protein complex composition

### Description
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is the principle biological methyl group donor for a diverse range of substrates. It is synthesised in the cytosolic methionine cycle and shuttled throughout the cell. The mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) pool depends on import through the inner-membrane SAMC and supports the maturation of metabolites and mitochondrial RNAs. We demonstrated that mitoSAM differentially effects mitochondrial function. Metabolite and iron-sulphur cluster biosynthesis are disrupted due to acutely decreased methylation potential, while prolonged mitoSAM deficiency affects fly longevity and OXPHOS stability. We developed a fly-compatible SILAC labelling technique and mapped mitochondrial protein methylation sites. Based on a novel mono-methylation on the DmR77 (HsR72) of the cysteine desulfurase NFS1 our data indicates that methylation can be used to regulate differential protein complex composition in mitochondria on the basis of immunoprecipitation data in this submission. While iron-sulphur cluster containing proteins enriched with Drosophila Nfs1.R77F that mimics a constitutively methylated Nfs1, the iron sequestering protein Fer1HCH bound stronger to Nfs1.R77K that resembles absence of methylation. Our results define the critical role of cytoplasmic SAM production for mitochondrial methylation events and highlight the indirect effect of one-carbon metabolism on cellular bioenergetics.

### Sample Protocol
Flies overexpressing NFS1.R77K-FLAG or NFS1.R77F-FLAG were generated by cloning a sequenced cDNA construct into pUAST-attB. The vector was injected together with PhiC31 into y[1] w[67c23]; P{y[+t7.7]=CaryP}attP1 (BL#8621) with a chromosome II attP landing site. All fly lines were maintained and experiments performed at 25°C and 60% humidity on a 12h:12h light:dark cycle and fed on a standard yeast–sugar–agar (10-5-1) medium containing methylparaben and propionic acid. The driver line used herein was daughterless-GAL4 (da-GAL4). Drosophila mitochondria were enriched by homogenizing larvae with a Teflon-coated dounce homogeniser (14 strokes, 700 rpm) on ice in STE-enrichment buffer (250 mM sucrose, 5 mM Tris, 2 mM EGTA, pH 7.4) with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Detritus and large cellular components were removed by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and mitochondria were enriched through differential centrifugation twice at 3,000 g, 10 minutes and in STE without BSA at 7,000 g for 10 minutes. FLAGed NFS1.R77K or NFS1.R77F was pulled down following the manufacturer’s recommendations of the FLAG® Immunoprecipitation Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were on-bead digested by resuspension in 50 µL of 4M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 70 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 before 0.5 µg trypsin supplemented in 5 µL. Beads were incubated at 27°C in thermoshaker at 880 rpm for 30 min and then centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 30 s. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube (ca. 125 µL) and the beads were washed with 25 µL of 1M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT twice and also with 50 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCl only. The supernatant was saved and combined after each step (final volume ca. 220 µL) and further digested with 0.5 µg trypsin in 5 µL overnight at room temperature with shaking at 400 rmp. The beads were re-suspended in 100 µL of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT before 0.5 µg trypsin in 5 µL was added and digested overnight at room temperature with shaking at 400 rmp. Alkylation was performed with 1 µL of 0.6M IAA for 30 min at room temperature at 300 rpm in dark. Following a brief spin down at 7000 rpm for 30 s the digests were combined and acidified with cc. FA at final concentration of 5%. Then the samples were cleaned on a C18 HyperSep plate with 40 µL bed volume (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a speedvac (MiVac, Thermo Scientific) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was performed in MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with Oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as fixed modification against a a Drosophila FASTA library (UP000000803_7227, downloaded from UniProt in March 2020).

### Publication Abstract
Induction of the one-carbon cycle is an early hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer metabolism. Vital intermediary steps are localized to mitochondria, but it remains unclear how one-carbon availability connects to mitochondrial function. Here, we show that the one-carbon metabolite and methyl group donor <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is pivotal for energy metabolism. A gradual decline in mitochondrial SAM (mitoSAM) causes hierarchical defects in fly and mouse, comprising loss of mitoSAM-dependent metabolites and impaired assembly of the oxidative phosphorylation system. Complex I stability and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis are directly controlled by mitoSAM levels, while other protein targets are predominantly methylated outside of the organelle before import. The mitoSAM pool follows its cytosolic production, establishing mitochondria as responsive receivers of one-carbon units. Thus, we demonstrate that cellular methylation potential is required for energy metabolism, with direct relevance for pathophysiology, aging, and cancer.

### Keywords
Nfs1, Iron sulphur clusters, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemisty and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemisty and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


