### Accession
PXD021451

### Title
Cotton fiber cytosolic proteins by CF-MS

### Description
This includes raw files for cotton fiber proteome and table S1 for Variation in protein oligomerization drives neofunctionalization during evolution

### Sample Protocol
Gossypium hirsutum: Cotton plants (Gossypium hirsutum cv. Deltapine 90) were grown in the Whistler Greenhouse at Purdue University. The greenhouse was controlled to retain 60-80 % of relative humidity and remain at 26/22 °C for a day/night with 16 hours of supplementary lighting. Flowers were marked as 0 d post-anthesis (0 DPA) at anthesis and harvested at 10 DPA representing the maximum fiber elongation period. The harvested cotton bolls pooled from five plants were dissected immediately to obtain fiber tissue (49). Three grams of fibers were used for soluble protein isolation as described above, except for the cheesecloth filtration. RuBisCO depletion was not performed in this sink type of tissue.  Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) Fractionation  The soluble protein samples were fractionated by an ÄKTA FPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) as described previously (23, 24, 48). Approximately one milligram of total proteins in A. thaliana, G. hirsutum, and O. sativa samples was loaded onto a Superdex® 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare). The SEC elution was carried out with the mobile phase (50 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 5 % glycerol) at a flow rate of 0.65 mL/min. Protein elution was monitored by absorption at 280 nm. For LC-MS/MS analysis, 500 μL of SEC fractions were collected.

### Data Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis Fractionated samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as described previously (19, 24). The mobile phase was removed and proteins in each fraction were precipitated by acetone precipitation. Dried pellets were denatured in 8 M urea for 1 hour at room temperature, reduced in 10 mM DTT for 45 minutes at 60 °C, and then alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The urea concentration of the peptide solution was brought down to below 1.5 M by additional ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion. The digested peptides were purified using Pierce® C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide concentration for each SEC fraction was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay following the manufacturer’s protocol. All the peptide samples were adjusted to equal volume. The most concentrated sample had a peptide concentration of 0.2 μg/μL. 5 μL of each sample was injected onto LC-MS/MS. Duplicates were analyzed.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (19). In brief, a Q-Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer in conjunction with a reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used for the analysis of A. thaliana, G. hirsutum, and O. sativa peptide samples. Peptides were resolved over a 125-minute gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An MS survey scan was acquired from 350 to 1600 m/z range. MS/MS spectra were acquired by selecting the 20 most abundant precursor ions for sequencing with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) normalized collision energy of 27 %. A fifteen-second dynamic exclusion window was applied for reducing the number of times the same ion was sequenced.   Peptide Identification and Quantification Acquired MS/MS files were submitted simultaneously to MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) for protein identification and relative quantification using the Andromeda search engine (51). The search was conducted with all the fractions obtained from the biological duplicates in one species at a single search as described previously (19). Each MS/MS spectrum in each species was searched against TAIR Athaliana_167_TAIR10.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa, the cotton FASTA file provided from Dr. Jonathan Wendel, JGI Gmax_275_Wm82.a2.v1.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa and JGI Osativa_323_v7.0.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa for Arabidopsis, cotton, soybean, and rice, respectively. The search parameters were set as follows; Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as a fixed modification; oxidation on methionine and acetylation on protein N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications: trypsin was selected as an enzyme specificity, and up to two missed cleavages were accepted for digestion error; the precursor mass tolerance and the fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively; one percent of the protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was chosen; a reverse decoy database was enabled; for identification, proteins should have at least one peptide that had a minimum of 7 amino acid length; peptide abundance was calculated from the extracted ion current for both razor and unique peptides, and protein level signals were aggregated from peptide intensities; and “match between runs” function was set with a maximum matching time window of 0.7 min as default. After MaxQuant searching, proteins identified by a single unique peptide were selected, and all the protein groups were filtered out when they had zero intensity value and zero ms/ms count.

### Publication Abstract
Whole-genome duplications are common during evolution, creating genetic redundancy that can enable cellular innovations. Novel protein-protein interactions provide a route to diversified gene functions, but, at present, there is limited proteome-scale knowledge on the extent to which variability in protein complex formation drives neofunctionalization. Here, we used protein correlation profiling to test for variability in apparent mass among thousands of orthologous proteins isolated from diverse species and cell types. Variants in protein complex size were unexpectedly common, in some cases appearing after relatively recent whole-genome duplications or an allopolyploidy event. In other instances, variants such as those in the carbonic anhydrase orthologous group reflected the neofunctionalization of ancient paralogs that have been preserved in extant species. Our results demonstrate that homo- and heteromer formation have the potential to drive neofunctionalization in diverse classes of enzymes, signaling, and structural proteins.

### Keywords
Fiber, Cytosolic proteins, Cotton, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
Purdue University

### Submitter
Youngwoo Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Youngwoo Lee
Purdue University


