### Accession
PXD007287

### Title
UPLC-MS/MS of YAP co-IP during activating and inactivating plating conditions

### Description
To identify YAP binding partners potentially involved in mechanotransduction, we performed a YAP co-IP/MS experiment using sparsely or densely plated MCF10A cells.

### Sample Protocol
Each gel band was washed, reduced and alkylated followed by destaining and in gel digested using 125ng Trypsin/LysC (Promega) as previously described (Schevchenko Nat. Prot. 2007) with the addition of protease max (Promega) to increase digestion efficiency. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel bands and dried in a speed vac.   Prior to LCMS each sample was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile and water. The LC was a M-Class (Waters) set at a flow rate of either 300nL/min or 450nL/min where mobile phase A was 0.2% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. The analytical column was in-house pulled and packed using C18 reprosil Pur 2.4uM (Dr. Maisch) where the I.D was 100uM and the column length was 20-25cm. Peptide pools were directly injected onto the analytical column where linear gradients (4-40% B) were 80min. The mass spectrometer was a Orbitrap Fusion, where a “fastest” MSMS data acquisition was used. MSMS was acquired using CID with a collisional energy of 32. .RAW files were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) using the …..FASTA database which included the custom sequences of the bait proteins. All data was filtered and presented at a 1% false discovery rate (Elias Nat. Meth. 2007). Post processing using in-house MatLab and Excel scripts was used to further present the data.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using Byonic v2.6.49 (ProteinMetrics) for peptide identification and protein inference against the Uniprot homo sapiens database with isoforms downloaded on 20160527. Each data file was searched using 12 ppm mass tolerances for precursors, with 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerances assuming up to two missed cleavages and allowing for only fully tryptic peptides. These data were validated at a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Yes-associated protein (YAP) is a transcriptional regulator and mechanotransducer, relaying extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness into proliferative gene expression in 2D culture. Previous studies show that YAP activation is dependent on F-actin stress fiber mediated nuclear pore opening, however the protein mediators of YAP translocation remain unclear. Here, we show that YAP co-localizes with F-actin during activating conditions, such as sparse plating and culturing on stiff 2D substrates. To identify proteins mediating YAP translocation, we performed co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (co-IP/MS) for proteins that differentially associated with YAP under activating conditions. Interestingly, YAP preferentially associates with &#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> integrin under activating conditions, and &#x3b2;<sub>4</sub> integrin under inactivating conditions. In activating conditions, CRISPR/Cas9 knockout (KO) of &#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> integrin (&#x394;ITGB1) resulted in decreased cell area, which correlated with decreased YAP nuclear localization. &#x394;ITGB1 did not significantly affect the slope of the correlation between YAP nuclear localization with area, but did decrease overall nuclear YAP independently of cell spreading. In contrast, &#x3b2;<sub>4</sub> integrin KO (&#x394;ITGB4) cells showed no change in cell area and similarly decreased nuclear YAP. These results reveal proteins that differentially associate with YAP during activation, which may aid in regulating YAP nuclear translocation.

### Keywords
Dense, Mammary epithelial cells, Mcf10a, Yap, Sparse, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University

### Submitter
Ryan Leib

### Lab Head
Dr Ovijit Chaudhuri
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University


