### Accession
PXD008187

### Title
Proteomic characterization of fresh spermatozoa and supernatant after cryopreservation in relation to freezability of carp (Cyprinus carpio) semen

### Description
Our recent studies suggested that the freezability of carp semen is related to seminal plasma protein profiles. Here, we aimed to compare the spermatozoa proteomes of good (GF) and poor (PF) freezability semen of carp. To achieve this, we used two-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. The semen was classified as GF or PF based on sperm motility after freeze/thawing. We identified proteins enriched in spermatozoa of GF (22 proteins) and PF (18 proteins) semen. We also identified 12 proteins enriched in the supernatant after cryopreservation of PF semen. Good freezability is related to high concentrations of proteins involved in the maintenance of flagella structure, membrane fluidity, efficient control of Ca2+ and sperm motility, energy production, and antioxidative protection, which likely reflects the full maturation status of spermatozoa of GF semen. On the other hand poor freezability seems to be related to the presence of proteins identified as released in high quantities from cryopreserved sperm of PF. Thus, the identified proteins might be useful bioindicators of freezing resilience and could be used to screen carp males before cryopreservation, thus improve long-term sperm preservation in carp.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from spermatozoa of good and poor freezability carp semen were extracted in DIGE buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 4% CHAPS) and sonicated. After centrifugation (10000 g x15 min, at 4ºC) supernatants were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and pellets were resuspended in DIGE labeling buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris, pH 8.5). Spermatozoa of good and poor freezability and supernatant after cryopreservation of good and poor freezability were labeled with 400 pmol (in 1 μL of anhydrous DMF) of CyDye per 50 μg of protein. After labeling, the appropriate samples were combined for each gel. 2-DE was carried out using the IPGPhor isoelectric focusing unit and Ettan Dalt six systems (GE Healthcare). After electrophoresis, gels was scanned using the Typhoon 9400 variable mode imager at the appropriate CyDye excitation wavelengths Cy3 (532 nm), Cy5 (633 nm), Cy2 (488 nm), and at a resolution of 100 um. Scanned images were analyzed using the DeCyder 5.0 software using the Differential In-gel Analysis (DIA) module to detect and normalize the protein spots. Standard was used to normalize gels by calculating the standardized abundance of each spot, i.e. the ratio of either Cy3 or Cy5 signal to that of Cy2. 40 protein spots of spermatozoa and 18 of supernatan after cryopreservation revealing significant quantitative (at least 1.1-fold change) differences were excised from the gels and sent to protein identification by in-gel digestion with modified porcine trypsin protease (Promega, Fitchburg, WI). The digested tryptic peptides were desalted using a Zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Peptides were eluted from the Zip-tip with 0.5 uL of matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 5 mg/mL in 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate), spotted on a MALDI plate and identified with MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the NCBInr database on 2017.11.9. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 200 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 Da, and 1 missed cleavage allowed.The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Our recent studies suggested that the freezability of carp semen is related to seminal plasma protein profiles. Here, we aimed to compare the spermatozoa proteomes of good (GF) and poor (PF) freezability semen of carp. To achieve this, we used two-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. The semen was classified as GF or PF based on sperm motility after freeze/thawing. We identified proteins enriched in spermatozoa of GF (22 proteins) and PF (18 proteins) semen. We also identified 12 proteins enriched in the supernatant after cryopreservation of PF semen. Good freezability is related to high concentrations of proteins involved in the maintenance of flagella structure, membrane fluidity, efficient control of Ca2+ and sperm motility, energy production, and antioxidative protection, which likely reflects the full maturation status of spermatozoa of GF semen. On the other hand poor freezability seems to be related to the presence of proteins identified as released in high quantities from cryopreserved sperm of PF. Thus, the identified proteins might be useful bioindicators of freezing resilience and could be used to screen carp males before cryopreservation, thus improve long-term sperm preservation in carp. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008187.

### Keywords
Sperm, Cryopreservation, Semen, Cryoresilience, Fish, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola  Dietrich

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Dietrich
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences


