### Accession
PXD020453

### Title
Structural insights into Cullin4-RING ubiquitin ligase remodelling by Vpr from simian immunodeficiency viruses

### Description
crosslinking mass spectrometry results for sulfo-SDA crosslinking of human CUL4-NEDD8/ROC1/DDB1/DCAF1-CtD in complex with SAMHD1 and Vpr protein from simian immunodeficiency virus infecting Cercopithecus cephus (SIVmus Vpr)

### Sample Protocol
The crosslinker sulfo-SDA (sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4′-azipentanoate) (Thermo Scientific) was dissolved in crosslinking buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM TCEP) to 100 mM before use. The labelling step was performed on 18 ug each of the CUL4-NEDD8/ROC1/DDB1/DCAF1-CtD/SAMHD1/SIVMus Vpr complex at 1mg/ml with 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125 mM suldo-SDA. The samples were irradiated with UV light at 365 nm, to form crosslinks, for 20 min and quenched with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 20min. All steps were performed on ice.  Reaction products were separated on a Novex Bis-Tris 4–12% SDS−PAGE gel (Life Technologies). The gel band corresponding to the crosslinked complex was excised and digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce) (). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted and desalted using C18 StageTips().  Eluted peptides were fractionated on a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 increase column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 µl min−1 using 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid as mobile phase. Fractions were collected every 50  µl and dried.   Samples for analysis were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid 3.2% (v/v) acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher). Samples were separated on a 50-cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Flow rates were 0.3 μl min−1 using gradients optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation, ranging from 2% mobile phase B to 55% mobile phase B over 90 min. MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a 3-s cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,500 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were isolated and fragmented. Fragmentation by Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) and fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (<1% false discovery rate (FDR)) linear peptide identifications. The re-calibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (v.1.7.5.1) for identification(). Final crosslink lists were compiled using the identified candidates filtered to <1% FDR on link level with xiFDR v.2.0 () imposing a minimum of 20% sequence coverage and 4 observed fragments per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses have evolved means to manipulate the host's ubiquitin-proteasome system, in order to down-regulate antiviral host factors. The Vpx/Vpr family of lentiviral accessory proteins usurp the substrate receptor DCAF1 of host Cullin4-RING ligases (CRL4), a family of modular ubiquitin ligases involved in DNA replication, DNA repair and cell cycle regulation. CRL4DCAF1 specificity modulation by Vpx and Vpr from certain simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIV) leads to recruitment, poly-ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of the host restriction factor SAMHD1, resulting in enhanced virus replication in differentiated cells. To unravel the mechanism of SIV Vpr-induced SAMHD1 ubiquitylation, we conducted integrative biochemical and structural analyses of the Vpr protein from SIVs infecting Cercopithecus cephus (SIVmus). X-ray crystallography reveals commonalities between SIVmus Vpr and other members of the Vpx/Vpr family with regard to DCAF1 interaction, while cryo-electron microscopy and cross-linking mass spectrometry highlight a divergent molecular mechanism of SAMHD1 recruitment. In addition, these studies demonstrate how SIVmus Vpr exploits the dynamic architecture of the multi-subunit CRL4DCAF1 assembly to optimise SAMHD1 ubiquitylation. Together, the present work provides detailed molecular insight into variability and species-specificity of the evolutionary arms race between host SAMHD1 restriction and lentiviral counteraction through Vpx/Vpr proteins.

### Keywords
Human cullin vpr crosslinking

### Affiliations
Technische Universitat Berlin

### Submitter
Andrea Graziadei

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Technische Universitat Berlin


