### Accession
PXD033141

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from fibroblasts stimulated by FGF2

### Description
We compared proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted from human dermal fibroblasts, either control or stimulated by FGF2 and after immunoprecipitation with FGF2-coated beads to isolated FGF2-positive EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-isolation of FGF2-positive EVs prior proteomic analysis was performed by coupling 2 microgr FGF2 antibody (AF-233-NA, R&D Systems) to 100 microL Pierce protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS/0.001% Tween overnight at 4°C. Cross-linking was performed with 1 mM final bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate) in 10 mM sodium phosphate, 150mM NaCl; pH 7.2 for 30 min RT and quenched with 100 mM Glycine. Next, beads were washed three times with PBS/0.001% Tween and incubated with CTL-EVs or FGF2-EVs in PBS overnight at 4°C (1E11 particles per sample, with a total of 5 replicates representing 5 different EV preparations from 2 different DF lines). EV flow-through fractions were collected after spin down and EV pull-down fractions were washed four times with PBS/Tween 0.001%. For exosomes samples, beads were incubated with 100µl of 8M Urea, 200mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 15min at 1200RPM and 37°C. After spin down, the supernatant were collected and proteins were then reduced with 100µl of 10mM dithiothreitol at 57°C for 30min and alkylated with 35µl of 55mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30min. Before digestion, samples were diluted with 200mM ABC to reach a concentration of 1M Urea and 0.4µg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) was added twice at 37°C, for 2 hours first and then overnight. Exosomes flow-through samples (450µl in PBS) were vacuum concentrated to dryness (Savant Centrifuge SpeedVac concentrator) and then suspended in 100µl of 8M Urea, 200mM ABC and proteins reduced, alkylated and Trypsin/Lys-C digested as previously describe for exosomes samples. Digested samples were loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 MeCN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µL injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database and a databank of the common contaminants using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteins  and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.2 (PMID: 17610305, 2007, https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) were used, missed cleavages and pepdides modifications were not allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracelular vesicles, Fibroblasts, Fgf2

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Reda Mekdad

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


