### Accession
PXD000930

### Title
Naa30 is critically involved in maintaining mitochondrial and Golgi integrity

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is one of the most common protein modifications in eukaryotes, with emerging roles in regulating protein quality and stoichiometry and targeting and complex formation. The NatC complex is one of the three major N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). Here, we partially defined the in vivo human NatC Nt-acetylome by combining siNAA30 mediated knockdown with positional proteomics. We identified 51 human NatC substrates and expanded our current knowledge on the substrate repertoire of NatC which now includes proteins harboring Met-Leu, Met-Ile, Met-Phe, Met-Trp, Met-Tyr, Met-Trp, Met-Met, Met-His and Met-Lys N-termini. Next to cytosolic proteins, several organellar proteins were identified as NatC substrates. Interestingly, upon Naa30 depletion, the levels of several organellar proteins were reduced, in particular those of mitochondrial proteins. Further, knockdown of Naa30 induced the loss of membrane potential, clearing and fragmentation of mitochondria. Naa30 depletion also led to disassembly of the Golgi apparatus. However, Naa30 depletion did not affect ER morphology, endosome or peroxisome distribution or microtubule and actin cytoskeletal architecture, suggesting that the observed mitochondrial fragmentation and clearance and Golgi scattering are not due to general disruption of organelles or microtubules. In conclusion, NatC Nt-acetylates a large variety of cytosolic and organellar proteins and is essential for cis-Golgi integrity and mitochondrial function.

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal COFRADIC analyses were performed as described previously (1). To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events, all primary protein amines were blocked making use of a (stable isotopic encoded) N-hydroxysuccinimide ester at the protein level (i.e. NHS esters of 13C2D3 or D3 acetate). In each case, a methionine oxidation step was introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separations, thereby shifting all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to earlier elution times, allowing an enrichment of these (2).  The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously ((3) and (4)).

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to human (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database version 2014_02, containing 20,256 human entries). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed and quantification of the degree of Nt-Ac was performed as described in (3). 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications for the N-terminal COFRADIC analyses. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation and acetylation of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine was additionally set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing no missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that were ranked one, have a minimum amino acid length of seven and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. All quantifications [12C6 L-arginine versus 13C615N4 L-arginine) were carried out using the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Tool (version 2.2.1). Ratios for all peptides were calculated by comparing the XIC peak areas of all matched light versus heavy peptides and all ratios were verified by visual inspection of MS spectra. A distribution of all individual peptide ratios was determined followed robust statistics. Peptides displaying a ratio that was significantly up- or down-regulated (95% confidence interval) were considered affected by the NAA30 knockdown. All data management was done in ms_lims (5).

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation (Nt-acetylation) by N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs) is one of the most common protein modifications in eukaryotes. The NatC complex represents one of three major NATs of which the substrate profile remains largely unexplored. Here, we defined the in vivo human NatC Nt-acetylome on a proteome-wide scale by combining knockdown of its catalytic subunit Naa30 with positional proteomics. We identified 46 human NatC substrates, expanding our current knowledge on the substrate repertoire of NatC which now includes proteins harboring Met-Leu, Met-Ile, Met-Phe, Met-Trp, Met-Val, Met-Met, Met-His and Met-Lys N termini. Upon Naa30 depletion the expression levels of several organellar proteins were found reduced, in particular mitochondrial proteins, some of which were found to be NatC substrates. Interestingly, knockdown of Naa30 induced the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and fragmentation of mitochondria. In conclusion, NatC Nt-acetylates a large variety of proteins and is essential for mitochondrial integrity and function.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Naa30, Golgi, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
University Ghent, VIB

### Submitter
Jonathan Vandenbussche

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
University Ghent, VIB


