### Accession
PXD016056

### Title
Recovery in the intrinsic myogenic program of congenital myotonic dystrophy myoblasts after excision of the expanded (CTG)n repeat

### Description
The congenital form of myotonic dystrophy type 1 (cDM) is caused by large-scale expansion of a (CTG•CAG)n repeat in DMPK and DM1-AS. Production of toxic transcripts with long trinucleotide tracts from these genes results in impediment of myogenic differentiation capacity as cDM’s most prominent morpho-phenotypic hallmark. In the current in vitro study, we compared the early differentiation programs of isogenic cDM myoblasts with and without a (CTG)2600 repeat obtained by gene editing. We found that excision of the repeat restored the ability of cDM myoblasts to engage in myogenic fusion, preventing that the ensuing myotubes remained immature. Although the cDM-typical epigenetic status of the DM1 locus and the expression of genes therein were not altered upon removal of the repeat, analyses at the transcriptome and proteome level revealed that early abnormalities in the temporal expression of differentiation regulators, myogenic progression markers and alternative splicing patterns before and immediately after the onset of differentiation became normalized. Our observation that molecular and cellular features of cDM are reversible and can be corrected by repeat-directed genome editing in muscle progenitors is important information for future development of gene therapy for different forms of DM1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were on-bead digested with trypsin. Extracted proteolytic peptides were labeled with TMT 8-plex labeling reagents (Thermo Scientific) allowing for peptide quantitation. Peptides were mixed at the 8-plex level and further fractionated by HILIC chromatography. Fractions were collected and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS. nLC-MS/MS was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1 % formic acid; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in 70 min and at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min using a splitter. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode using the multinotch SPS MS3 reporter ion-based quantification method.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Peak lists were automatically created from raw data files using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3; MatrixScience). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, version July 2016). The peptide tolerance was typically set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The target FDR for both peptide and protein validation was set to 1%. Typical contaminants were omitted from the output tables. MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca) version 4.0 was used for generating heatmaps and volcano plots of the data [93]. Gene Ontology (GO)-enrichment analysis was performed using the GO enrichment analysis and visualization tool (Gorilla) [32,94]

### Publication Abstract
The congenital form of myotonic dystrophy type 1 (cDM) is caused by the large-scale expansion of a (CTG&#x2022;CAG)<i>n</i> repeat in <i>DMPK</i> and <i>DM1-AS</i>. The production of toxic transcripts with long trinucleotide tracts from these genes results in impairment of the myogenic differentiation capacity as cDM's most prominent morpho-phenotypic hallmark. In the current in vitro study, we compared the early differentiation programs of isogenic cDM myoblasts with and without a (CTG)2600 repeat obtained by gene editing. We found that excision of the repeat restored the ability of cDM myoblasts to engage in myogenic fusion, preventing the ensuing myotubes from remaining immature. Although the cDM-typical epigenetic status of the DM1 locus and the expression of genes therein were not altered upon removal of the repeat, analyses at the transcriptome and proteome level revealed that early abnormalities in the temporal expression of differentiation regulators, myogenic progression markers, and alternative splicing patterns before and immediately after the onset of differentiation became normalized. Our observation that molecular and cellular features of cDM are reversible in vitro and can be corrected by repeat-directed genome editing in muscle progenitors, when already committed and poised for myogenic differentiation, is important information for the future development of gene therapy for different forms of myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1).

### Keywords
Myotonic dystrophy, Triplet repeat, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Genome editing, Myogenesis, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam


