### Accession
PXD030428

### Title
Distinct proteomic responses to multiple abiotic stresses in two rice genotypes

### Description
In the present study, we found that Nipponbare and IAC1131 behave equivalently in response to multiple abiotic stress, which included simultaneous application of drought, salt and temperature stress. At the level of molecular analysis by isotopic labelling quantitative proteomics, 6215 proteins were reproducibly identified and quantified across the two genotypes and three time points sampled. Heat shock proteins, late embryogenesis abundant proteins, and photosynthesis-related proteins were all found to be differentially abundant in response to stress treatments in both Nipponbare and IAC1131.

### Sample Protocol
After 4 weeks of plant growing in normal condition, IAC1131 and Nipponbare rice plants were exposed to multiple abiotic stress that was imposed for 2 and 4 days, including a combination of 50% field capacity watering (FC) as drought stress, 50mM NaCl as salt stress and 33/18°C as temperature stress. Leaf proteins were extracted with trichloroacetic acid- acetone method followed by methanol-chloroform precipitation, and digested in solution with trypsin. Peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT), fractionated, separated and analysed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v2.1 was used for peptide to spectrum matching, and TMTPrepPro was used for further analysis of quantitative proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Rice crops are often subject to multiple abiotic stresses simultaneously in both natural and cultivated environments, resulting in yield reductions beyond those expected from single stress. We report physiological changes after a 4 day exposure to combined drought, salt and extreme temperature treatments, following a 2 day salinity pre-treatment in two rice genotypes-Nipponbare (a paddy rice) and IAC1131 (an upland landrace). Stomata closed after two days of combined stresses, causing intercellular CO2 concentrations and assimilation rates to diminish rapidly. Abscisic acid (ABA) levels increased at least five-fold but did not differ significantly between the genotypes. Tandem Mass Tag isotopic labelling quantitative proteomics revealed 6215 reproducibly identified proteins in mature leaves across the two genotypes and three time points (0, 2 and 4 days of stress). Of these, 987 were differentially expressed due to stress (<i>cf.</i> control plants), including 41 proteins that changed significantly in abundance in all stressed plants. Heat shock proteins, late embryogenesis abundant proteins and photosynthesis-related proteins were consistently responsive to stress in both Nipponbare and IAC1131. Remarkably, even after 2 days of stress there were almost six times fewer proteins differentially expressed in IAC1131 than Nipponbare. This contrast in the translational response to multiple stresses is consistent with the known tolerance of IAC1131 to dryland conditions.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Heat shock proteins, Tmt- labeling, Multiple abiotic stress, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, NSW 2109, Australia
Macquarie university

### Submitter
Fatemeh Habibpourmehraban

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Haynes
Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, NSW 2109, Australia


