### Accession
PXD030486

### Title
A specialized Hsp90 co-chaperone network regulates steroid hormone receptor response to ligand

### Description
Heat shock protein-90 chaperone machinery is involved in the stability and activity of its client proteins. The chaperone function of Hsp90 is regulated by co-chaperones and post-translational modifications. Although structural evidence exists for Hsp90 interaction with clients, our understanding of the impact of Hsp90 chaperone function towards client activity in cells remains elusive. Here, we dissected the impact of newly identified co-chaperones in higher eukaryotes, FNIP1/2 (FNIPs) and Tsc1, towards Hsp90 client activity. Our data show that Tsc1 and FNIP2 form mutually exclusive complexes with FNIP1 and that unlike Tsc1, FNIP1/2 interact with the catalytic residue of Hsp90. Functionally, these co-chaperone complexes increase the affinity of the steroid hormone receptors glucocorticoid receptor and estrogen receptor to their ligands in vivo. Here, we provide a model for the responsiveness of the steroid hormone receptor activation upon ligand binding as a consequence of their association with specific Hsp90:co-chaperone subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
Limited proteolysis of GR was achieved by exposing 10µg recombinant GR (0.5 µg/µl; Thermo Scientific) +/– 1.0 µg recombinant Hsp90α to 2.0 µg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma) for 6 minutes on ice. All samples were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and following Coomassie staining visible bands were manually cut into small pieces approximately 1 mm x 1 mm.  The selected protein gel bands were in-gel digested with chymotrypsin and the tryptic peptides were desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The mass spec data was processed by MaxQuant and proteins were identified by database searching with Uniprot human database.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock protein-90 (Hsp90) chaperone machinery is involved in the stability and activity of its client proteins. The chaperone function of Hsp90 is regulated by co-chaperones and post-translational modifications. Although structural evidence exists for Hsp90 interaction with clients, our understanding of the impact of Hsp90 chaperone function toward client activity in cells remains elusive. Here, we dissect the impact of recently identified higher eukaryotic co-chaperones, FNIP1/2 (FNIPs) and Tsc1, toward Hsp90 client activity. Our data show that Tsc1 and FNIP2 form mutually exclusive complexes with FNIP1, and that unlike Tsc1, FNIP1/2 interact with the catalytic residue of Hsp90. Functionally, these co-chaperone complexes increase the affinity of the steroid hormone receptors glucocorticoid receptor and estrogen receptor to their ligands in&#xa0;vivo. We provide a model for the responsiveness of the steroid hormone receptor activation upon ligand binding as a consequence of their association with specific Hsp90:co-chaperone subpopulations.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Co-chaperone, Chaperone, Glucocorticoid receptor, Steroid hormone receptors, Tsc1, Fnip1, Fnip2

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Sarah Backe

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


