### Accession
PXD003698

### Title
Identification of CDK8 and CDK19 substrates in human cells using cortistatin A and quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Description
Cortistatin A (CA) is a highly selective inhibitor of the Mediator kinases CDK8 and CDK19. Using CA, we report here the first large-scale identification of Mediator kinase substrates in human cells (HCT116). Among over 16,000 quantified sites, we identified 78 high-confidence Mediator kinase targets within 64 proteins, including DNA-binding transcription factors and proteins associated with chromatin, DNA repair, and RNA polymerase II. Although RNA-seq data correlated with Mediator kinase targets, CA effects on gene expression were limited and distinct from CDK8 or CDK19 knockdown. Quantitative proteome analyses, which tracked about 7,000 proteins across six time points (0-24h), revealed that CA selectively affected pathways implicated in inflammation, growth, and metabolic regulation; contrary to expectations, increased turnover of Mediator kinase targets was not generally observed. Collectively, these data support Mediator kinases as regulators of chromatin and RNA polymerase II activity and suggest roles beyond transcription, including metabolism and DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were metabolically labeled (SILAC) with heavy arginine (Arg10) and lysine (Lys8). Phosphoproteomic experiments were performed in triplicate using cortistatin A (CA) to inhibit CDK8/19. Heavy cells were treated with CA and light cells were treated with DMSO in two of three replicates; the third replicate represented a label swap, where light cells were CA treated and heavy cells were DMSO treated. Phosphopeptides were enriched after FASP with titanium dioxide and were ERLIC fractionated, with 24 fractions per replicate. These runs were performed on an Orbitrap LTQ (LC-MS/MS). Deep proteomic analyses were performed over a time course with CA treatment with SILAC labeled cells in duplicate. Six time points were used, 0h, 1h, 3h, 6h, 18h, and 24h. Replicate 2 represented a label swap in this experiment, with light cells treated. After FASP, samples were fractionated offline using basic reversed phase and 17 fractions per time point were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files for phosphoproteomics and quantitative proteomics were searched using the MaxQuant (v1.4.1.2) software package. Triplicate phosphoproteomic and duplicate proteomic treatments with a CA time course were searched individually against the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 1/27/2014) using the default MaxQuant parameters, except: multiplicity was set to 2 (heavy/light) with Arg10 and Lys8 selected, LysC/P was selected as an additional enzyme, ‘re-quantify’ was unchecked, and Phospho (STY) was selected as a variable modification in both runs. For phosphosite analysis, the Phospho (STY) table was processed with Perseus (v1.4.1.3) using the following workflow: reverse and contaminant reads were removed, the site table was expanded to accommodate differentially phosphorylated peptides, and rows without any quantification were removed after site table expansion. For protein quantification with a CA treatment time course, the proteinGroups table was processed similarly to the Phospho (STY) table, except that there was no need for expansion of the site table.

### Publication Abstract
Cortistatin A (CA) is a highly selective inhibitor of the Mediator kinases CDK8 and CDK19. Using CA, we now report a large-scale identification of Mediator kinase substrates in human cells (HCT116). We identified over 16,000 quantified phosphosites including 78 high-confidence Mediator kinase targets within 64 proteins, including DNA-binding transcription factors and proteins associated with chromatin, DNA repair, and RNA polymerase II. Although RNA-seq data correlated with Mediator kinase targets, the effects of CA on gene expression were limited and distinct from CDK8 or CDK19 knockdown. Quantitative proteome analyses, tracking around 7,000 proteins across six time points (0-24&#xa0;hr), revealed that CA selectively affected pathways implicated in&#xa0;inflammation, growth, and metabolic regulation. Contrary to expectations, increased turnover of Mediator kinase targets was not generally observed. Collectively, these data support Mediator kinases as regulators of chromatin and RNA polymerase II activity and suggest their roles extend beyond transcription to metabolism and DNA repair.

### Keywords
Cortistatin a, Cdk8, Phosphoproteomics, Orbitrap velos, Colorectal carcinoma, Proteomics, Orbitrap ltq, Hct116, Mediator, Silac, Quantitative, Cdk19

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado USA
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Zach Poss

### Lab Head
Dr Dylan J Taatjes
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado USA


