### Accession
PXD006449

### Title
A systematic multi-omics investigation of breast cancer metabolism mapping its tiered regulation

### Description
Altered metabolism is a hallmark of cancer, but little is still known about its regulation. Here we measure transcriptomic, proteomic, phospho-proteomic and fluxomics data in a breast cancer cell-line across three different conditions. Integrating these multiomics data within a genome scale human metabolic model in combination with  machine learning we systematically chart the different layers of metabolic regulation in breast cancer, predicting which enzymes and pathways are regulated at which level. We distinguish between two types of reactions, directly or indirectly regulated. Directly-regulated reactions include those whose flux is regulated by transcriptomic alterations (~890) or via proteomic or phospho-proteomics alterations (~140) in the enzymes catalyzing them. Indirectly regulated reactions are those that currently lack evidence for direct regulation in our measurements or predictions (~930).  Remarkably, we find that the flux of indirectly regulated reactions is strongly coupled to the flux of the directly regulated ones, uncovering a hierarchical organization of breast cancer metabolism. Furthermore, the predicted indirectly regulated reactions are predominantly bi-directional. Taken together, this architecture may facilitate the formation of stochiometrically consistent flux distributions in response to the varying environmental conditions incurred by the tumor cells. The approach presented lays a conceptual and computational basis for a more complete mapping of metabolic regulation in different cancers with incoming additional data.

### Sample Protocol
Breast cancer cell line, MCF7 was purchased from ATCC and cultured in MEM without phenol red (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) containing 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Gibco), 10mM d-Glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), 1mM Sodium Pyruvate (Biological Industries), 2mM Glutamine (Gibco), 0.1% antibiotic (Penicillin 10 Units/ml-Streptomycin 10 Units/ml, Gibco), 0.01 mg/ml Insulin (Sigma), and 1% Non-essential amino acids (Biological Industries). The cells were maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2 and saturated humidity. Growth medium was replaced every 2-3 days.  For the experiments, 1x106 MCF7 cells were seeded in each p100 plate. 48 h later, the medium was exchanged with an adaptation medium, DMEM without phenol red (Gibco) containing 10 % dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum (Sigma) and the above mentioned supplements. For the metabolomics experiments, after 24 h of incubation with adaptation medium, for the MEM+Glc+Gln systems, the medium was exchanged with the same medium containing 10 mM [1,2-13C2]-glucose (Sigma) or 4 mM [U-13C5]-glutamine (Sigma) with or without oligomycin (1 µM). For the MEM+Glc systems the medium did not contain glutamine. The cells were counted at 0 h, 8 h and 24 h after tracer introduction to the plates, and cell pellet and media were immediately frozen to use in later analysis.  For the proteomic experiments heavy labeled MCF7 cells were used as an internal standard. To obtain complete labeling, cells were cultured in DMEM deprived of lysine and arginine, and supplemented with the heavy versions of these amino acids, 13C615N2-lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-arginine (Arg10). After ten cell doublings complete labeling was achieved and validated by mass spectrometric analysis.   MCF7 cells were lysed in buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT in Tris-HCl pH 7.5. Equal protein amounts were combined with the SILAC standard and 5-10 mg proteins were digested using the FASP protocol (PMID: 19377485). From each sample, 10 ug were taken for proteomic analysis, and the rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment with IMAC. Single runs were performed for each proteomic and phosphoproteomic sample.  MS analysis was performed on the EASY-nLC1000 nano-HPLC coupled to the Q-Exactive MS (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on PepMap C18 columns using 200 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant. Database search was performed with the Andromeda search engine using the Uniprot database. A decoy database was used to determine a 1% FDR cutoff on the peptide and protein levels. For phosphoproteomic analysis, the database search included p(STY) sites as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Altered metabolism is a hallmark of cancer, but little is still known about its regulation. In this study, we measure transcriptomic, proteomic, phospho-proteomic and fluxomics data in a breast cancer cell-line (MCF7) across three different growth conditions. Integrating these multiomics data within a genome scale human metabolic model in combination with machine learning, we systematically chart the different layers of metabolic regulation in breast cancer cells, predicting which enzymes and pathways are regulated at which level. We distinguish between two types of reactions, directly and indirectly regulated. Directly-regulated reactions include those whose flux is regulated by transcriptomic alterations (~890) or via proteomic or phospho-proteomics alterations (~140) in the enzymes catalyzing them. We term the reactions that currently lack evidence for direct regulation as (putative) indirectly regulated (~930). Many metabolic pathways are predicted to be regulated at different levels, and those may change at different media conditions. Remarkably, we find that the flux of predicted indirectly regulated reactions is strongly coupled to the flux of the predicted directly regulated ones, uncovering a tiered hierarchical organization of breast cancer cell metabolism. Furthermore, the predicted indirectly regulated reactions are predominantly reversible. Taken together, this architecture may facilitate rapid and efficient metabolic reprogramming in response to the varying environmental conditions incurred by the tumor cells. The approach presented lays a conceptual and computational basis for mapping metabolic regulation in additional cancers.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Metabolic modeling, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University


