### Accession
PXD018894

### Title
CALCOCO1 acts with VAMP-Associated Proteins to mediate ER-phagy

### Description
To explore the interaction partners of CALCOCO1, we immunoprecipitated EGFP-CALCOCO1 from HEK 293 cells’ lysate and identified the bound proteins by mass spectrometry. The identified proteins were then filtered against GFP control.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from HEK 293 cells stably expressing EGFP-CALCOCO1 were immunoprecipitated using µMACS GFP Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the instruction manual. The immunoprecipitates were then eluted by boiling in 2X SDS sample buffer and resolved in SDS-PAGE. Subsequently, gel pieces were subjected to in gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion using 6 ng/μl trypsin (V511A, Promega, Wisconsin, USA). OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) was used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 50µm, 50 cm). Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 50 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The separated peptides was analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vapa, Vapb, Calcoco1, Er-phagy, Golgi, Autophagy, Ffat motif

### Affiliations
Molecular Cancer Research Group,  Department of Medical Biology,  University of Tromsø – The Arctic University of Norway,  9037 Tromsø,  Norway
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Terje Johansen
Molecular Cancer Research Group,  Department of Medical Biology,  University of Tromsø – The Arctic University of Norway,  9037 Tromsø,  Norway


