### Accession
PXD028672

### Title
Deciphering BTH-induced response of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L) and its influence on plant virus infection through a multi-omics approach

### Description
The plant response may be triggered by various factors, including pathogens, non-pathogenic microbes, and natural or synthetic molecules, such as salicylic acid (SA), benzo(1,2,3)-Thiadiazole-7-Carbothioic Acid S-Methyl Ester (BTH) that are considered as plant resistance inducers. Resistance inducers mobilize the plant for the synthesis of defense compounds, but they are not directly toxic for the plant. The BTH is an analogue of SA, a molecule naturally synthesized in the plant during systemic acquired resistance (SAR).  In this study, we hypothesized that challenging the plant with resistance inducer causes an increase in the level of proteins associated with defence response to external stimuli with primary metabolism and that the action of the choline derivative of the BTH (in the form of the ionic liquid) during induction of resistance in tomato plants is mediated by to some extent similar signaling pathways as it is in the case of unmodified BTH compound. Therefore, this study aimed to identify global proteome changes occurring in tomato plants exposed to resistance inducers as well as to identify common pathways associated with the plant's defense response to (+)ssRNA viruses induced upon both, viral infection and prior resistance inducer treatment. The effect of ionic liquids on changes in plant proteome is not described in the literature. The ionic character of compounds offers a great advantage of using them as the plant resistance inducer. The high chemical and thermal stability, as well as low volatility, guarantees safe application in fields. For that reason, comparing the action of the resistance inducer in the form of an ionic liquid with the core compound (BTH) will help to elucidate the mode of action of ionic liquid derivatives in plant resistance induction. To this end, two RNA-type viruses from different families were tested: tomato mosaic virus (ToMV, Virgaviridae) and potato virus Y (PVY, Potyviridae). The most affected processes presented in the results were: photosynthesis, regulation of oxidative stress, metabolism of glutathione and chitin, cell wall reorganization. The increased impact on the regulation of primary metabolism in inducer-treated plants (both for BTH and cholinium ionic liquid derivative). The response to ToMV and PVY was more intense when infected plants were pre-treated with inducers. The increased abundances of defense priming proteins with changes in cell wall organization may block virus transport from infected spots to other tissue of the host plant so that the losses caused by the disease will be lower.

### Sample Protocol
0.2-0.4g of plant material (leaves) from each condition were pulverized in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in Tris-HCl/SDS  buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 2mM EDTA-Na2; 20mM DTT and 2mM PSMF with 1% SDS). For each sample 50 µg of protein were reduced and alkylated and digested with Trypsin at 1:50 (tryspin:protein) using SP3 on a KingFisher Flex System. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Digital PicoView source and coupled to a M-Class UPLC operated with a flow rate of 300nL/min. Peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) and separated on a nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 400’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 8’000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 25 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a tomato reference proteome (version from 2020-02-17), concatenated to its decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Iontrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService  was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap fusion tribrid, Leaves, Pvy, Tomv, Bth, Viral resistance, Solanum lycopersicon, Tomato

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of Plant Protection—National Research Institute, Poznan, Poland
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Obrepalska-Steplowska
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of Plant Protection—National Research Institute, Poznan, Poland


