### Accession
PXD029970

### Title
De novo variants of CSNK2B cause a new intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome by disrupting the canonical Wnt signaling pathway

### Description
Main purpose of the project is to delineate the consequences of de novo variants identified in patients manifesting intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome. By employing pulldown assay coupled with mass spectrometry, we investigated the novel binding partners of CK2β and tried to find the impaired interaction due to variant, CK2β:NP_001311.3;p.Asp32His. Furthermore, we also investigated the effects of mutated CK2β by performing phosphoproteome profiling of patient derived LCLs along with the age and gender matched control.

### Sample Protocol
To assay the possible impaired interaction between mutant CK2β and β-Catenin, we incubated Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads carrying GST-tagged CK2β (wild type and mutants) with precleared cell lysates of HeLa cells expressing GFP-tagged β-Catenin. To study impact of variant on global interaction of CK2β, Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads carrying GST-tagged CK2β (wild type and mutants) were added to the precleared HeLa cell lysates. Overnight incubated beads were sedimented, washed five times with PBS containing 1X PIC and 1 mM each of DTT, Benzamidine and PMSF. Samples were submitted for mass spectrometry analysis. Data was analyzed on the basis of log2 LFQ (Label-free quantification; signifies the relative amount of proteins in two or more biological replicates) intensities and number of peptides pulled down with purified GST tagged CK2β wild type and mutant. Proteins obtained for negative control (GST-only) were excluded from the analyses.  In case of phosphoproteome profiling, a total of 3 mg of protein lysates obtained from CSNK2B mutated patient (Case 1) LCLs along with wild type (3 biological replicates of both) LCLs were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment (PPE). The isolation of phosphopeptides was carried out by a previously described method with some modifications. Further, the lysates were incubated with DTT and iodoacetamide and digested overnight using trypsin (1:50 w/w ratio). Then, the peptides were desalted and passed through a polysulfoethyl column (4.6 mm ID×20 cm length, 5-μm particle size, 300-Å pore size; PolyLC, Switzerland) for cation exchange fractionation. The gradient being used in this experiment was: solvent A [composition given below] (100%) and solvent B (0%) for 2 min; followed by addition of solvent B (0-20%) for 40 min; increasing the concentration of solvent B (20-100%) for 5 min; finally, 100% solvent B held for 5 min was processed. The composition of solvent A was: 5 mM KH2PO4 25% ACN, pH 2.7 and solvent B was: 5 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, 350 mM KCl, pH 2.7). Based on the number of peptides, the fractions of 5 up to 10 was being collected. PPE was performed using FeNTA-IMAC columns (Pierce). Cleaning of phosphopeptides was performed using ZipTips followed by their submission to nLC-MS/MS analyses on LTQ Orbitrap machine. The fractionation of peptides was carried out via nLC on a 150 mm C18 column (75 µm internal diameter; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using an EASY nLC-II system (Proxeon/Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nl/min flowrate for 90 minutes (5%–7% ACN in 5 minutes; 7%–45% in 60 minutes; 45%–50%in 5minutes; 50%–97% in 5 minutes; wash at 100%). Here the composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid dissolved in H2O and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid diluted in acetonitrile. The survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–2000) of intact peptides was carried out in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 using m/z 445.12003 as a lock mass. The mass spectrometer was used for spectra in data-dependent automatic mode (automatic switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition). Further, dynamic exclusion was enabled for 1 min. The five most intense ions having a charge state, z ≥ 2 were isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap; this was carried out by collision induced dissociation fragmentation. However, the peptides having unknown z value were not being fragmented.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant using default parameters with match between runs function enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csnk2b, Ck2β and ck2

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne (lab head)

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Sajid Hussain
Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne (lab head)


