### Accession
PXD001893

### Title
Insights into Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (CLN1) point to the involvement of cilia pathology in the disease

### Description
Mutations in Ppt1, which is a depalmitoylation enzyme result in early onset neurodegeneration, therefore, we hypothesized that the protein content of brain membranes from mutant newborn mice will differ from those derived from wild-type. This unbiased analysis revealed that the majority of the differentially identified proteins are palmitoylated and their upstream pathway analysis point to neurodegenerative diseases. One of the differentially expressed proteins was Rab3IP, which is a direct downstream effector of Rab11 and affects the guanine nucleotide-exchange activity of Rab3IP toward Rab8. Rab3IP, Rab11 and Rab8 are known to be involved in ciliogenesis. Rab3IP distribution in cilia differed between the wild type and the mutant cells. Our analysis showed that these three proteins are palmitoylated. Site-directed mutagenesis of the palmitoylation sites of Rab11 affects its intracellular localization. Most importantly, in MEFs, neuroblasts, neurons and brain preparations, longer cilia were detected in Ppt1-/-. Collectively, our studies suggest that cilia abnormalities need to be considered as part of the pathophysiology of CLN1.  Mutations in Ppt1, which is a depalmitoylation enzyme result in early onset neurodegeneration, therefore, we hypothesized that the protein content of brain membranes from mutant newborn mice will differ from those derived from wild-type. This unbiased analysis revealed that the majority of the differentially identified proteins are palmitoylated and their upstream pathway analysis point to neurodegenerative diseases. One of the differentially expressed proteins was Rab3IP, which is a direct downstream effector of Rab11 and affects the guanine nucleotide-exchange activity of Rab3IP toward Rab8. Rab3IP, Rab11 and Rab8 are known to be involved in ciliogenesis. Rab3IP distribution in cilia differed between the wild type and the mutant cells. Our analysis showed that these three proteins are palmitoylated. Site-directed mutagenesis of the palmitoylation sites of Rab11 affects its intracellular localization. Most importantly, in MEFs, neuroblasts, neurons and brain preparations, longer cilia were detected in Ppt1-/-. Collectively, our studies suggest that cilia abnormalities need to be considered as part of the pathophysiology of CLN1. Mutations in Ppt1 result in early onset neurodegeneration, therefore, we hypothesized that the levels of proteins extracted from purified brain membranes of newborn mice will differ. One of the main effects of palmitoylation is changing the hydrophobic index of proteins and thus affecting these proteins interactions with different membranal domains. Assuming that PPT1 substrates are over palmitoylated in Ppt1-/- brains it is possible that its localization to specific membranal domain is different than in the wild-type brains. We isolated Triton X-100 soluble membranes from three wild-type and three Ppt1-/- brains and identified the proteins by PalmPISC. Many of the identified proteins were found to be palmitoylated. A second feature, which was noted is that many of the differential proteins (62 out of 88, 70%) can be detected in the cilia proteome (http://v3.ciliaproteome.org/cgi-bin/index.php). This observation led to test whether ciliary proteins differ between wild-type and Ppt1-/-. Cilia were prepared from newborn dissociated brain cell cultures and analyzed by MS

### Sample Protocol
Acyl-Biotinyl Exchange chemistry (ABE) was performed. Protein concentrations of the triton soluble (TS) fractions of brain cells from five PPT1 knockout and five wild type mice were determined using the micro-Lowry protein assay kit according to the manufacturers instructions. 300 µg from each TS fraction was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol (CM) method. Precipitated protein pellets were re-solubilized in 25 µl 4% SDS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA) at 37°C for 15 min followed by incubation in a sonication bath for 2 min. The samples were diluted with three volumes of dilution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100 supplemented with EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail and reduced with 10 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 56°C for 30 min followed by alkylation with 50 mM NEM (N-ethylmaleimide) for 2.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. Four sequential CM precipitations were performed to remove excess NEM. In between each precipitation the pellets were re-dissolved in 25 µl 4% SDS buffer at 37°C for 15 min followed by incubation in a sonication bath for 2 min and diluted with three volumes of dilution buffer. After the fourth precipitation the samples were stored at -20°C. The next day a fifth CM precipitation was performed and the protein pellets were re-solubilized in 50 μl 4% SDS buffer and divided equally into two portions (experimental HA+ portion, and control HA- portion, respectively). Three volumes of a freshly prepared solution of 0.53 mM N-[6-(biotinamido) hexyl]-3-(2-pyridylthio) propionamide) (biotin-HPDP), 0.27% Triton X-100 13.2% N,N-di-methylformamide supplemented with EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4 was added to each portion. For the experimental HA+ portions the solution contained 1M hydroxylamine (HA) pH 7.4 whereas for the control HA- portions the HA was substituted with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. Samples were incubated for 1.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. Excess of biotin-HPDP was removed by two sequential CM precipitations. In between the precipitations the samples were re-dissolved in 25 µl 4% SDS buffer at 37°C for 15 min followed by incubation in a sonication bath for 2 min and diluted with three volumes of dilution buffer. After the second precipitation the samples were stored at -20°C. The next day a third CM precipitation was performed and the protein pellets were re-solubilized in 12.5 μl 2% SDS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 2% SDS, 5 mM EDTA). The samples were diluted with 19 volumes of dilution buffer, incubated for 30 min at room temperature with end-over-end rotation followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16.000g to remove any particulates. The samples were transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes containing 25 μl pre-equilibrated avidin agarose beads and incubated for 1.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. The beads were successively washed five times for 2 min with 50 volumes of equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS). The beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 200g for 2 min in between each wash step. The proteins were eluted by incubating the beads with 250 μl 20 mM TCEP in equilibration buffer for 30 min at room temperature with end-over-end rotation followed by centrifugation at 200g for 2 min. The supernatants were centrifuged again at 200g for 2 min and transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes. The proteins were concentrated by a CM precipitation and re-dissolved in 20 μl 2% SDS buffer. After the addition of 20 μl Laemmli buffer the proteins were resolved by 12.5% Criterion precast TGX gels and silver stained. Each lane was excised and divided into smaller pieces (2x2 mm) and in-gel digested. Briefly, the gel pieces were washed repeatedly in 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM TCEP in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 56°C, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After washing with 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate the gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The gel pieces were rehydrated on ice for 45 min in digestion buffer containing 10 ng/μl sequencing-grade modified trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were successively extracted three times with 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile for 30 min. Samples were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and cleaned up using Stage-Tip C18 columns according to the manufacturers instructions. The eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -20°C until analysis by nanoflow reversed phase HPLC tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry An ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with an Eksigent 2D NanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) was used to analyze the peptides derived from in-gel digestions after ABE chemistry. Peptides were loaded at a constant flow rate of 10 μl/min onto a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 5 μm, 5 mm x 0.3 mm, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Hägersten, Sweden) and subsequently separated on a 10 μm fused silica emitter, 75 μm x 16 cm (PicoTip Emitter, New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with a 60 min linear gradient of 3% to 35% acetonitrile in water, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode, simultaneously acquiring MS spectra in the Orbitrap (from m/z 400 to 2000) and MS/MS spectra in the LTQ. Four MS/MS spectra were acquired using collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. Each Orbitrap-MS scan was acquired at 60.000 FWHM nominal resolution settings using the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) for internal calibration. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries using a repeat count of two with a repeat duration of 20 sec, and with a maximum retention period of 120 sec. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled to select for ions with at least two charges and rejecting ions with undetermined charge state.  Protein identification, quantification and detection of palmitoylation Raw mass spectrometric data files were analyzed in the Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, version 4, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) software platform. Runs were aligned and peptide identifications were propagated between runs to minimize missing values. MS/MS spectra of ions with charge state +2/+3/+4 between 400 and 2000 m/z were filtered and submitted to Mascot (v 2.3, 2012) for identification using the mouse UniProt database including a reverse dataset. No fixed modifications were set for any amino acids. Variable modifications were selected as carbamidomethyl (Cys), deamidation (Asn and Gln), N-acetyl (N terminus), N-ethylmaleimide (Cys), N-ethylmaleimide + water (Cys), and oxidation (Met). The mass tolerance was set as 5 ppm for MS spectra and 0.8 Da for MS/MS spectra. Identifications were filtered with an FDR of 0.05 at the peptide and protein levels. The Progenesis software was used both as a tool for the differential protein analysis between the knockout PPT1 and wild type mice and for the detection of palmitoylated proteins in the samples. For the differential protein analysis the experimental HA+ raw data files were compared between the knockout and wild type samples, whereas for the detection of palmitoylated proteins the paired experimental HA+ and control HA- raw data files were compared for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Palmitoylation, Cilia

### Affiliations
Lund University
Dpeartment of Immunotechnology, Lund University

### Submitter
Peter James

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Dpeartment of Immunotechnology, Lund University


