### Accession
PXD010951

### Title
Quantification of Ndc1 and Pom121

### Description
On bead tryptic digestion-based mass spectrometry quantitation of Pom121-Ndc1 interaction showed that both the proteins interact with a stoichiometry of ~1:1. Also shown are the expression levels of both the proteins, which are among the most abundant proteins in our expression system.

### Sample Protocol
For the mass spectrometry based pull down experiments, we used PierceTM Streptavidin magnetic beads (#88816) and biotinylated-GFP nanobodies expressed and purified from E. coli. In this workflow we used less beads (10 µL) and short incubations to effectually discriminate between background and true interactor partners. Protein was eluted by trypsin digestion directly on the beads resulting in an elution through protein digestion. We used magnetic bar to recover beads from the corresponding solution at every step. All the subsequent steps were performed in the same way as for co-IP (see the previous section) except for elution. Just before elution, the beads were washed with 700 µL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and vortexed for 10 sec. The supernatant was discarded and this step was done three times in total. 100 µL of elution buffer 1 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 μg/mL trypsin) was added to the beads, vortexed and incubated for 30min on a thermomixer at 27 °C at 1200 rpm. The supernatant was collected and transferred into fresh eppendorf tubes followed by 40 µL elution buffer 2 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM TCEP). The second supernatant was collected and combined to the first eluate. This step was repeated once more to make the total volume to 180 µL of the total eluate. All the three fractions were vortexed briefly and the reaction was incubated at 37 °C for overnight. After trypsin reaction, 40 µL iodoacetamide (5 mg/ml), was added, vortexed and incubated for 30min in the dark. After acidification of the samples with 5% TFA to pH <2, they were loaded onto pre-equilibrated preomics columns. The peptides were eluted into a new tube with 2x 150 buffer B (50% acetonitrile/50% water (v/v) and 0.1% TFA). The peptide mixture was concentrated in vacuum to dry. The dried mixture was dissolved in 0.15% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile by quick ultrasonication and brief vortex. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.1), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2014/11/24), the six calibration mix proteins (PMID:27345528).  and commonly observed contaminants (in total 84,610 sequences for Homo sapiens) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program (PMID:14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Large multiprotein nanopores remain difficult to reconstitute in vitro, such as, for instance, the nuclear pore complex (NPC) that regulates macromolecular transport between the nucleus and cytoplasm in cells. Here, we report that two NPC pore membrane proteins self-assemble into &#x223c;20 nm diameter nanopores following in vitro reconstitution into lipid bilayers. Pore formation follows from the assembly of Pom121 and Ndc1 oligomers, which arrange into ringlike membrane structures that encircle aqueous, electrically conductive pores. This represents a key step toward reconstituting membrane-embedded NPC mimics for biological studies and biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Ndc1, Pom121, Mass spectreomtry

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


