### Accession
PXD030748

### Title
Mouse retina from Msi1/Msi2 double knockout in photoreceptor cells

### Description
This quantitative protepomics study (TMT10 isobaric labeling) of the protein expression in the retina of Msi1/Msi2 double knockout mouse compared to floxed controls. The Msi1 and Msi2 genes were knocked out in photoreceptor cells using tamoxifen inducible Cre (Cre-ERT2) under the control of Pde6g promoter. Tamoxifen was administered by intrapertoneal injection for three consecutive day starting at postnatald day 30, and the retina was collected at postnatal day 51. Retinas from floxed animals lacking the Cre recombinase and treated with tamoxifen were used as controls. Five biological replicates for each knockout (three femailes, two males) and control (two femaes and three males) group were used.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into one 10-plex sample group. The labeled peptide multiplex was separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.  Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile  Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile  Both buffers adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide for offline separation

### Data Protocol
To create a database of proteins expressed in the retina we first filtered our RNASeq data to remove genes with median expression across all samples that are below the median expression for the dataset. As a result we selected 15,626 genes with expression equal or more than 1.2 RPKM. Ensembl release 79 was queried for annotated proteins produced by these genes resulting in a database of 34,055 protein sequences. Peptide identification against the retinal protein database was performed using MS-GF+ (version v2021.03.22) with parent ion tolerance of 10ppm, a reporter ion tolerance of -0.0035 Da and +0.0067 Da, and requiring fully tryptic peptides (S. Kim & Pevzner, 2014). Only peptides with peptide level Q-value of 0.05 or below were accepted. The MSnbase package from R/Bioconductor was used to quantify the MS3 reporter ions and combine the identification and quantification data (Gatto et al., 2021; Gatto & Lilley, 2012). Differential protein expression analysis was performed using the DeqMS package from R/Bionconductor (Zhu et al., 2020). Protein changes with adjusted p-value below 0.05 and fold change of more than 1.5 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Mouse', 'Photorecptor', 'Retina', 'Msi1', 'Msi2', 'Knockout']

### Affiliations
['West Virginia University']

### Submitter
['Peter Stoilov']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'West Virginia University', 'email': 'pstoilov@hsc.wvu.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Peter Stoilov', 'id': '2335942'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['mus musculus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['retina']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['TMT126' 'TMT127N' 'TMT127C' 'TMT128N' 'TMT128C' 'TMT129N' 'TMT129C'
 'TMT130N' 'TMT130C' 'TMT131']
comment[instrument]: ['Orbitrap Eclipse']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=TMT6plex;PP=Any N-term;AC=UNIMOD:737;MT=fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:4;MT=fixed']

