### Accession
PXD037234

### Title
LFQ proteomics analysis of M. smegmatis treated with CymA and ecumicin (Part 2).

### Description
To assess the impact of the bactericidal compounds CymA and ecumicin on the mycobacterial proteome and to monitor proteome remodeling by the AAA+ ClpC1 protease machinery, we performed a LFQ proteomics analysis treating the cells at bactericidal compound concentration. We identified new players of the mycobacterial ClpC1 stress response (ClpC2 and ClpC3), as novel bacterial antibiotic resistance mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing cells as described in the cultivation section were harvested by centrifugation at and concentrated to an OD600 of 5 in fresh 7H9 medium. 750 μL aliquots were transferred into eachwell of a 24-well glass-coated microplate (WebSeal Plate+, Thermo Scientific) and treated with either DMSO or a dCym* or Ecu* stock (to achieve a final concentration of 150 µM compound and 1% DMSO per well). Subsequently, another 750 µl cell culture was added to ensure proper mixing of the compound. Each treatment was performed in triplicates. Before treatment, after 30 minutes incubation and after 120 minutes incubation, 250 μL of cell suspension was harvested from each well, and the resulting pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Prior to cell lysis, pellets were thawed, resuspended in 100 μL lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 150 mM KCl) and lysed for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on - 30 seconds off) after adding a small amount of glass beads. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation (10 minutes, 4 °C, 20,000 x g), flash-frozen and stored at -80 °C. Samples were lysed using a Bioruptor and processed using the SP3 on-bead sample processing protocol (Hughes C. et al. 2019). Each lysate of 100 µl was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 37 °C and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature for 60 minutes. In parallel, a 1:1 mixture of 50 mg/mL Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, cat. no. 45152105050250) and 50 mg/mL Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, cat. no. 65152105050250), exhibiting different surface hydrophilicity, was washed, and prepared in water. To each lysate, 15 µL of the prepared SP3 bead stock was added and binding was induced by the addition of 100 µL ethanol. To ensure proper binding, samples were incubated on a shaker for 5 minutes at 24 °C and 1000 rpm. After protein binding, beads were washed 3 times with 200 µL rinsing solution (80% ethanol in water) while being kept on a magnetic rack. Protein elution from the beads was enforced by addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.5, Sigma Aldrich). To disaggregate the beads, the tubes were shortly sonicated in a water bath. For protein digestion, 1:25 wt/wt ratio of trypsin to protein was added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C in a thermo-shaker at 1000 rpm. Finally, 5% TFA was used to adjust the pH to 3, prior to MS analysis. Sample amount and quality was determined by HPLC-UV using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem with a PepSwift Monolithic RSLC column (0.2 x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C. Peptides were separated using a 20 minutes 2-90% elution gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% TFA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) and the search was performed against a database of the M. smegmatis 2019 Uniprot Reference Proteome with contaminants added. The database search allowed tryptic peptides (min. 7 amino acids) with two missed cleavages. Alkylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Match between runs and LFQ was enabled and a 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at PSM and protein level. Statistical analysis and data normalization was performed in R using the in-house built LaTeX script Cassiopeia (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ). Data was filtered for contaminants, protein groups with less than two razor and unique peptides and for missing valid values in raw intensities with a cutoff of less than three valid values in at least one group. Remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution. The data was normalized by the median log2 protein raw intensity.

### Publication Abstract
The ClpC1:ClpP1P2 protease is a core component of the proteostasis system in mycobacteria. To improve the efficacy of antitubercular agents targeting the Clp protease, we characterized the mechanism of the antibiotics cyclomarin A and ecumicin. Quantitative proteomics revealed that the antibiotics cause massive proteome imbalances, including upregulation of two unannotated yet conserved stress response factors, ClpC2 and ClpC3. These proteins likely protect the Clp protease from excessive amounts of misfolded proteins or from cyclomarin A, which we show to mimic damaged proteins. To overcome the Clp security system, we developed a BacPROTAC that induces degradation of ClpC1 together with its ClpC2 caretaker. The dual Clp degrader, built from linked cyclomarin A heads, was highly efficient in killing pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with&#xa0;&gt;100-fold increased potency over the parent antibiotic. Together, our data reveal Clp scavenger proteins as important proteostasis safeguards and highlight the potential of BacPROTACs as future antibiotics.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Tuberculosis, Antibiotics, Tpd

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria
IMP

### Submitter
David Hoi

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria


