### Accession
PXD031444

### Title
Mutant CHCHD10 causes an extensive metabolic rewiring that precedes OXPHOS dysfunction in a murine model of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy

### Description
Mitochondrial cardiomyopathies are fatal diseases, with no effective treatment. Alterations of heart mitochondrial function activate the mitochondrial integrated stress response (ISRmt), a transcriptional program affecting cell metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis, and proteostasis. In humans, mutations in CHCHD10, a mitochondrial protein with unknown function, were recently associated with dominant multi-system mitochondrial diseases, whose pathogenic mechanisms remain to be elucidated.  Here, in CHCHD10 knock-in mutant mice, we identify an extensive cardiac metabolic rewiring triggered by proteotoxic ISRmt. The stress response arises early on, before the onset of bioenergetic impairments, triggering a switch from oxidative to glycolytic metabolism, enhancement of transsulfuration and one carbon (1C) metabolism, and widespread metabolic imbalance. In parallel, increased NADPH oxidases elicit antioxidant responses leading to heme depletion. As the disease progresses, the adaptive metabolic stress response fails, resulting in fatal cardiomyopathy. Our findings suggest that early interventions to counteract metabolic imbalance could ameliorate mitochondrial cardiomyopathy associated with proteotoxic ISRmt.

### Sample Protocol
Weigh tissue. Mince tissue into small pieces using a clean scalpel on ice. Homogenize the tissue using any proper commercial homogenizers or tissue lyzers. Transfer samples to 1.5 ml microfuge tubes. Approximately, for each 20 mg tissue, use ~ 200ul lysis buffer (9M urea with 5mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, and protease inhibitors (Complete tablet; Roche, Mannheim, Germany)). Urea solution should be made fresh. Fresh phosphatase and protease inhibitors should be added just before use. Put lysates on dry ice or store them in -80 C.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform (version 1.6.17.0) for protein identification. The fragmentation spectra were used to search the UniProt human protein database (downloaded on 09/21/2017). TMT 6-plex on peptide N-term / lysine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications for database searching. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to7 and 20 ppm, respectively. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate based on decoy search using a database with the protein sequences reversed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Chchd10, Cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medicine
Brain and Mind Research Institute Weill Cornell Medicine 407 E 61st St, New York, NY, 10065 United States

### Submitter
Nneka Southwell

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Manfredi
Brain and Mind Research Institute Weill Cornell Medicine 407 E 61st St, New York, NY, 10065 United States


