### Accession
PXD019816

### Title
Engineering transplantable jejunal mucosal grafts using primary patient-derived organoids for children with intestinal failure

### Description
Intestinal failure (IF), following extensive anatomical or functional loss of small intestine (SI), hasdebilitating long-term consequences on children1. Priority of care is to increase the child’s length of functional intestine, jejunum in particular, to promote nutritional independence2. Here we construct autologous jejunal mucosal grafts using primary patient biomaterials. We show that organoids derived from patients can be expanded efficiently in vitro. In parallel, we generate decellularized human intestinal matrix with intact nanotopography, which form optimal biological scaffolds. Remarkably, proteomic and Raman spectroscopy analyses reveal highly analogous biochemical profiles of human SI and colon scaffolds, indicating that both can be used interchangeably as platforms for intestinal engineering. Indeed, seeding jejunal organoids onto either scaffold type reliably reconstructs grafts that exhibit several aspects of physiological jejunal function with potential to survive after transplantation. Our findings provide proof-of-concept data for engineering IF patient-specific jejunal grafts, ultimately aiding in restoration of nutritional autonomy.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates of both decellularized colon and SI ECM scaffolds were used for massspectrometry analysis. Samples were prepared for analysis as previously reported36. Briefly, 1mg of lyophilised decellularized tissue was solubilised in 8M urea containing 10mM dithiothreitol. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 55mM and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature protected from light. Proteins were treated with PNGaseF (25,000 units/mg) overnight. An initial protein digest using Lys-C (10 μg/mg for 4 hours) was followed up with two successive tryptic digests (20 μg/mg overnight; 10 μg/mg for 4 hours). All enzyme reactions were performed at 37ᵒC. Four biological replicates each of colon and intestine scaffolds were processed. Peptide material was cleaned up using C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters 50 mg sorbent, WAT054955). Eluates were dried in a speedvac concentrator. Dried peptides were solubilised in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a concentration of approx. 5 μg/μl, then diluted to 0.25 μg/μl in a glass auto-sampler vial immediately prior to analysis. Each of the eight samples were analysed in technical triplicate (approx. 1 μg per injection) using a ThermoFisher Scientific QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation. Each sample was initially loaded onto a C18 trap column (ThermoFisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100; 5 mm length, 300 μm inner diameter) then transferred onto a C18 reversed phase column (ThermoFisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100; 50 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250nL/min with a stepped gradient of 5-25% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO) for 60 minutes followed by 25-40% for 20 minutes. Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) was used for MS/MS peptide fragmentation. Singly-charged and unknown charge state precursor ions were not analysed. Full MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1800; resolution 70k; AGC target value 1E6) with the MS/MS spectra of the ten most abundant precursors from the preceding MS survey scan then acquired 409 (resolution 17.5k, AGC target value 1E5; normalised collision energy 28 eV; minimum AGC target 1E2). Selected precursors were dynamically-excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.13) for protein identification and quantification using intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ). iBAQ values were calculated for colon and SI by combining technical and biological replicates. A SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded July 2017 containing 26,389 reviewed sequences) was searched with a fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine modification and variable oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation (N-term) modifications. Protein and peptide false discovery rates were set at 1 %. The MaxQuant protein groups output file was imported into Perseus software (version 1.4.0.2) for further statistical analysis and data visualisation. Common contaminant proteins and reverse sequences were removed. Intensity values were log2 transformed and Gene Ontology cellular compartment (GOCC) descriptions were added by Perseus. Protein detection was called when it was detected in at least 3 out of the 4 biological replicates of either colon or SI scaffolds. This resulted in 377 total proteins detected in these intestinal scaffolds.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Organoids, Colon, Label-free, Small intestine

### Affiliations
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform


