### Accession
PXD031142

### Title
Marine Synechococcus sp. strain WH7803 shows specific adaptative responses to assimilate nanomolar concentrations of nitrate

### Description
Marine Synechococcus, together with Prochlorococcus, contribute to a significant proportion of the primary production on Earth. The spatial distribution of these two groups of marine picocyanobacteria depends on different factors such as nutrients availability or temperature.  Some Synechococcus ecotypes thrive in mesotrophic and moderately oligotrophic waters, where they exploit both oxidized and reduced forms of nitrogen. Here, we present a comprehensive study, which includes transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the response of Synechococcus sp. strain WH7803 to nanomolar concentrations of nitrate, compared to ammonium or nitrogen starvation. We found that Synechococcus has a specific response to nanomolar nitrate concentration that differs to the response showed under nitrogen starvation or the presence of standard concentrations of either ammonium or nitrate. This fact suggests that the particular response to the uptake of nanomolar concentration of nitrate could be an evolutionary advantage for marine Synechococcus against Prochlorococcus in the natural field.

### Sample Protocol
Synechococcus WH7803 was grown in a chemically defined artificial seawater medium (ASW). Cells were grown in polycarbonate Nalgene flasks, in a culture room set at 24 °C under continuous blue irradiance (40 µE m−2 s−1). Growth was determined by measuring the absorbance of cultures at 550 nm, and cells were collected during the exponential phase of growth, when absorbance at the indicated wavelength was 0.1.To prepare the experiments, cultures (8 L) at 0.1 units of absorbance at 550 nm were centrifuged at 26,000 x g for 8 min at 24 °C using an Avanti J-25 Beckman centrifuge equipped with a JA-14 rotor. Cell pellets were washed twice with ASW medium with no nitrogen source added and then resuspended in ASW medium supplemented with either no nitrogen or different forms of nitrogen sources, namely, ammonium ((NH4)2SO4) 400 µM, nitrate (KNO3) 800 nM or 800 µM. Cultures were then kept under standard light and temperature conditions for 24 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 26,000 x g for 8 min at 4 °C. Cell pellets were resuspended in 2 mL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for proteomic studies. Samples were then stored at -80 °C, respectively, until used. Three biological replicates were processed for the proteomic analysis as previously described, using trypsin as protease (Dominguez-Martin et al 2017, Muñoz-Marín et al 2017). Peptide generated were separated on an Ultimate 3000 Dionex UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using the following chromatographic conditions: preconcentration in a C18 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 0.3 mm x 5 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3 min at 5 µl/min in 98% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as loading buffer. Then, a chromatographic gradient of 4 to 40% ACN was performed on a C18 nano-column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 60 min. Total chromatography time was 85 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific) operated in Top 50 data-dependent acquisition mode, selecting for fragmentation the top 50 ions of highest intensity from each full scan at a maximum duty cycle time of 3 s. The mass range acquisition in full scan mode was 400-1,500 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 K, at 4 x 105 AGC ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed by quadrupole isolation at 1.2 Th. Only precursors with charge state 2-5 were sampled for MS2, setting a dynamic exclusion window of 15 s and allowing a 10 ppm tolerance for selected precursor. Fragmentation was performed by CID at normalized collision energy of 35. Fragment ions were analyzed in the ion trap. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out at the proteomic facilities of SCAI.

### Data Protocol
Absolute quantification of proteins was calculated using the Hi3 strategy in Progenesis QI (Waters Corporation). “Normalize to all proteins” was selected in Progenesis QI as normalization method to correct from protein loading. The peak list generated in Progenesis QI was searched against a database containing all entries for Synechococcus WH7803 in UniProt (www.uniprot.org) (retrieved on 8 May 2019; containing 2,530 entries). As internal standard for absolute quantification, rabbit phosphorylase B (UniProt KB P00489, Waters Corporation) was added to each sample (50 fmol on column). Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin was selected as protease for digestion, allowing one missed cleavage and setting carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, product ions tolerance at 0.5 Da and false discovery rate (FDR) set at 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synechococcus wh7803; nitrogen metabolism; orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Universidad de Córdoba (Spain)
Universidad de Cordoba

### Submitter
Guadalupe Gomez-Baena

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel García Fernández
Universidad de Córdoba (Spain)


