### Accession
PXD034789

### Title
- Deep proteomics network and machine learning analysis of human cerebrospinal fluid in Japanese encephalitis virus infection

### Description
- Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, and leading cause of neurological infection in Asia and the Pacific, with recent emergence in multiple territories in Australia in 2022. Patients may experience devastating socioeconomic consequences; JEV infection (JE) predominantly affects children in poor rural areas, has a 20-30% case fatality rate, and 30-50% of survivors suffer long-term disability. JEV RNA is rarely detected in patient samples, and the standard diagnostic test is an anti-JEV IgM ELISA with sub-optimal specificity; there is no means of detection in more remote areas. We aimed to test the hypothesis that there is a diagnostic protein signature of JE in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and contribute to understanding of the host response and predictors of outcome during infection.  We retrospectively tested a cohort of 163 patients recruited as part of the Laos central nervous system infection study. Application of liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using extensive offline fractionation and tandem mass tag labelling, enabled a comparison of the CSF proteome in 68 JE patient vs 95 non-JE neurological infections. 5,070 proteins were identified, including 4,805 human proteins and 265 pathogen proteins. We incorporated univariate analysis of differential protein expression, network analysis and machine learning techniques to build a ten-protein diagnostic signature of JE with >99% diagnostic accuracy. Pathways related to JE infection included neuronal damage, anti-apoptosis, heat shock and unfolded protein responses, cell adhesion, macrophage and dendritic cell activation as well as a reduced acute inflammatory response, hepatotoxicity, activation of coagulation, extracellular matrix and actin regulation. We verified the results by performing DIA LC-MS/MS in 16 (10%) of the samples, demonstrating 87% accuracy using the same model. Ultimately, antibody-based validation will be required, in a larger group of patients, in different locations and in field settings, to refine the list to 2-3 proteins that could be harnessed in a rapid diagnostic test.

### Sample Protocol
- Patient cerebrospinal fluid samples were processed to peptide digests with urea, DTT, IAA and trypsin. The samples were cleaned and desalted with SPE. Peptide concentration was assessed with a colorimetric peptide assay and peptide concentrations normalised between samples. TMT-pro/16plex labelling was performed, such that there were ten pools of 16plex, each with 15 patient samples plus one reference samples containing a pool of all the samples. Each TMT pool was separated with high pH reverse phase fraction, into 90 fractions, and then these were concatenated into 44 samples. 440 samples were analysed by LC-MS with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive benchtop hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
- Protein identification, quantification, missing value imputation and batch correction: Thermo raw files were imported into Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Scientific, UK) for peptide identification using the SEQUEST algorithm searching against the SwissProt Homo sapiens and pathogen databases according to the included samples with precursor mass tolerance 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT at N-termini and lysine were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was performed using the Percolator algorithm (27). The criteria for protein identification included FDR < 1%, ≥ 2 peptides per protein, ≥ 1 unique peptides per protein, ≤ 2 missed cleavages and ≥ 6 and ≤ 144 peptide length (amino acids), coisolation threshold < 50%, average S/N threshold >10 and at least 2 channels with quantification data. Protein quantification was performed in R v 4.1.2 with the package MSstatsTMT. Proteins with >50% missing data were removed and the data was imputed with the package DreamAI. To incorporate peptide count per protein, jitter was added proportional to 1/median peptide count for each protein. The pilot and larger study data were merged, normalised with the package RobNorm and then batch correction was performed with the function ComBat in the package sva without modifiers as covariates.

### Publication Abstract
Japanese encephalitis virus is a leading cause of neurological infection in the Asia-Pacific region with no means of detection in more remote areas. We aimed to test the hypothesis of a Japanese encephalitis (JE) protein signature in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that could be harnessed in a rapid diagnostic test (RDT), contribute to understanding the host response and predict outcome during infection. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using extensive offline fractionation and tandem mass tag labeling (TMT), enabled comparison of the deep CSF proteome in JE vs other confirmed neurological infections (non-JE). Verification was performed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) LC-MS/MS. 5,070 proteins were identified, including 4,805 human proteins and 265 pathogen proteins. Feature selection and predictive modeling using TMT analysis of 147 patient samples enabled the development of a nine-protein JE diagnostic signature. This was tested using DIA analysis of an independent group of 16 patient samples, demonstrating 82% accuracy. Ultimately, validation in a larger group of patients and different locations could help refine the list to 2-3 proteins for an RDT. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD034789 and 10.6019/PXD034789.

### Keywords
Encephalitis, Brain infection, Cerebrospinal fluid (csf), Lao pdr, Central nervous system infection, Japanese encephalitis virus, Meningitis, - neurological infection, Tmt, Arbovirus, Flavivirus

### Affiliations
University of Oxford and the Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit (LOMWRU)
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Tehmina Bharucha

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Zitzmann
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford


