### Accession
PXD028150

### Title
Interrogating kinase-substrate relationships with proximity labeling and phosphorylation enrichment

### Description
Kinases govern many cellular responses through the reversible transfer of a phosphate moiety to their substrates. However, pairing a substrate with a kinase is challenging. In proximity labeling experiments, proteins proximal to a target protein are marked by biotinylation, and mass spectrometry can be used for their identification. Here, we combine ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) proximity labeling and a phosphorylation enrichment-based workflow, Phospho-APEX (pAPEX), to rapidly identify phosphorylated and biotinylated neighbor proteins which can be considered for candidate substrates. The pAPEX strategy enriches and quantifies differences in proximity for proteins and phosphorylation sites proximal to an APEX2-tagged kinase under the kinase “ON” and kinase “OFF” conditions. As a proof of concept, we identified candidate substrates of MAPK1 in HEK293T and HCT116 cells and candidate substrates of PKA in HEK293T cells. In addition to many known substrates, C15orf39 was identified and confirmed as a novel MAPK1 substrate. In all, we adapted the proximity labeling-based platform to accommodate phosphorylation analysis for kinase substrate identification. TMT1: pAPEX-MAPK1 experiment in HEK293T cells  TMT2: pAPEX-MAPK1 experiment in HCT116 cells  TMT3: pAPEX-PKA experiment in HEK293T cells

### Sample Protocol
All cell lines were maintained in DMEM media with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin. For the starvation condition, we replaced the cell culture medium 24 hours after plating with 10 mL of DMEM supplemented with 1% FBS, and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin. After a 24-hour starvation, biotinyl tyramide (Toronto Research Chemicals) stock was added directly into starvation media to a final concentration of 500 µM. Cells were incubated in labeling medium for 1 hour. EGF was added 55 minutes after media change for a 5 minute treatment. An equal amount of PBS buffer was added to the controls. A final concentration of 1 mM hydrogen peroxide was freshly diluted from a 2M H2O2 stock and was added into the medium 59 minutes after media change to initialize the labeling reaction. After 1min of H2O2 treatment, cells were washed with ice-cold quenching solution (PBS supplemented with 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM trolox, and 10 mM sodium azide) thrice and quenching solution with 5 mM EDTA once. 1 mL ice-cold lysis buffer (2 M sodium hydroxide with 7.5% 2-mercaptoethanol in Milli-Q water) was added directly to the plate to harvest the cells. Cell lysates were stored at -80 °C until the next step. Streptavidin pull-down was then performed to enrich biotinylated proteins. Protein was digested using LysC and trypsin, followed by TMT lableing. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using High-Select Fe-NTA Phospho-peptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher). Flow through and washes from phospho-peptide enrichment were combined, dried and fractionated using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce). Six fractions were dried, desalted, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline and searched against the human UniProt database (Downloaded in 2014-02-14). Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. In the phospho-peptide analysis, phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). In pAPEX protein level analysis, peptides were collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. For each protein, signal-to-noise (S: N) measurements of the peptides were summed, and these values were normalized to the MAPK1 level in each channel. Proteins with summed signal-to-noise greater than 100 were used for further analysis. In APEX-Phos phospho-peptide analysis, sites with a summed signal-to-noise greater than 200 and AScore greater than 13 were used for further analysis. In global phospho-proteome analysis, phosphorylated peptides with coefficient of variation (CV) among replicates that are in the top 5% were removed for further analysis. Global Phosphorylation analysis Cells were syringe lysed in 8M urea and 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. A BCA assay determined the protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 15 mM DTT. 1mg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and resuspended in 1mL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature, shaking gently. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio as Lys-C. After digestion, the samples were desalted by solid-phase extraction. Phosphopeptide enrichment was conducted using Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptides enrichment kit. Phosphopeptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction and dried down. Each sample was re-suspended in 100 µL EPPS pH 8.5 and 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. 200 µg of TMT reagent in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample and vortexed briefly. After 1 hour labeling, 2 µL of each sample were combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Total intensities in each channel were used to calculate normalization factors. After quenching with 0.3% hydroxylamine, samples were combined at a 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors, dried and fractionated by Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit. Six fractions were dried, desalted, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Publication Abstract
Kinases govern many cellular responses through the reversible transfer of a phosphate moiety to their substrates. However, pairing a substrate with a kinase is challenging. In proximity labeling experiments, proteins proximal to a target protein are marked by biotinylation, and mass spectrometry can be used for their identification. Here, we combine ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) proximity labeling and a phosphorylation enrichment-based workflow, Phospho-APEX (pAPEX), to rapidly identify phosphorylated and biotinylated neighbor proteins which can be considered for candidate substrates. The pAPEX strategy enriches and quantifies differences in proximity for proteins and phosphorylation sites proximal to an APEX2-tagged kinase under the kinase "ON" and kinase "OFF" conditions. As a proof of concept, we identified candidate substrates of MAPK1 in HEK293T and HCT116 cells and candidate substrates of PKA in HEK293T cells. In addition to many known substrates, C15orf39 was identified and confirmed as a novel MAPK1 substrate. In all, we adapted the proximity labeling-based platform to accommodate phosphorylation analysis for kinase substrate identification.

### Keywords
Pka, Mapk1, Kinases, Apex, Substrates, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School


