### Accession
PXD008875

### Title
FILIP1 CT pull-down

### Description
FILIP1 was identified as potential new filamin C interaction partner by a SILAC-based BioID experiment. Interaction of the two protein via the carboxy-terminal end of FILIP and domain 18-21 of filamin C was prooven by yeast-2-hybrid sreens and dot-blot assays, respectively. To verify this interaction by mass spectrometry, recombinantly expressed FILIP1 carboxy-term was fused via its His6-tag to Ni2+-NTA beads. Subsequently. beads were incubated with cell extracts from human skeletal muscle cells. Bands observed in SDS-PAGE from the pull-down assay were cut and analysed by LC-MS. As a result Filamin C could be identified as FILIP1 binding partner.

### Sample Protocol
His6-tagged FILIP1-2 CT was used to pull-down putative binding partners from extracts prepared from C2C12 cells. Differentiated C2C12 myotubes were scraped in PBS from 4 their 10 cm culture dishes, pelleted and frozen until use. Cell pellets were lysed in 3 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Na2HPO4, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM Imidazol, 0.5 % (w/v) Tween-20, pH 8.0), and extensively sonified (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (30 min, 4,000 x g). 1 ml of the cleared lysates was incubated while rotating at 4°C for 1 h with 150 µl empty Ni2+-NTA-agarose beads or beads with bound FILIP1-2 CT (aa 776-1177). As a control, beads with bound FILIP1-2 CT were incubated with lysis buffer only. After extensive washing (50 mM Na2HPO4, 300 mM NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, pH 8.0), FILIP1-2 CT with associated proteins was eluted from the beads by addition of 120 µl elution buffer (50 mM Na2HPO4, 300 mM NaCl, 200 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). The eluate was mixed with 30 l 5x Laemmli sample buffer and heated for 10 min at 95°C. Eluted proteins (30 µl ) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. A band observed only in the sample obtained from FILIP1-2 CT-coated beads incubated with cell extract was cut from the gel and analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
QExactive Plus raw files were converted into mascot generic files with the ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4. Resulting mgf files were searched against the Uniprot ProteomeSet Mouse Isoform database (release 02_2016, 58,761 entries), enabeling trypsin as protease with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, oxidation (M), phospho (ST) and phospho (Y) as variable modifiation. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.1 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
C2c12 myotubes, Filamin c, Filip1

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


