### Accession
PXD030317

### Title
Revisiting the role of beta-tubulin in Drosophila development: beta-tubulin60D is not an essential gene, and its novel Pin1 allele has a tissue-specific dominant-negative impact

### Description
Diversity in cytoskeleton organization and function may be achieved through alternative tubulin isotypes and by a variety of post-translational modifications. The Drosophila genome contains five different β-tubulin paralogs, which may play an isotype tissue-specific function in vivo.  One of these genes, the beta-tubulin60D gene, which is expressed in a tissue-specific manner, was found to be essential for fly viability and fertility.  To further understand the role of the beta-tubulin60D gene, we generated new beta-tubulin60D null alleles (beta-tubulin60DM) using the CRISPR/Cas9 system and found that the homozygous flies were viable and fertile.  Moreover, using a combination of genetic complementation tests, rescue experiments, and cell biology analyses, we identified Pin1, an unknown dominant mutant with bristle developmental defects, as a dominant-negative allele of beta-tubulin60D.  We also found a missense mutation in the Pin1 mutant that results in an amino acid replacement from the highly conserved glutamate at position 75 to lysine (E75K). Analyzing the β-tubulin structure suggests that this E75K alteration destabilizes the alpha-helix structure and may also alter the GTP-Mg2+ complex binding capabilities. Our results revisited the credence that beta-tubulin60D is required for fly viability and revealed for the first time in Drosophila, a novel dominant-negative function of missense beta-tubulin60D mutation in bristle morphogenesis

### Sample Protocol
The samples were grinded in 10mM DTT 100mM Tris and 5% SDS, sonicated and boiled in 950 C for 5 min.  The samples were precipitated in 80% acetone. The protein pellets were dissolved in in 9M Urea and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate than reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with 10mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature for 30 min in the dark) and digested in 2M Urea, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega), overnight at 37oC in a 1:50 (M/M) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Harvard) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. They were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8. (//www.maxquant.org) using the Andromeda search engine, searching against the Drosophila uniprot database with mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 6 ppm for the fragment ions. Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Diversity in cytoskeleton organization and function may be achieved through alternative tubulin isotypes and by a variety of post-translational modifications. The <i>Drosophila</i> genome contains five different <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin</i> paralogs, which may play an isotype tissue-specific function <i>in vivo</i>. One of these genes<i>,</i> the <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> gene, which is expressed in a tissue-specific manner, was found to be essential for fly viability and fertility. To further understand the role of the <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> gene, we generated new <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> null alleles (<i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> <sup><i>M</i></sup> ) using the CRISPR/Cas9 system and found that the homozygous flies were viable and fertile. Moreover, using a combination of genetic complementation tests, rescue experiments, and cell biology analyses, we identified <i>Pin</i> <sup><i>1</i></sup> , an unknown dominant mutant with bristle developmental defects, as a dominant-negative allele of <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i>. We also found a missense mutation in the Pin<sup>1</sup> mutant that results in an amino acid replacement from the highly conserved glutamate at position 75 to lysine (E75K). Analyzing the <i>&#xdf;</i>-tubulin structure suggests that this E75K alteration destabilizes the alpha-helix structure and may also alter the GTP-Mg<sup>2+</sup> complex binding capabilities. Our results revisited the credence that <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> is required for fly viability and revealed for the first time in <i>Drosophila</i>, a novel dominant-negative function of missense <i>&#x3b2;-tubulin60D</i> mutation in bristle morphogenesis.

### Keywords
Pin1 development tubulin

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Uri Abdu
Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel


