### Accession
PXD004515

### Title
Is transthyretin a regulator of Ubc9 SUMOylation?

### Description
Ageing and mutations of transthyretin (TTR), the thyroid hormones and retinol transporting protein lead to amyloidosis by destabilizing the structure of TTR. Because protein structure is regulated through posttranslational modifications, we investigated the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO)ylation of TTR. We chose the widely used Ubc9 fusion-directed SUMOylation system, which is based on a fusion of the SUMOylation substrate of interest with Ubc9, a sole SUMO conjugating enzyme. Surprisingly, despite our presumptions, we found that Ubc9 fused to TTR was SUMOylated at a unique set of lysine residues. Three unknown SUMOylation sites of Ubc9—K154, K18 and K65—were revealed by mass spectrometry (MS). The previously reported SUMOylation at K49 of Ubc9 was also observed. SUMOylation of the lysine residues of TTR fused to Ubc9 was hardly detectable. However, non-fused TTR was SUMOylated via trans-SUMOylation by Ubc9 fused to TTR. Interestingly, mutating the catalytic residue of Ubc9 fused to TTR did not result in complete loss of the SUMOylation signal, suggesting that Ubc9 linked to TTR is directly cross-SUMOylated by the SUMO-activating enzyme E1. Ubc9, TTR or fusion proteins composed of TTR and Ubc9 specifically affected the global SUMOylation of cellular proteins. TTR or Ubc9 alone increased global SUMOylation, whereas TTR and Ubc9 together decreased the amount of high-molecular weight (HMW) SUMO conjugates. Our data suggest that TTR may influence the SUMOylation of Ubc9, thereby altering signalling pathways in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade. The peptide mixture was cleaned using self-made reversed-phase C18 StageTips (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261). Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by LC-MS/MS with Q-Exactive (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Digital PicoView 550 nanospray source (New Objective) coupled to UltiMate 3000RS LC nanoSystem (Thermo-Dionex). Peptides were injected into a C18 precolumn (AcclaimPepMap100, 2 cm x 75 µm inner diameter, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) using 2% acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA as a mobile phase, and further separated on an analytical column (AcclaimPepMapRLSC, 15 cm × 75μm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) with gradient 2–40% ACN in 0.05% formic acid for 60 minutes. The Q-Exactive was operated in the first run in data dependent mode with an inclusion list of selected precursors and in the second run in targeted mode (tMS2 mode). The list of precursors derived from the possible Ubc9_TTR peptides with a GlyGly-tagged lysine was generated by the ProteinProspector tool (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). The MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200 with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, a target value of 5.00E+05 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer platform (v. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the cRAP database (132 sequences) with a Ubc9_TTR protein sequence. The searching was performed using an in-house MASCOT server (v. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) with the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and GlyGly-tagged (K); peptide mass tolerance, ±10 ppm; and fragment mass tolerance, ±20 mmu.

### Publication Abstract
Ageing and mutations of transthyretin (TTR), the thyroid hormones and retinol transporting protein lead to amyloidosis by destabilizing the structure of TTR. Because protein structure is regulated through posttranslational modifications, we investigated the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO)ylation of TTR. We chose the widely used Ubc9 fusion-directed SUMOylation system, which is based on a fusion of the SUMOylation substrate of interest with Ubc9, a sole SUMO conjugating enzyme. Surprisingly, despite our presumptions, we found that Ubc9 fused to TTR was SUMOylated at a unique set of lysine residues. Three unknown SUMOylation sites of Ubc9-K154, K18 and K65-were revealed by mass spectrometry (MS). The previously reported SUMOylation at K49 of Ubc9 was also observed. SUMOylation of the lysine residues of TTR fused to Ubc9 was hardly detectable. However, non-fused TTR was SUMOylated via trans-SUMOylation by Ubc9 fused to TTR. Interestingly, mutating the catalytic residue of Ubc9 fused to TTR did not result in complete loss of the SUMOylation signal, suggesting that Ubc9 linked to TTR is directly cross-SUMOylated by the SUMO-activating enzyme E1. Ubc9, TTR or fusion proteins composed of TTR and Ubc9 specifically affected the global SUMOylation of cellular proteins. TTR or Ubc9 alone increased global SUMOylation, whereas concomitant presence of TTR and Ubc9 did not further increase the amount of high-molecular weight (HMW) SUMO conjugates. Our data suggest that TTR may influence the SUMOylation of Ubc9, thereby altering signalling pathways in the cell.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Transthyretin, Sumoylation, Ufds, Ubc9

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kedracka-Krok
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


