### Accession
PXD004059

### Title
Mass spectrometry insights into a tandem ubiquitin‐binding domain hybrid engineered for the selective recognition of unanchored polyubiquitin

### Description
Unanchored polyubiquitin chains are emerging as important regulators of cellular physiology with diverse roles paralleling those of substrate-conjugated polyubiquitin. However tools able to discriminate unanchored polyubiquitin chains of different isopeptide linkages have not been described. We describe the design of a linker-optimised ubiquitin-binding domain hybrid (t-UBD) containing two UBDs, a ZnF-UBP domain in tandem with a linkage-selective UBA domain, which exploits avidity effects to afford selective recognition of unanchored Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains. Utilising native MS to quantitatively probe binding affinities we confirm cooperative binding of the UBDs within the synthetic protein, and desired binding specificity for Lys48-linked ubiquitin dimers. Furthermore MS/MS analyses indicate that the t-UBD, when applied as an affinity enrichment reagent, can be used to favour the purification of endogenous unanchored Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains from mammalian cell extracts. Our study indicates that strategies for the rational design and engineering of polyubiquitin chain-selective binding in non-biological polymers are possible, paving the way for the generation of reagents to probe unanchored polyubiquitin chains of different linkages and more broadly the ‘ubiquitome’.

### Sample Protocol
50 μL t-UBD or ZnF-UBP Sepharose captures were incubated overnight at 37°C, with 50 μL of full-length human USP5 (10 ng/μL, ENZO Life Sciences, Exeter, UK) or 50 μL of the catalytic core of the USP2 (25 ng/μL, ENZO Life Sciences, Exeter, UK), in DUB buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM DTT). The reaction was quenched with the addition of gel loading buffer, and immunoblotted against ubiquitin (VU-1).  Proteins affinity purified on t-UBD or ZnF-UBP Sepharose were eluted into 0.1% formic acid (pH 2), and digested according to a modified FASP strategy [23]. Briefly, eluate was buffer exchanged (Amicon ultra, 0.5 ml, 10 kDa MWCO) into digestion buffer (2 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), 5% (v/v) acetonitrile), reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (100 mM chloroacetamide, Sigma, Dorset, UK) and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin, Promega, Southampton, UK). After overnight digestion, peptides were extracted (70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. LC-MS/MS was carried out using an RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex, UK) and an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) (see supporting information for detail on sample loading and analysis).

### Data Protocol
The .raw data file obtained from each LC-MS/MS acquisition was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific), searching each file in turn using Mascot (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd.) against the UniProtKB-Swissprot database. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (+57.021464 on cysteine) and variable modifications set as oxidation (+15.994915 on methionine), GlyGly (+114.042927 on Lysine) and LeuArgGlyGly (+383.228103 on Lysine). A decoy database search was performed. The output from Proteome Discoverer was further processed using Scaffold Q+S (version 4.0.5, Proteome Software). Upon import, the data was searched using X!Tandem (The Global Proteome Machine Organization). PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet (Institute for Systems Biology) probability thresholds of 95% were calculated from the decoy searches and Scaffold was used to calculate an improved 95% peptide and protein probability threshold  based on the data from the two different search algorithms. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters

### Publication Abstract
Unanchored polyubiquitin chains are emerging as important regulators of cellular physiology with diverse roles paralleling those of substrate-conjugated polyubiquitin. However tools able to discriminate unanchored polyubiquitin chains of different isopeptide linkages have not been reported. We describe the design of a linker-optimized ubiquitin-binding domain hybrid (t-UBD) containing two UBDs, a ZnF-UBP domain in tandem with a linkage-selective UBA domain, which exploits avidity effects to afford selective recognition of unanchored Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains. Utilizing native MS to quantitatively probe binding affinities we confirm cooperative binding of the UBDs within the synthetic protein, and desired binding specificity for Lys48-linked ubiquitin dimers. Furthermore, MS/MS analyses indicate that the t-UBD, when applied as an affinity enrichment reagent, can be used to favor the purification of endogenous unanchored Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains from mammalian cell extracts. Our study indicates that strategies for the rational design and engineering of polyubiquitin chain-selective binding in nonbiological polymers are possible, paving the way for the generation of reagents to probe unanchored polyubiquitin chains of different linkages and more broadly the 'ubiquitome'. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004059 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD004059).

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Polyubiquitin

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Queen’s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Layfield
School of Life Sciences, Queen’s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK


