### Accession
PXD015330

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana acclimation to fluctuating light

### Description
Plants are subjected to perpetual fluctuations of light intensity and spectral composition in their natural growth environment, particularly due to movement of clouds and upper canopy leaves. Sudden exposure to intense light is accompanied by absorption of excess light energy, which results in an overload of photosynthetic electron transport chain and generation of reactive oxygen species in and around thylakoid membranes. To cope with this photooxidative stress and to prevent chronic photoinhibition under dynamically changing light intensities, plants have evolved various short- and long-term photoprotective mechanisms. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate long-term acclimation of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf proteome to fluctuating light (FL) which induces photooxidative stress. After three days of FL exposure the proteomes of young and mature leaves were analyzed separately in the morning and at the end of day to examine possible interaction between FL acclimation and leaf development or time of day.

### Sample Protocol
The plant materials, growth conditions and light treatments used in this study were exactly the same as in the transcriptome study reported elsewhere (Schneider et al., 2019). Briefly, young and mature leaves were separately harvested from five individual plants (n=5) in the morning (1 h after the light was turned on) and at the end of day (1 h before the light was turned off) on the third day of the FL or CL treatment. Leaves were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until protein extraction. For proteome analysis, frozen leaf samples were transferred into 5 mL reaction tubes and homogenized with 1.5 mL protein extraction buffer (150 mM HEPES, 6 M GuHCl and 5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5 adjusted with 1M NaOH) and added HALT Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1:100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a KINEAMTICA Polytron at approx. 30.000 rpm for 1 min. The resulting suspension was filtered through a Miracloth mesh, the flow-through was collected and centrifuged for 10 min at 500 x g and 4°C and 1 mL of the supernatant was transferred to fresh 2 mL reaction tubes. 200 µL sample was precipitated using chloroform/methanol precipitation (Wessel and Flugge, 1984), washed twice with 1 mL ice-cold MeOH and dried at room temperature for 30 min before re-suspending in 200 µL protein extraction buffer. 25 µL of each sample were taken to estimate protein concentration by BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and also to verify intactness of proteome by visualization on silver-stained SDS-PAGE (Laemmli, 1970; Blum et al., 1987). Cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated by adding 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 55°C, followed by 30 mM IAA for 30 min at 20°C in the dark and 15 mM DTT for 20 min at 37°C. Samples were precipitated again using chloroform/methanol, re-suspended in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a protein concentration of approx. 1 mg mg-1 based on the measurement results of the BCA assay and digested with trypsin at a protease:protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C for 16 h. The efficiency of trypsin digestion was verified by silver-stained SDS-PAGE. The samples were then stable isotope labeled at the peptide level with 40 mM formaldehyde (standard 12CH2O formaldehyde for CL samples and heavy 13CD2O  formaldehyde for FL samples) and 20 mM cyanoborohydride for 90 min at 20°C (Boersema et al., 2009). The reaction was quenched for 15 min by adding 100 mM TRIS pH 7.5. Subsequently, a FL sample of every experimental group (morning-young, MY; morning-mature, MM; evening-young, EY; evening-mature, EM) was mixed with a respective CL sample, resulting in five biological replicates of FL/CL comparison for every group. Prior to LC-MS/MS all samples were desalted using reversed-phase StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). 500 ng of desalted peptides, as estimated from the initial BSA assay, were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase capillary trap column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm  column length, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an UltiMate3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 90-min gradient from 2% to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in H2O at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The nano-LC system was online coupled to an Impact II high-resolution quadrupole-time of flight (Q-TOF) tandem mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified, quantified and matched to corresponding proteins using the Max-Quant software package, version 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Generic settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments were used to match mass spectra to protein sequence in the A. thaliana Uniprot proteome database (release 2016/11, 33463 entries). Trypsin was set as digestion protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages and the re-quantification feature of MaxQuant was enabled. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Labels were set according to the stable isotope labels used (+28.0313 kDa / primary amine for CL samples and +34.0631 kDa / primary amine for FL samples).

### Publication Abstract
Plants are subjected to strong fluctuations in light intensity in their natural growth environment, caused both by unpredictable changes due to weather conditions and movement of clouds and upper canopy leaves and predictable changes during day-night cycle. The mechanisms of long-term acclimation to fluctuating light (FL) are still not well understood. Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate long-term acclimation of low light-grown <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> to a FL condition that induces mild photooxidative stress. On the third day of exposure to FL, young and mature leaves were harvested in the morning and at the end of day for proteome analysis using a stable isotope labeling approach. We identified 2,313 proteins, out of which 559 proteins exhibited significant changes in abundance in at least one of the four experimental groups (morning-young, morning-mature, end-of-day-young, end-of-day-mature). A core set of 49 proteins showed significant responses to FL in three or four experimental groups, which included enhanced accumulation of proteins involved in photoprotection, cyclic electron flow around photosystem I, photorespiration, and glycolysis, while specific glutathione transferases and proteins involved in translation and chlorophyll biosynthesis were reduced in abundance. In addition, we observed pathway- and protein-specific changes predominantly at the end of day, whereas few changes were observed exclusively in the morning. Comparison of the proteome data with the matching transcript data revealed gene- and protein-specific responses, with several chloroplast-localized proteins decreasing in abundance despite increased gene expression under FL. Together, our data shows moderate but widespread alterations of protein abundance during acclimation to FL and suggests an important role of post-transcriptional regulation of protein abundance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Leaf proteome, Fluctuating light, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Jülich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Jülich


