### Accession
PXD010622

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii MIC2 TSRs glycosylation

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that causes disseminated infections which can lead to neurological damage in fetuses and immunocompromised individuals. Microneme protein 2 (MIC2), a member of the thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) family, is a secreted protein important for motility, host cell attachment, invasion, and egress. MIC2 contains six thrombospondin type I repeats (TSRs) that are modified by C-mannose and O-fucose in Plasmodium spp. and mammals.  Here we used mass spectrometry to show that the four TSRs in T. gondii MIC2 with protein O-fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2) acceptor sites are modified by a dHexHex disaccharide, while Trp residues within three TSRs are also modified with C-mannose. Disruption of genes encoding either pofut2 or nucleotide sugar transporter 2 (nst2), the putative GDP-fucose transporter, results in loss of MIC2 O-fucosylation, as detected by an antibody against the GlcFuc disaccharide, and markedly reduced cellular levels of MIC2. Furthermore, in 10-15% of the Δpofut2 or Δnst2 vacuoles, MIC2 accumulates earlier in the secretory pathway rather than localizing to micronemes. Dissemination of tachyzoites in human foreskin fibroblasts is reduced in these knockouts, which both show defects in attachment to and invasion of host cells comparable to the phenotype observed in the Δmic2.  These results, which show O-fucosylation of TSRs is required for efficient processing of MIC2 and for normal parasite invasion, are consistent with the recent demonstration that P. falciparum Δpofut2 has decreased virulence and support a conserved role for this glycosylation pathway in quality control of TSR-containing proteins in eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
4x10^10 tachyzoites were isolated and resuspended in DMEM with 1% ethanol to induce secretion from micronemes. After removal of parasites by centrifugation, the supernatant was filtered and concentrated. About 110 μg total protein was precipitated in 0.1 M ammonium acetate in MeOH for at least 16 h at -20 °C. After washing, the sample was dried by speed vacuum (Speed Vac Plus, Savant) and re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. The proteins were then reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were desalted on a silica C18 column (Nest Group). After speed vacuum drying, the sample was reconstituted in 99% Water/1% Acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% Formic Acid (FA).

### Data Protocol
The discovery raw (Thermo Fisher Scientific Xcalibur Sotfware) data were converted to mgf file format through Thermo Fisher Scientific Proteome Discovery Software.  In all cases the mgf files were searched on Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: semiTrypsin enzyme allowing 3 missed cleavages, 5 ppm tolerance for precursor ions, and 50 mmu for fragment ions.  Variable modifications included carbamydomethyl (C), oxidation (M), dHex (S/T), Hex (W) and dHexHex(S/T). The ETD and HCD PRM MS/MS data were manually interpreted using the Thermo Fisher Scientific Xcalibur Platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-fucosylation, Toxoplasma gondii, C-mannosylation

### Affiliations
Boston University
Department of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA

### Submitter
Giulia Bandini

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Elizabeth Costello
Department of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA


