### Accession
PXD034624

### Title
Myeloid cell responses to fungicides, surfactants and fungicide formulations

### Description
MUTZ-3 cells were challenged with different chemicals and mixtures to assess immunotoxic reactions such as skin sensitization on the antigen-presenting cell level.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 200 µl lysis buffer (5% SDS and 50 mM Tris, pH=7.55) and homogenized on ice by probe sonication. Supernatants were recovered after centrifugation. 50 µg of proteins were used for hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC, ReSyn Biosciences, South Africa) clean-up and automated protein on-bead digestion using KingFisher Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) in a 96-well format.  Peptides were recovered from the plate and dried in a Speedvac before desalting  using BioPureSPN Mini, PROTO 300 C18 (The Nest Group, Inc., MA, USA). Cleaned peptides were dried and stored at -20°C before quantification and injection into the mass spectrometer. Approximately 300 ng peptides were injected and separated on an EASY-nano LC system 1200 coupled with a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer operating in positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The analytical column was a 15 cm long fused silica capillary (75 μm* 16 cm Pico Tip Emitter, New Objective), packed in house with C18 material ReproSil-Pur 1.9 µm. Peptides were separated using a 60 min gradient from 5% to 90% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. Full MS scan with an automatic gain control target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms in a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z and selection of the 20 most abundant peptide ions for HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 with mainy default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mutz-3

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden


