### Accession
PXD023834

### Title
A type I IFN, prothrombotic hyperinflammatory neutrophil signature is distinct for COVID-19 ARDS

### Description
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a severe critical condition with a high mortality that is currently in focus given that it is associated with mortality caused by coronavirus induced disease 2019 (COVID-19). Neutrophils play a key role in the lung injury characteristic of non-COVID-19 ARDS and there is also accumulating evidence of neutrophil mediated lung injury in patients who succumb to infection with SARS-CoV-2. We undertook a functional proteomic and metabolomic survey of circulating neutrophil populations, comparing patients with COVID-19 ARDS and non-COVID-19 ARDS to understand the molecular basis of neutrophil dysregulation. Expansion of the circulating neutrophil compartment and the presence of activated low and normal density mature and immature neutrophil populations occurs in ARDS, irrespective of cause. Release of neutrophil granule proteins, neutrophil activation of the clotting cascade and upregulation of the Mac-1 platelet binding complex with formation of neutrophil platelet aggregates is exaggerated in COVID-19 ARDS. Importantly, activation of components of the neutrophil type I interferon responses is seen in ARDS following infection with SARS-CoV-2, with associated rewiring of neutrophil metabolism to promote glutamine utilisation, and the upregulation of antigen processing and presentation. Whilst dexamethasone treatment constricts the immature low density neutrophil population it does not impact upon prothrombotic hyperinflammatory neutrophil signatures.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation  Normal density neutrophils cell pellets were resuspended in 372 μL of freshly made 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) lysis buffer and vortexed. Samples were then heat denatured in a heat block for 5 min at 100 °C and stored at –80 °C. Cell lysates were thawed and tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) were added to a final concentration of 10 mM and 50 mM respectively. Lysates were shaken at 500 rpm at 22 °C for 5 min before being incubated at 98 °C for 5 min. Samples were allowed to cool and were then sonicated 30 cycles: 30 s on and 30 s off. Tubes were centrifuged at 17,000 × g to collect the cell lysate and 1 L of benzonase (27.8 units) was added to each sample and samples incubated at 37 °C for 15 min. Samples were then alkylated with addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22 °C in the dark. Protein lysates were processed for mass spectrometry using s-trap spin columns following the manufacturer’s instructions (Protifi). Lysates were digested with Trypsin at a ratio 1:20 (protein:enzyme) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were eluted from s-trap columns by sequentially adding 80 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by 80 mL of 0.2 % formic acid with a final elution using 80 mL of 50 % acetonitrile + 0.2 % formic acid.  LC-MS analysis For each sample, 2 g of peptide was analysed on a Q-Exactive-HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). 2 μg aliquot of each sample were loaded at 15 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50 oC at all times.   The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature at 250 °C and the funnel RF at 60 °C.  The MS was operated in DIA mode with some modifications. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650, with a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms, a resolution of 120 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 5 × 106).  MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: default charge state of 3, resolution 30.000, maximum ion injection time 55 ms, AGC 3 x 106, stepped normalized collision energy 25.5, 27 and 30, fixed first mass 200 m/z. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of proteomics data The DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut 14.7.201007 using the directDIA option. Cleavage Rules were set to Trypsin/P, Peptide maximum length was set to 52 amino acids, Peptide minimum length was set to 7 amino acids and Missed Cleavages set to 2. Calibration Mode was set to Automatic. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. The FDR threshold was set to 1% Q-value at both the Precursor and Protein level. The single hit definition was to Stripped sequence. The directDIA data were searched against the human SwissProt database (July 2020) and included isoforms. The Major Group Quantity was set to the Sum of peptide quantity and the Minor Group Quantity was set to the Sum of the precursor quantity; Cross Run Normalization was disabled.  Fold changes and P-values were calculated in R utilising the bioconductor package LIMMA version 3.7. The Q-values provided were generated in R using the “qvalue” package version 2.10.0.  Estimates of protein copy numbers per cell were calculated using the histone ruler method. The mass of individual proteins was estimated using the following formula: CN × MW/NA = protein mass (g cell−1), where CN is the protein copy number, MW is the protein molecular weight (in Da) and NA is Avogadro’s Constant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Dexamethasone, Covid-19, Type i ifn, Neutrophil, Ards

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Centre for Inflammation Research, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Walmsley
Centre for Inflammation Research, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK


