### Accession
PXD013701

### Title
Energetics- and transport-related protein abundance responds differentially to salt in Oryza australiensis roots

### Description
Salinity is a major constraint on agricultural productivity worldwide. Despite the serious impacts of salinity on rice yields, particularly in Asia, mechanisms of salt tolerance in wild rice species are yet to be explored. Here we extracted and quantified root microsomal proteins of Oryza australiensis accessions contrasting in salt tolerance. Whole root systems of two-week-old seedlings were treated with 80 mM NaCl for 30 days or left untreated. Proteins were quantified by tandem mass tags (TMT) and triple-stage MS. We found >200 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between the salt-treated and control in the two accessions (p-value <0.05). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis showed that ‘metabolic process’, ‘transport’ and ‘transmembrane transporter’ activities were highly responsive categories following salt treatment of the O. australiensis seedlings. In particular, ATPases and SNARE proteins were up-regulated in the salt-tolerant accession and appeared to have a major role in response to salinity. ATPases are the central link between energy generation and transport, while SNARE proteins facilitate vesicle fusion and interact with voltage-gated potassium channels to regulate K+ influx. We successfully validated the putative function of two strongly upregulated proteins, a monosaccharide transporter and a VAMP-like protein, by measuring the growth under salinity of yeast mutants in which homologous genes were deleted. Our results demonstrate the potential use of wild species as a source of new mechanisms of salt tolerance for the breeding of elite cultivars of rice.

### Sample Protocol
Two wild accessions of Oryza australiensis (Oa-VR and Oa-D, salinity tolerant and sensitive respectively) were selected and grown in a temperature-controlled glasshouse with a 14h photoperiod and day/night temperatures of 28/22°C for the duration of the experiment. After 1 week in hydroponics, plants were exposed to salt solution in daily increments to concentrations of 25, 40 and finally 80mM by adding NaCl to a final EC of 10dS m-1 in Yoshida nutrient solution or they were left as salt-free controls (‘control’) with roots maintained in dark-walled containers. 15 plants of each genotype were grown in each treatment, contributing five plants to each biological triplicate. 30 days after salt application, roots from both treatments were harvested for protein extraction and washed thoroughly with deionised water. Proteins were extracted by grinding the washed roots with a mortar and pestle in 2mL ice-cold extraction buffer (250mM sucrose, 250mM KI, 2mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% BSA, 2mM DTT, protease inhibitor, 15mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1mM Na2SO3 and 50mM BTP, with a pH of 7.8 adjusted with MES buffer) per g of tissue. Homogenates were filtered and centrifuged and the pellet was discarded. Samples were centrifuged at 87,000 × g for 35min. The pellet was washed 4 times in the extraction buffer (without BSA) followed by ultracentrifugation as above. Pellets were dissolved in 100µL urea buffer (8M urea, 2% SDS, 0.2M N-methylmorpholine, 0.1M acetic acid, 10mM TCEP) at room temperature (RT) for 1h, followed by alkylation with 4µL 25% 2-vinylpyridine in methanol for 1h at RT, then quenching with 2µL 2-mercaptoethanol.  Alkylated proteins were extracted by acetate solvent protein extraction (ASPEX). ASPEX-extracted pellets were re-dissolved in 100µL urea buffer (without TCEP) and protein concentrations determined by BCA assay. 50μg protein aliquots were ASPEX-extracted without the inclusion of apomyoglobin. Partially air-dried pellets were digested in Rapigest containing Lys-C and trypsin as per manufacturer’s protocol, except that 0.4% Rapigest was used instead of 0.3%. Instead of stopping overnight digests with TFA, digests were labelled with TMT 10-plex reagents (as per manufacturer’s protocol) first, followed by TFA acidification. A master mix (MM) of the 12 samples was created by pooling 4µL of each sample. The MM was labelled with the 126 channel and all other channels were randomly assigned to the samples in 2 sets of 6 TMT channels as follows:  1st set (Oa-VR) 2nd set (Oa-D) 127C control  control 127N salt  control 128C salt  salt 128N control  salt 129C control  control 129N salt  salt TMT reagent was prepared as per manufacturer’s protocol and 10µL was added to 7µL of each sample with 1h incubation at RT. Reactions were quenched with 2µL 5% hydroxylamine in 0.2M N-methylmorpholine, 20mM acetic acid for 15min.  The 6 channels per TMT set and MM were combined with 250µL 0.5% TFA, incubated at 37°C, 45min to hydrolyse Rapigest, and evaporated to approximately 250µL. 250µL 0.1% TFA was added, followed by centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 5min. Supernatants were loaded on Oasis HLB SPE cartridges preconditioned with 1mL of 100% methanol and acetonitrile (ACN) and washed sequentially with 1mL 5% ACN and 0.1% TFA. The column was washed with 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted with 1.2mL of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were dried to completion overnight and reconstituted in water for HILIC fractionation. Briefly, 20µL aliquots of peptide for the total proteome analysis were dispensed in 100% HILIC Buffer B (90% ACN, 9.9% MilliQ water, 0.1% TFA) and fractionated. An in-house-packed fritless 320µm i.d. × 17cm fused-silica column with a post column PEEK filter was used to divide each sample into 8 fractions with an Agilent 1200 chromatography system. Peptides were loaded onto the column in 100% HILIC Buffer B for 10.5min at a flow rate of 10µL/min and eluted with a gradient of 100-30% Buffer B containing 0.1% TFA over 50min at 6µL/min. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate at 2min intervals after UV detection (80-nL flow cell) and the plate was dried by vacuum centrifugation before LC-MS/MS analysis. Each TMT-labelled HILIC fraction was resuspended in 6µL of MS Loading Buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were injected onto a reversed phase column (75µm i.d. × 40cm) packed in-house with C18AQ material of particle size 1.9µm. Peptides were eluted with 2-30% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid for 140min at a flow rate of 250nL/min at 55°C. The MS1 scans were acquired over the range of 350-1400 m/z (120,000 resolution, 4e5 AGC, 50ms maximum injection time), followed by MS2 and MS3 data-dependent acquisitions of the 20 most intense ions with higher collision dissociation (HCD-MS3) (60,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 300ms injection time, 2 m/z isolation window).

### Data Protocol
The nanoLC-MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. For quantitation of TMT reporter ions, the S/N for each TMT channel was extracted by finding the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion in a window of 0.06 m/z. Searches against a UniProt tailored database were performed using Sequest HT and Mascot. Since O. australiensis does not have a sequenced genome, a combined Oryza database was assembled as the search database, containing identifiers from the UniProt databases of Oryza barthii, Oryza glaberrima, Oryza nivara, Oryza punctata, Oryza rufipogon, Oryza sativa sp. indica, Oryza sativa sp. japonica and Oryza meridionalis (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.com/ in August 2018). The database was concatenated (90% identity threshold) using CD-HIT software for a total of 133,465 sequences; common contaminant protein sequences were from GPM DB (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of ±2 Da and ±0.2 Da, up to 2 missed trypsin cleavage sites tolerance. Fixed modifications were set for cysteine modification by methyl methanethiosulfonate and variable modifications were set for oxidation of methionine. Peptide results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and 0.05 p-value. In addition to the protein detection confidence cut-off, an overall FDR was estimated based on the percentage of decoy database hits (reversed hits).    The TMTPrepPro scripts implemented in the R programming language were used for the subsequent analysis, accessed through a graphical user interface provided via a local GenePattern server. The scripts were used to identify differentially expressed proteins and to carry out overall multivariate analyses (clustering and principal component analyses) on the resulting datasets.  Four quantitative comparisons were made of the differentially expressed proteins between the 2 genotypes and treatments: (a) Oa-VR salt vs Oa-VR control (b) Oa-D salt vs Oa-D control (c) Oa-VR salt vs Oa-D salt  (d) the salt–genotype interaction (Oa-VR salt vs Oa-VR control) / (Oa-D salt vs Oa-D control)  Student t-tests were performed within each of the above comparisons. The statistical significance in the abundance of identified proteins, the up- and down-regulated proteins and their associated pathways for each comparison were determined. The quantified proteins were classified by parallel sequence searches against reference databases to compile the results and compute the most likely functional categories (BINs) for each query using the MapMan tool. Bioinformatics analysis was performed using the programs Mercator and MapMan to categorise the proteins into their biological processes. Protein differential expression between treatments was determined for each individual protein separately using the replicates, either by a t-test on log-transformed ratios for pairwise comparisons (p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5) or an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test on log-transformed ratios for cross-variety comparisons (p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5). Sequential BLASTP searching with an E-value cut-off of 1e-10 was used to map the sequences to corresponding identifiers in the UniProt O. sativa database. Gene Ontology (GO) information was extracted from the UniProt database and matched to the list of identified proteins. This GO information was used to categorise the differentially expressed proteins into a selected number of biological processes of interest using the PloGO tool. The PloGO tool was further used to identify enriched representation of proteins in 2 specific categories; ‘molecular functions’ and ‘biological process’. This entailed 2 complementary approaches to assess enrichment in response to salt: one based on numbers of proteins only, and another based on quantitation of all proteins within each functional category. Under the 1st approach, enriched categories were determined by comparing the numbers of proteins identified in each protein subset of interest with the total number of proteins in that category identified by a Fisher’s exact test. ‘Functional’ or ‘process’ categories with a Fisher’s exact test p-value < 0.05 and present in higher proportion in the respective subset than in the whole protein subset were deemed to be ‘enriched’.  Secondly, protein abundance was taken into account by summing overall log-transformed protein ratios of salt/control for each molecular function or biological process category, and by comparing the overall salt-induced response of each functional category between the 2 accessions by an unpaired Student t-test applied to the log-transformed protein ratios.  Categories with a difference in total salt response (t-test p-value < 0.05) were deemed as significantly differentially expressed in terms of their overall salt response between the two varieties. Proteins were then classified into pathways based on biological process information available on the  KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
Salinity is a major constraint on rice productivity worldwide. However, mechanisms of salt tolerance in wild rice relatives are unknown. Root microsomal proteins are extracted from two Oryza australiensis accessions contrasting in salt tolerance. Whole roots of 2-week-old seedlings are treated with 80&#xa0;mM NaCl for 30 days to induce salt stress. Proteins are quantified by tandem mass tags (TMT) and triple-stage Mass Spectrometry. More than 200 differentially expressed proteins between the salt-treated and control samples in the two accessions (p-value &lt;0.05) are found. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis shows that proteins categorized as "metabolic process," "transport," and "transmembrane transporter" are highly responsive to salt treatment. In particular, mitochondrial ATPases and SNARE proteins are more abundant in roots of the salt-tolerant accession and responded strongly when roots are exposed to salinity. mRNA quantification validated the elevated protein abundances of a monosaccharide transporter and an antiporter observed in the salt-tolerant genotype. The importance of the upregulated monosaccharide transporter and a VAMP-like protein by measuring salinity responses of two yeast knockout mutants for genes homologous to those encoding these proteins in rice are confirmed. Potential new mechanisms of salt tolerance in rice, with implications for breeding of elite cultivars are also discussed.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Energy metabolism, Atpase, Proteomics, Transporters, Tolerance, Tandem mass tags, Oryza australiensis, Stress response, Rice

### Affiliations
Sydney Institute of Agriculture, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Yoav Yichie

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas H Roberts
Sydney Institute of Agriculture, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia


