### Accession
PXD001330

### Title
Temporal quantitative proteomics of Chikungunya virus infected cells

### Description
To better understand the complex CHIKV-host interplay we used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and LC-MS/MS to define the temporal dynamics of the cellular response to infection. Using samples harvested at 8, 10 and 12 hours post infection, over 4700 proteins were identified and per time point 2750-3150 proteins could be quantified in both biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
293/ACE2 cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM (PAA), 10% dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Gibco), 0.280 mM arginine, 0.398 mM lysine, 0.5 mM proline, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 IU penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. The SILAC light medium was supplemented with Arg 12C6 14N4 and Lys 12C6 14N2 (Sigma), the SILAC heavy medium was supplemented with Arg 13C6 15N4 and Lys 13C6 15N2 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories).  SILAC-labeled cells were seeded in 10 cm2 dishes 1 day before infection with CHIKV strain LS3 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5. At 1 h p.i. the inoculum was removed and replaced with SILAC DMEM, 2% FBS, 0.280 mM arginine, 0.398 mM lysine, 0.5 mM proline, 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Infected and mock-infected cells were lysed at 8, 10 and 12 h p.i in 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.6, followed by incubation at 96 °C for 10 min. The experiment was performed in duplicate with a label swap.  The protein concentration of the SILAC cell lysates was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce) and equal amounts (200 μg) of mock- and CHIKV-infected lysates were mixed, followed by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 0.1 M and 5 min incubation at 70 ºC. Protein digestion was performed with endo Lys-C and trypsin using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. Peptides were collected by centrifugation, acidified by addition of TFA to 1% and desalted using solid phase extraction.  Peptides were separated into 12 fractions on 13-cm Immobiline DryStrips pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare) in a 3100 Offgel Fractionator (Agilent Technologies) that was run up to 20 kVh. Peptide fractions were desalted using solid phase extraction, frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized in a CHRIST RVC 2-18.  Lyophilized peptide fractions were dissolved in 95/3/0.1 (v/v/v) water/acetonitrile/formic acid. The samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS. The 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) operating in split-flow configuration was coupled on line to a 7-tesla LTQ-FT Ultra MS (Thermo). The samples were trapped on a 15-mm ReproSil-Pur C18, 3-µm pre-column (inner diameter 100-µm) and eluted to a 20-cm ReproSil-Pur C18, 3-µm analytical column (inner diameter 50-µm) by a 2.5 h 0-50% solvent B (10/90/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid) gradient. The eluent was emitted via a customized nano-electrospray probe into the mass spectrometer performing in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS mode. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the FT-ICR. The top 5 most intense ions were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap. The data were acquired with Xcalibur, version 2.0 SR2 (Thermo). Each fraction was measured twice.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 using the Andromeda search engine, databases used for the main search were ipi.HUMAN.v3.72 and a custom-made database containing the protein sequences of CHIKV-LS3. A concatenated reversed database was used to reach a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and a list of common contaminants was included in the search.

### Publication Abstract
Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arthropod-borne reemerging human pathogen that generally causes a severe persisting arthritis. Since 2005, the virus has infected millions of people during outbreaks in Africa, Indian Ocean Islands, Asia, and South/Central America. Many steps of the replication and expression of CHIKV's 12-kb RNA genome are highly dependent on cellular factors, which thus constitute potential therapeutic targets. SILAC and LC-MS/MS were used to define the temporal dynamics of the cellular response to infection. Using samples harvested at 8, 10, and 12 h postinfection, over 4700 proteins were identified and per time point 2800-3500 proteins could be quantified in both biological replicates. At 8, 10, and 12 h postinfection, 13, 38, and 106 proteins, respectively, were differentially expressed. The majority of these proteins showed decreased abundance. Most subunits of the RNA polymerase II complex were progressively degraded, which likely contributes to the transcriptional host shut-off observed during CHIKV infection. Overexpression of four proteins that were significantly downregulated (Rho family GTPase 3 (Rnd3), DEAD box helicase 56 (DDX56), polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2C (UbcH10) reduced susceptibility of cells to CHIKV infection, suggesting that infection-induced downregulation of these proteins is beneficial for CHIKV replication. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001330 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001330).

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Chikungunya virus, Silac

### Affiliations
LUMC
Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Emmely Treffers

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A van Veelen
Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center


