### Accession
PXD002351

### Title
Alkali-salinity NaHCO3-responsive mechanisms in leaves from halophyte Puccinellia tenuiflora revealed from physiological and comparative proteomic analysis

### Description
Alkali-salinity is a major abiotic stress that limits plant growth and productivity. Studying mechanisms of alkali-salinity tolerance in halophytic plants will provide valuable information for underlying plant alkali-salinity tolerance. Puccinellia tenuiflora is considered as an ideal model plant for studying the alkali-salinity tolerant mechanisms in plants. In this study, the NaHCO3-responsive molecular mechanisms in P. tenuiflora leaves were investigated using a combined physiological and proteomic approaches. Our results implied some specific NaHCO3-responsive mechanisms in leaves from P. tenuiflora. They are (1) reduction of photosynthesis attributed to the decrease of the abundance of Calvin cycle enzymes, (2) accumulation of Na+ and K+ caused ion-specific stress, (3) accumulation of proline, soluble sugar and betaine enhanced the ability of osmotic regulation, (4) diverse reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging mechanisms under different NaHCO3 concentrations, and (5) alternative protein synthesis and processing strategies in chloroplast and cytoplasm. All these provide important evidence for understanding NaHCO3-responsive mechanisms in P. tenuiflora.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) separation were performed as previously described, with minor modifications (Wang et al., 2010). Briefly, 1g of treated leaves was ground in liquid nitrogen, and total soluble proteins were extracted at 4°C in 8 mL of extraction buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.8)，10 mM EDTA, 0.9 M sucrose, and 0.4% mercaptoethanol. Homogenates were centrifuged at 15 000g for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were added to 5 vol of 100 mM ammonium sulfate/methanol. Samples were maintained at −20 °C for 4 h and then were centrifuged at 20 000g for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were washed with 80% acetone containing at −20 °C for 1 h, and the 100% acetone wash was repeated after centrifugation. The final pellets were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 7 M urea, 40 mM DTT, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, and 2% (w/v) ampholyte (pH 3−10). Samples in ampholyte were vortexed thoroughly for 1 h at room temperature and then were centrifuged at 25 000g for 20 min at 20 °C. Supernatants then were collected for 2DE experiments (Dai et al., 2006; Yu et al, 2011). Protein concentration was determined using a Quant-kit according to manufacture’s instructions (GE Healthcare, USA). Extracted proteins were first separated by isoelectric focusing (IEF) using gel strips to form an immobilized nonlinear pH gradient from 4 to 7 (GE Healthcare, USA). Following IEF, proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using 12.5% (w/v) polyacrylamide. Gel strips then were rehydrated in 450 μL of dehydration buffer containing 1600 μg of total proteins and a trace of bromophenol blue for 26 h. Gel strips were focused at 80 kV/h and 20 °C using the PROTEAN IEF system (Bio-Rad) and then were equilibrated for 15 min in equilibration buffer (6 M urea, 0.5 M Tris [pH 8.8], 2% [w/v] SDS, 30% [v/v] glycerol). Gel strips then were placed over 12.5% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gels for 2DE. Gel electrophoresis was performed at 25 mA for 5 h. Gels were stained using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB). After staining, gels were scanned using an ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare, USA) at a resoltion of 300 dpi and 16-bit grayscale pixel depth. The images were analyzed with ImageMaster 2D software (version 6.0) (GE Healthcare, USA). The average vol% balues were calculated from three technical replicates to represent the final vol% values of each biological replicate. The volume of each spot changed more than 1.5-fold among the treatments and a p< 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed spots.Protein spots displaying significant changes in abundance were excised manually from colloidal CBB stained 2DE gels using sterile pipette tips. Briefly, spots cut out of the gels were destained twice with 100 mM NH4HCO3, 50% ACN at 37 °C for 20 min in each treatment. After dehydration with 100% ACN and drying, the gel pieces were pre-incubated in 10-20 μL of trypsin solution (10 ng /μL) for 1h. Then adequate digestion buffer (40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN) was added to cover the gel pieces, which were extracted using Milli-Q water followed by double 1h extraction with 50% ACN and 5% TFA. The combined extracts were dried in SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific) at 4 °C. The samples were then subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra were acquired using a MALDI-TOF-MS/MS (AB SCIEX TOF/TOF: trademark: 5800 system) according to Dai et al. (2010). A Mass standard kit (Applied Biosystems) and a standard BSA digest (Sigma-Aldrich) were used for MS and MS/MS calibrations and fine-tuning the resolution and sensitivity of the system as previously described (Zhu et al., 2009). The mass error was below 30 ppm at both MS and MS/MS mode and the resolution was more than 25 000.  The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBInr protein databases (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using Mascot software (Matrix Sciences, London, UK). The taxonomic category was green plants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nahco3, Proteomics, Puccinellia tenuiflora

### Affiliations
NEFU
staff

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr zepeng  
staff


