### Accession
PXD019121

### Title
Cell wall proteome of Tuwongella immobilis

### Description
Bacteria of the Planctomycetes phylum have many unique cellular features, such as extensive membrane invaginations and the ability to import macromolecules. These features raise intriguing questions about the composition of their cell envelopes. In this study, we have used microscopy, phylogenomics and proteomics to examine the composition and evolution of cell envelope proteins in Tuwongella immobilis and other members of the Planctomycetes. Cryo electron tomography data indicated a distance between the inner and outer membranes of 45 nm in T. immobilis. Consistent with the wide periplasmic space, our bioinformatics studies showed that the periplasmic segments of outer membrane proteins in type II secretion systems are extended in bacteria of the order Planctomycetales. Homologs of two highly abundant cysteine-rich cell wall proteins in T. immobilis were identified in all members of the Planctomycetales, whereas genes for peptidoglycan biosynthesis and cell elongation have been lost at least twice in this group of bacteria. The cell wall proteins contain multiple copies of the YTV motif, which is the only domain that is conserved and unique to the Planctomycetales. Earlier diverging taxa in the Plantomycetes phylum contain genes for peptidoglycan biosynthesis but no homologs to the YTV cell wall proteins. The major remodelling of the cell envelope in the ancestor of the Planctomycetales coincided with the emergence of budding and other unique cellular phenotypes. These results have implications for hypotheses about the process whereby complex cellular features evolve in bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of cell wall. T. immobilis was cultivated in 100 mL M1 medium at 32°C until the early stationary phase (OD600 ≈ 1.0, 6 days). The cell suspension was split into aliquots à 50 mL and centrifuged at 4500 x g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed twice in 1x TE buffer. The washed pellet was stored at -20°C until further processing. To isolate the cell wall, the frozen pellet from 50 mL cell suspension was thawed at room temperature and re-suspended in 10 mL 5% SDS (v/v) in 1xTE buffer. After overnight incubation at 70°C under gentle orbital shaking, the SDS-insoluble cell wall was pelleted by ultracentrifugation (100 000 x g, 40 min, 4°C, Beckman Optima XPN-100, 90Ti rotor). The pellet was washed twice by re-suspension in 4 mL 5% SDS in 1xTE buffer, followed by ultracentrifugation (100 000 x g, 30 min, 4°C, Beckman Optima XPN-100, 90Ti rotor). The washed pellet was resuspended in 500 µL 1x TE buffer and dissolved by mild tip-sonication (2 mm probe, 30% amplitude, 5x10 s, on ice, Vibra-Cell VCX 130 sonicator).  LC-MS/MS analysis of isolated T. immobilis cell wall. A small aliquot of the isolated cell wall preparation was mixed to a final concentration of 1x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer, 1x NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent and incubated at 70°C for 10 min. 20 µL sample and 5 µL Novex Sharp Unstained Protein Standard were loaded on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (1.0 mm) and electrophoresis was performed in 1x MOPS SDS Running buffer supplemented with NuPage Antioxidant for 55 min at 200 V. The gel was washed, stained and destained using SimplyBlue SafeStain based on the manufacturers microwave protocol and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad). For LC-MS/MS analysis, the top of the gel, expected to contain the large cell wall sacculi, was cut and stored at 4°C (#1). The rest of the gel lane was cut and stored at 4°C until processing (#2). The proteins from both samples were in-gel digested by trypsin as previously described (Shevchenko, Chernushevich, Wilm, & Mann, 2000). Brieﬂy, gel pieces were destained, reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetoamide. Incubation with 12.5 ng/mL trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NaHCO3 was performed overnight, at 37°C in the dark. Tryptic peptides were extracted using sonication and by adding 60% ACN in 5 % formic acid. Peptides were dried in a Speedvac system. Thereafter the samples were resolved in 30 µL 0.1% FA (formic acid). The resulting peptides were separated in reversed-phase on a C18-column, applying a 90 min long gradient, and electrosprayed on-line to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). Tandem mass spectrometry was performed applying HCD.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Sequest algorithm, embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the genome of T. immobilis isolate MBLW1 (GenBank: LR593887.1). The search parameters were set to Enzyme: Trypsin (Fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ). The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides of 95% confidence level per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria of the Planctomycetes phylum have many unique cellular features, such as extensive membrane invaginations and the ability to import macromolecules. These features raise intriguing questions about the composition of their cell envelopes. In this study, we have used microscopy, phylogenomics, and proteomics to examine the composition and evolution of cell envelope proteins in Tuwongella immobilis and other members of the Planctomycetes. Cryo-electron tomography data indicated a distance of 45&#x2009;nm between the inner and outer membranes in T.&#xa0;immobilis. Consistent with the wide periplasmic space, our bioinformatics studies showed that the periplasmic segments of outer-membrane proteins in type II secretion systems are extended in bacteria of the order Planctomycetales. Homologs of two highly abundant cysteine-rich cell wall proteins in T.&#xa0;immobilis were identified in all members of the Planctomycetales, whereas genes for peptidoglycan biosynthesis and cell elongation have been lost in many members of this bacterial group. The cell wall proteins contain multiple copies of the YTV motif, which is the only domain that is conserved and unique to the Planctomycetales. Earlier diverging taxa in the Planctomycetes phylum contain genes for peptidoglycan biosynthesis but no homologs to the YTV cell wall proteins. The major remodeling of the cell envelope in the ancestor of the Planctomycetales coincided with the emergence of budding and other unique cellular phenotypes. The results have implications for hypotheses about the process whereby complex cellular features evolve in bacteria.

### Keywords
Planctomycetes, Lc-ms/ms, Tuwongella immobilis, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Seeger

### Lab Head
Dr Siv Andersson
Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden


