### Accession
PXD025132

### Title
Simple Strategy of Integrating the Micro-centrifugation-based Extraction and 4-Hexylphenylazosulfonate for the Preparation of Plant Microsomal Proteins for Bottom-Up Proteomics

### Description
The preparation of high-quality microsomal proteins (MPs) is of critical importance to high-throughput microsomal proteomics. The isolation of MPs for proteomic analysis has to date relied on Ultracentrifugation-based methods (UBMs), however, these methods are labor-intensive, time-consuming, and unaffordable to many laboratories. Here, we report a simple method developed by integrating the micro-centrifugation-based extraction (MME) method and 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo) surfactant for the isolation and solubilization of MPs from rice leaves. A mass spectrometry-based (MS) label-free proteomic approach was used for a comprehensive quantitative comparison of the extractability between the MME method and the plasma membrane extraction (PME) kit and of the ability to solubilize proteins between Azo and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Results showed that the MME method can not only effectively isolate MPs from rice leaves for a bottom-up proteomic analysis but also performs better than the PME kit in the enrichment of plasma membrane (PM) proteins. Additionally, Azo was found to effectively solubilize total proteins, including the MPs from rice leaves for bottom-up proteomics with performance comparable to that of SDS. Azo can be integrated with the MME approach as a simple and effective strategy to prepare MPs and could replace SDS for high-throughput proteomic studies. This is the first study revealing the applicability of the micro-centrifugation-based method and Azo in plant proteomics

### Sample Protocol
The extraction efficiency of two different protein extraction methods, including the MME method and the PME kit (ab65400, abcam, Cambridge, UK) was compared. For the MME method, 200 μg of rice leaf powder was homogenized in concentrated stock (1.5x) solution of HED buffer [37.5 mM hydroxyethyl piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 8.0, 37.5% (w/w 1.215 M) sucrose, 7.5% (v/v) glycerol, 15 mM ethylene-diamine-tetraacetic acid (EDTA), 15 mM ethylene-glycol-tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100x HaltTM protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA)], and the supernatant was collected after centrifuged at 600 g for 3 min at 4℃. The remaining pellet was re-extracted, with half, then a third of the initially used HED buffer, at the same centrifugation conditions as the first extraction. All of the supernatants were combined before being centrifuged at 600 g for 3 min at 4℃ to remove any remaining debris. Subsequently, the clear supernatant was diluted with ddH2O at a ratio of 1 supernatant: 2 water (v/v) for adjusting sucrose to a final concentration of 12 to 13%. After being diluted, the supernatant was divided intoaliquots of no larger than 200 μL, then the centrifugation at 21,000 g was applied for 90 min at 4℃. After centrifugation, the supernatant, referred to as soluble fraction, was precipitated with 12.5% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol overnight at -20°C and centrifuged at 14,000 g while the pellet, referred to as microsomal fraction, was resuspended in wash buffer [20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA] and re-centrifuged at 21,000 g for 45 min at 4℃. Finally, all of the resulting pellets were additionally washed with 80% acetone and stored -20℃ for further analysis. The extraction of microsomal membrane proteins using the plasma membrane (PM) extraction kit (ab65400, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), referred to as PME, was carried out following the manufacturer’s instructions. The rice-leaf protein pellets isolated using the abovementioned MME method were separately solubilized by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and Azo followed by in-solution digestion of the solubilized proteins using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. The peptide samples were desalted using the HLB OASIS column according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After desalting, the dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Before loading the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptide were loaded, and 3 fractions were subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution containing 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 60, 80, and 100% ACN.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) as described previously. All three technical replicates of MS/MS spectra were cross-referenced against the Oryza sativa database (Oryza sativa pepV6, 67,393 entries). Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones. The LFQ data was searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for the fixed modifications, while acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen for additional modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) set at 1% for peptide identifications was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database.

### Publication Abstract
The preparation of microsomal membrane proteins (MPs) is critically important to microsomal proteomics. To date most research studies have utilized an ultracentrifugation-based approach for the isolation and solubilization of plant MPs. However, these approaches are labor-intensive, time-consuming, and unaffordable in certain cases. Furthermore, the use of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and its removal prior to a mass spectrometry (MS) analysis through multiple washing steps result in the loss of proteins. To address these limitations, this study introduced a simple micro-centrifugation-based MP extraction (MME) method from rice leaves, with the efficacy of this approach being compared with a commercially available plasma membrane extraction kit (PME). Moreover, this study assessed the subsequent solubilization of isolated MPs in an MS-compatible surfactant, namely, 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo) and SDS using a label-free proteomic approach. The results validated the effectiveness of the MME method, specifically in the enrichment of plasma membrane proteins as compared with the PME method. Furthermore, the findings showed that Azo demonstrated several advantages over SDS in solubilizing the MPs, which was reflected through a label-free quantitative proteome analysis. Altogether, this study provided a relatively simple and rapid workflow for the efficient extraction of MPs with an Azo-integrated MME approach for bottom-up proteomics.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Sds, Maxquant, Perseus, Micro-centrifugation, Azo, Plasma membrane, Ultracentrifugation, Rice leaves, Microsomal membrane extraction

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, South Korea


