### Accession
PXD034365

### Title
Model Bacteria Physiological Studies Dataset 1: Triplicate replete proteomes for Ruergeria pomeroyi DSS-3  Dataset 2: Triplicate replete proteomes for Alteromonas macleodii MIT1002

### Description
These datasets represent the global proteome of biological triplicates of replete cultures of Ruergeria pomeroyi DSS-3 and Alteromonas macleodii MIT1002 (three samples each). These datasets are an initial examination of the proteome allocation of these two heterotrophic bacteria. 2341 and 2075 proteins were identified in DSS-3 and MIT1002, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using a Michrom Advance HPLC system with reverse phase chromatography coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a Michrom Advance CaptiveSpray source. Each sample was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 250 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 150 min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer monitored MS1 scans from 380 m/z to 1580 m/z at 70K resolution. MS2 scans were performed on the top 10 ions with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a 15 second exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against the P. granii translated transcriptome using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST HT algorithm (Thermo) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. Identification criteria consisted of a peptide threshold of 95% and protein threshold of 99% (1 peptides minimum), corresponding to an FDR of 0.01 when analyzed with Scaffold version 5.1.2 (Proteome Software, Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ruergeria pomeroyi dss-3, Alteromonas macleodii mit1002, Ccomp

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


