### Accession
PXD005085

### Title
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 WT and Δhik33 (sll0698) proteomic research, proteomic data of normal culture conditions.

### Description
In this study, by using shotgun LC-MS/MS approach with the Tandem Mass Tag (TMTs) isobaric labelling technique we show that proteins in photosystem, inorganic carbon uptake and CO2 fixation systems are significantly changed in Δhik33 cells compared with WT cells.This is the normal culture condition proteomic data.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer. The whole cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 30 min at 5000 x g at 4 °C to remove insoluble debris. After precipitation with ice-cold 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone at -20 °C, total proteins were washed with acetone and resolubilized with 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. A BCA protein assay kit (Thermo-Fisher, Rockford, IL) was used to determine the protein concentration. Proteins were digested using the filter-aided proteome preparation method (FASP) according to a previously described method (Wisniewski et al., 2009), with minor modifications. The resulting tryptic peptides were collected and labeled with TMT-sixplex Label Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to manufacturer's manual with slight modifications.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric files were analyzed in the MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). The database search was performed using the integrated searching engine Andromeda, and the proteome sequence database used was downloaded from CyanoBase that contains 3,672 protein entries (http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase/Synechocystis). Bioinformatic and statistical analyses were mainly performed using the software Perseus (Cox and Mann, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
The histidine kinase Hik33 plays important roles in mediating cyanobacterial response to divergent types of abiotic stresses including cold, salt, high light (HL), and osmotic stresses. However, how these functions are regulated by Hik33 remains to be addressed. Using a hik33-deficient strain (&#x394;hik33) of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Synechocystis) and quantitative proteomics, we found that Hik33 depletion induces differential protein expression highly similar to that induced by divergent types of stresses. This typically includes downregulation of proteins in photosynthesis and carbon assimilation that are necessary for cell propagation, and upregulation of heat shock proteins, chaperons, and proteases that are important for cell survival. This observation indicates that depletion of Hik33 alone mimics divergent types of abiotic stresses, and that Hik33 could be important for preventing abnormal stress response in the normal condition. Moreover, we found the majority of proteins of plasmid origin were significantly upregulated in &#x394;hik33, though their biological significance remains to be addressed. Together, the systematically characterized Hik33-regulated cyanobacterial proteome, which is largely involved in stress responses, builds the molecular basis for Hik33 as a general regulator of stress responses.

### Keywords
Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803; hik33 mutant; lc-msms

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China.

### Submitter
Haitao Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China.


