### Accession
PXD017195

### Title
Placental Growth Factor Regulates the Pentose Phosphate Pathway and Antioxidant Defense Systems in Human Retinal Endothelial Cells

### Description
The molecular mechanisms whereby placental growth factor (PlGF) mediates its effects in nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (DR) are unknown.  To better understand the role of PlGF in DR, we used tandem mass tags (TMT)-labeled quantitative proteomics to human retinal endothelial cells (HRECs), treated anti-PlGF antibody as a experimental, PBS as a control.

### Sample Protocol
The control and PlGF-ab–treated HRECs of protein quantification was done by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit. The resulting peptide mixtures were labeled with one of the TMT reagents from the 10plex version. The samples were then fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with the ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350–1800. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed on Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Sequest and Mascot search engines and MaxQuant tool program. The data were searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) human reference sequence (NCBI RefSeq) protein database. MS/MS was searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The protease used was specified as trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The TMT ratio for each peptide–spectrum match was calculated by the quantitation node, and the probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site was calculated by the phosphoRS3.1 node in the Proteome Discoverer and MaxQuant programs. the KEGG online service tool KAAS (Kregg Automatic Annotation Server) to annotate the protein’s KEGG database description. Protein-protein network analysis was performed for 60 overlap DEPs by using the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes) database (https://string-db.org/) to disclose possible connections among proteins and to visualize the PPI (protein-protein interaction) network.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms whereby placental growth factor (PlGF) mediates its effects in nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (DR) are unknown. To better understand the role of PlGF in DR, we used tandem mass tags (TMT)-labeled quantitative proteomics to human retinal endothelial cells (HRECs), treated anti-PlGF antibody, and PBS as a control. Functional annotation and pathway enrichments were performed, which suggested that the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were involved in key metabolic processes, protein binding, and membrane, pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and adherens junction. We conducted integrated gene profiles of our previously published transcriptomic data to the TMT-labeled proteomics data. The results showed the sixty genes were found to be changed at the proteome level. The functional annotation conducted for the sixty proteins suggested that 58.3% of proteins were involved in PPP, 25% of proteins were in interleukin-12 singling and 16.7% of proteins were involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis pathway. Mass spectrometry results were validated by transendothelial electrical resistance measurement by an electrical cell-impedance sensing (ECIS) and western blot analysis of VE-cadherin, G6PD. These findings suggest that the PPP proteins and antioxidants may act as a downstream target of PlGF and may play a decisive role in HREC biological functions in DR. SIGNIFICANCE: PlGF (Placental growth factor) is known to play a pivotal role in pathological angiogenesis and inflammation by stimulating endothelial cell migration and by recruiting pericytes and inflammatory cells such as microglia and macrophages. Despite the well-defined pathophysiological roles of PlGF, the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms are not completely understood, especially the exact relationships between biochemical events and molecular pathways regulated by PlGF, whose inhibition exhibits a protective role in DR. This study provides new insights into protein expression patterns and enables the identification of many attractive candidates for investigation of PPP pathway role in the activation of the antioxidant defense system in DR. Our findings suggest that the PPP proteins and antioxidants (PRDX6, HMOX1, NQO1 and YES1) may act as downstream targets of PlGF and may play a decisive role in HREC biological functions in DR.

### Keywords
Ppp, Kegg, Tmt, Prdx6, Plgf

### Affiliations
University of Missouri School of Medicine  Columbia, MO-65201, USA
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Madhu Saddala Saddala

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Hu Huang
University of Missouri School of Medicine  Columbia, MO-65201, USA


