### Accession
PXD025194

### Title
RNA-interactome capture in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)

### Description
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell-fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carried out a proteome-wide screen and identified 810 proteins that directly bind RNA in hESCs. We determined the RBP catalog by using RNA-interactome capture (RIC), a method based on UV light-mediated cross-linking (CL) of RNAs to proteins in living cells, followed by oligo(dT) purification of poly(A)-RNA-protein complexes and mass spectrometry analysis of captured proteins. As control, we applied a similar strategy to non-cross-linked (non-CL) samples. To uncover the identity of the eluted proteins, we performed in-solution tryptic digestion of CL and non-CL eluates and analyzed their contents by a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus). We then performed differential proteome analysis between CL and non-CL eluates, resulting in a set of 810 high-confidence protein groups, defined as the hESC RNA-interactome. RIC was carried out in four independent biological replicates. This data accompanies the manuscript: "Uncovering the RNA-binding protein landscape in the pluripotency network of human embryonic stem cells".

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: four eluates from CL and control samples each were buffer-exchanged in 8 M urea using a 3 kDa cutoff filter, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. The urea was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were incubated with trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (1%). The resulting peptides were desalted using the Oasis HLB columns (Waters), speed-vac to dryness, and stored at -80˚C. Liquid chromatography: each sample was reconstituted in 25 µL of an acetonitrile-water mixture at a ratio of 97:3 with 0.1% formic acid and loaded using split-less nano-ultra-performance liquid chromatography. The mobile phase A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Desalting was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column. After desalting, peptides were separated using a T3 HSS nano-column at a flow rate of 0.35 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer with a gradient of 4-20% solvent B over 105 min, 20-90% solvent B over 5 min, held at 90% for 5 min, and then back to initial conditions. Mass spectrometry: the nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nano-electrospray ionization (nanoESI) emitter to a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus), using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode, using a top-20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400 m/z) and a maximum injection time of 20 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500 and a maximum injection time of 60 msec. To maximize peptide identification, a second injection of each sample was analyzed on the instrument with identical parameters, using an exclusion list containing peptides identified by a database search of the first set of experiments.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human reference proteome (accessed 14 May 2016; www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Reversed sequences of all human proteins and a list of 245 laboratory contaminants were added to the sequence database. Trypsin/P was used as the digestive enzyme, allowing no more than two missed cleavages and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications to oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), and deamidation (Q or N). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using a target-decoy strategy, with a maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. The match-between-runs (MBR) option was used to transfer peptide identifications across runs.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during early stem cell differentiation. Notably, many RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly targeted by this factor. Using cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), we find that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 transcription factors interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Hescs, Rna-binding proeins, Human embryonic stem cells, Rbps, Rna-interactome capture, Ric

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel

### Submitter
Shlomi Dvir

### Lab Head
Dr Yael Mandel-Gutfreund
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: Whole-cell
- cell type: human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Q Exactive Plus

