### Accession
PXD034027

### Title
DISCO-MS: Proteomics of spatially identified tissues in whole organs and organisms

### Description
Spatial molecular profiling of complex tissues is essential to investigate cellular function in physiological and pathological states. However, methods for molecular analysis of biological specimens imaged in 3D as a whole are lacking. Here, we present DISCO-MS, a technology combining whole-organ/ism imaging, deep learning-based image analysis, robotic tissue extraction and ultra-high sensitivity mass spectrometry. DISCO-MS yielded qualitative and quantitative proteomics data indistinguishable from uncleared samples in both rodent and human tissues. Using DISCO-MS, we investigated microglia activation along axonal tracts after brain injury and characterized early and late-stage individual amyloid-beta plaques in Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Furthermore, aided by DISCO-bot robotic extraction we studied regional proteomics heterogeneity of immune cells in intact mouse bodies and aortic plaques in whole human heart. Overall, DISCO-MS enables unbiased proteome analysis of pre-clinical and clinical tissues after unbiased imaging of entire specimens in 3D, providing new diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities for complex diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Optimization of DISCO cleared sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis. Several conditions and combinations of solubilizing agents for the isolation of proteins from tissue cleared mouse brain, heart, and lung samples were initially evaluated for protein extraction efficiency, peptide recovery, and qualitative and quantitative reproducibility keeping fresh or PFA-fixed as reference. Our goal was to establish a workflow that recovers proteomes that are as similar as possible to non-cleared tissue and is universal for all tissue clearing techniques. Tissue cleared organs or cryosections were removed from the defraction neutral BABB solution and washed five times with 1x PBS solution. The organ was then flash-frozen and pulverized in a Covaris CP02. Afterwards, the samples were resuspended in different protein solubilizing solutions (6 % Sodiumdodecylsulfate, 500 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.5 (SDS buffer); 2 % Sodiumdeoxycholate, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP), 40 mM Chloroacetamide (SDC buffer)1 ; 50 % Trifluoroethanole, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.5 (TFE buffer), followed by protein extraction at 95 °C, 1.000rpm for 45 min. Then the samples were subjected to sonication (Branson) at maximum frequency for 30 cycles at 50% output, followed by another heating step at 95 °C, 1.000 rpm for 45 min. From here on, processing steps diverged for each protocol. Proteins solubilized in SDS buffer were precipitated at with ice-cold Acetone at 80 % v/v ratio overnight at -80 °C, followed by centrifugation at max. g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed, the pellet was washed with 5 ml ice-cold 80 % v/v Acetone/ddH2O, followed by 30 min precipitation on dry ice. The acetone wash steps were repeated two times for a total of three washes. Proteins solubilized in TFE buffer, were subjected to solvent evaporation in a speedvac at 45 °C until dryness before further processing. In case of SDS-SDC or TFE-SDC protocol, in which SDS or TFE protein extraction was coupled to an SDC-based protein digestion, SDS- or TFE-solubilized proteins were resuspended in 1ml of SDC buffer and heated to 95 °C at 1.000 rpm for 10 min to denature proteins, reduce cysteine bridges and alkylate free cysteine residues. Afterwards, samples were sonicated for 15 cycles each 30sec at max power in a Bioruptor, followed by another heating step for 10 min at 95 °C, 1.000 rpm in a Thermoshaker.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were either searched against the mouse Uniprot databases (UP00000589_10090.fa, UP00000589_10090_additional.fa) or human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa using the MaxQuant version 1.6.7.07,8, which extracts features from four-dimensional isotope patterns and associated MS/MS spectra. False-discovery rates were controlled at 1 % both on peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein level. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,600 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving c-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor tolerance in the first search and fragment ion mass tolerance were searched as default for TIMS-DDA data. Main search tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The median absolute mass deviation for the data set was 1.57 ppm. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs with a 0.7 min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm and a minimum ratio count of 19.

### Publication Abstract
Spatial molecular profiling of complex tissues is essential to investigate cellular function in physiological and pathological states. However, methods for molecular analysis of large biological specimens imaged&#xa0;in 3D are&#xa0;lacking. Here, we present DISCO-MS, a technology that combines whole-organ/whole-organism clearing and imaging, deep-learning-based image analysis, robotic tissue extraction, and ultra-high-sensitivity mass spectrometry. DISCO-MS yielded proteome data indistinguishable from uncleared samples in both rodent and human tissues. We used DISCO-MS to investigate microglia activation along axonal tracts after brain injury and characterized early- and late-stage individual amyloid-beta plaques in a&#xa0;mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. DISCO-bot robotic sample extraction enabled us to study the regional heterogeneity of immune cells in intact mouse bodies and aortic plaques in a complete human&#xa0;heart. DISCO-MS enables unbiased proteome analysis of preclinical and clinical tissues after unbiased imaging of entire specimens in 3D, identifying diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities for complex diseases. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Disco-ms, Disci-bot

### Affiliations
Dr. Saketh Kapoor, Ph.D.
Mass Spectrometry Unit In-Charge
Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM)
Helmholtz Zentrum München
Ingolstädter Landstraße 1
85764 Neuherberg
Germany

+49 15129916548
saketh.kapoor@helmholtz-muenchen.de
http://erturk-lab.com/team/
Director, Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM) Helmholtz Zentrum München Ingolstädter Landstraße 1 85764 Neuherberg Germany

### Submitter
Saketh Kapoor

### Lab Head
Dr Ali Ertürk
Director, Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM) Helmholtz Zentrum München Ingolstädter Landstraße 1 85764 Neuherberg Germany


