### Accession
PXD022885

### Title
Surveying the vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) serum proteome: a resource for identifying immunological proteins and detecting pathogens

### Description
Bats are increasingly studied as model systems for longevity and as natural hosts to some virulent viruses. Yet our ability to characterize immune mechanisms of viral tolerance and to quantify infection dynamics in wild bats is often limited by small sample volumes and few species-specific reagents. To address this, we demonstrate how proteomics can overcome these limitations by using data-independent acquisition-based shotgun proteomics (i.e., bottom-up proteomics) to survey the serum proteome of 17 vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) from Belize. We focused this work on vampire bats, a species that has an obligate diet of blood and feeds on prey as diverse as sea lions, tapirs, livestock, and even humans, providing numerous opportunities for transmission of viruses (e.g., rabies virus, adenovirus, herpesvirus) to and from these recipient hosts. Using just 2 μL of sample and relatively short separations of undepleted serum digests, we identified 361 proteins across five orders of magnitude. We also used known bat virus proteomes to identify Rh186 from Macacine herpesvirus 3 and ORF1a from Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, indicating that mass spectrometry-based techniques show promise for pathogen detection. Our results demonstrate the feasibility and capabilities of serum proteomic analyses in wild bats, including possibilities to simultaneously detect host immunological components and viral infection as well as to establish preliminary ranges of vampire bat proteins for comparison with other mammalian blood proteomes. Overall, these results can be used to design targeted mass-spectrometry assays to quantify immunological markers and detect pathogens. More broadly, our findings also highlight the application of proteomics in advancing wildlife immunology and pathogen surveillance.

### Sample Protocol
Field protocols followed guidelines for safe and humane handling of bats issued by the American Society of Mammalogists and were approved by the University of Georgia Animal Care and Use Committee (A2014 04-016-Y3-A5). Bat sampling was authorized by the Belize Forest Department under permit number CD/60/3/15(21). Specimen use for proteomic analysis was approved by the NIST Animal Care and Use Coordinator (NIST ACUC) under approval MML-AR19-0018. We included 17 serum samples for proteomic analysis. The 17 serum samples were thawed then centrifuged at 13 000 x g for 8 min at 4 °C. The S-Trap method was used for digestion with the S-Trap micro column (ProtiFi; ≤ 100 μg binding capacity), and the specific method is described below. Based on prior work with other mammalian sera, we assumed a protein concentration of approximately 50 μg/μL (this value can vary but assuming at least 50 μg/μLwas used for estimating enzyme for the digest). Therefore, 2 μL (approximately 100 μg protein) of each sample was mixed with 48 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate and 50 μL of 2x lysis buffer (ProtiFi), then added onto the S-Trap. Additionally, since the samples were digested in two sets, each set included a 2 μL aliquot of NIST SRM 909c Frozen Human Serum, which is technically a converted plasma pool. This sample was used to qualitatively confirm digestion, LC-MS/MS performance, and downstream search methods. All samples were reduced with 10 μL of 90 mmol/L DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT; final concentration of 10 mmol/L) at 60 °C for 30 min, then cooled and alkylated with 10 μL of 200 mmol/L 2-chloroacetamide (CAA; final concentration of 20 mmol/L) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The sample was acidified with 12 μL of 12 % phosphoric acid (volume fraction) bringing the final volumetric ratio to 1:10. Next, 700 μL binding buffer [ProtiFi; 5 % triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) volume fraction in methanol] was added (approximately 1:7 volumetric ratio). Using a vacuum manifold, the sample was washed across the S-Trap with six sequential washes of 400 μL binding buffer. Next, 3 μL of 1 μg/μL trypsin (Pierce) was mixed with 122 μL, 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, and this 125 μL solution was added to each S-Trap, yielding approximately a 1:30 mass ratio (trypsin:total protein). Samples were incubated at 47 °C for 1 h, after which they were sequentially washed into 1.5 mL Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf) by centrifugation with the following wash steps: 80 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, 80 μL 0.2 % formic acid (volume fraction), 80 μL 0.2 % formic acid in 50 % acetonitrile (volume fractions) at 1000 x g, 1000 x g, and 4000 x g, respectively at 4 °C for 1 min. The resulting peptide mixtures were reduced to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge at low  heat and stored at -80 °C. Prior to analysis samples were reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1 %  formic acid (volume fraction) and briefly vortexed, then centrifuged 10 000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The peptide concentration of each sample was determined using the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay with a BioTek Synergy HT plate reader. Peptide mixtures in 0.1% formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order and injection volumes were determined for 0.5 μg loading (between 0.37 and 0.95 μL sample). One sample from bat D141 (experimental key Bat_20) was used as a technical replicate to evaluate technical variability across the run, while the two aforementioned human serum pools were analyzed in the same manner as the bat sera. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 60 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly ramped to 95% mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method constructed using the targetedMS2 module (as opposed to the built-in DIA module). The full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 120 000, the mass range was 399 to 1200 m/z (corresponding to the DIA windows used), 30 % RF lens was set, the full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 20 ms. A default charge of 4 was set under MS Global Settings. As stated, DIA windows were constructed using the targetedMS2 module. Each window used higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation width at 21 m/z. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 30 000, the scan range was specified as 200 to 2000 m/z, ion target value of 1.0e6 and 60 ms maximum injection time. Data were collected as profile data in both MS1 and MS2, though the authors wish to note that using centroid data is possible for most DIA software. The DIA window scheme was an overlapping static window strategy such that each of the 40 windows were 21 m/z wide, with 1 m/z overlap on each side covering the range of 399 to 1200 m/z. The window centers were specified in the mass list table (with z = 2), such that they were 409.5, 429.5, 449.5, ..., 1189.5. The method file (85min_DIA_40x21mz.meth) is also included in the PRIDE submission. Analysis was performed using Spectronaut (v13.6.190905.43655). The following settings were used. Sequences: Trypsin selected, max pep length 52, min pep length 7, two missed cleavages, KR as special amino acids in decoy generation, toggle N-terminal M set to true. Labelling: no labelling settings were used. Applied modifications: maximum of five variable modifications using fixed carbamidomethyl (C), and variable acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M). Identification: per run machine learning, Q-value cut-off of 0.01 for precursors and proteins, single hits defined by stripped sequence, and do not exclude single hit proteins, PTM localization set to true with a probability cut-off of 0.75, kernel density p-value estimator. Quantification: interference correction was used with excluding all multi-channel interferences with minimum of 2 and 3 for MS1 and MS2, respectively, proteotypicity filter set to none, major protein grouping by protein group ID, minor peptide grouping by stripped sequence, major group quantity set to mean peptide quantity, a Major Group Top N was used (min of 1, max of 3), minor group quantity set to mean precursor quantity, a Minor Group Top N was used (min1, max of 3), quantity MS-level used MS2 area, data filtering by q-value, cross run normalization was used with global median normalization and automatic row selection, no modifications or amino acids were specified, best N fragments per peptide was set to between 3 and 6, with ion charge and type not used. Workflow: no workflow was used. Post Analysis: no calculated explained TIC or sample correlation matrix, differential abundance grouping using major group (from quantification settings) and smallest quantitative unit defined by precursor ion (from quantification settings), differential abundance was not used for conclusions. The fasta file used for searching bat samples was the NCBI RefSeq Desmodus rotundus Release 100, GCF_002940915.1_ASM294091v2 (29 845 sequences), and for searching human samples was the 2020_01 release of the UniProtKB SwissProt with isoforms, using the taxonomy term 9606 (Homo sapiens; 42 385 sequences). For the host plus virus searching, these same fasta files were used along with a fasta of D. rotundus–associated virus sequences retrieved from the DBatVir database (156 sequences; downloaded 12 November 2020) and the following six fasta retrieved from the 2020_05 release of the UniProtKB SwissProt and TrEMBL: Adenoviridae (taxon ID: 10508; 30 051 sequences), Betacoronavirus (taxon ID: 694002; 21 892 sequences), Henipavirus (taxon ID: 260964; 462 sequences), Herpesvirales (taxon ID: 548681; 88 353 sequences), Morbillivirus (taxon ID: 11229; 23 142 sequences), and Rabies lyssavirus (taxon ID: 11292; 23 398 sequences). All fasta and Spectronaut .snes files are included in PRIDE submission.

### Publication Abstract
Bats are increasingly studied as model systems for longevity and as natural hosts for some virulent viruses. Yet the ability to characterize immune mechanisms of viral tolerance and to quantify infection dynamics in wild bats is often limited by small sample volumes and few species-specific reagents. Here, we demonstrate how proteomics can overcome these limitations by using data-independent acquisition-based shotgun proteomics to survey the serum proteome of 17 vampire bats (<i>Desmodus rotundus</i>) from Belize. Using just 2 &#x3bc;L of sample and relatively short separations of undepleted serum digests, we identified 361 proteins across 5 orders of magnitude. Levels of immunological proteins in vampire bat serum were then compared to human plasma via published databases. Of particular interest were antiviral and antibacterial components, circulating 20S proteasome complex and proteins involved in redox activity. Lastly, we used known virus proteomes to putatively identify Rh186 from <i>Macacine herpesvirus 3</i> and ORF1a from Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, indicating that mass spectrometry-based techniques show promise for pathogen detection. Overall, these results can be used to design targeted mass-spectrometry assays to quantify immunological markers and detect pathogens. More broadly, our findings also highlight the application of proteomics in advancing wildlife immunology and pathogen surveillance.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Vampire bat, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Adam Neely
National Institute of Standards and Technology


