### Accession
PXD024419

### Title
Cargo and lipid profiling of isolated autophagosomes upon basal autophagy, starvation, and proteasome inhibition

### Description
Autophagy is responsible for degradation of an extensive portfolio of cytosolic cargoes that are engulfed in autophagosomes to facilitate their transport to lysosomes. Besides basal autophagy, which constantly degrades cellular material, the pathway is dynamically altered by different conditions, resulting in enhanced autophagosome formation and cargo turnover. The extensive profile of autophagosome content as well as the phospholipid composition of human autophagosome membranes remains elusive. Here, we introduce a novel FACS-based approach for isolation of native autophagosomes and confirm the quality and specificity of the preparations. Employing quantitative proteomics and lipidomics, we obtained a profound cargo and lipid profile of autophagosomes isolated upon basal autophagy conditions, nutrient deprivation, and proteasome inhibition. This resource will allow to identify the impact of different autophagy conditions on the degradation of distinct proteins and to dissect the phospholipid composition of the human autophagosome membrane in detail.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS Eight million of Cy3/5-positive autophagosomes (roughly 10ug of proteins) were denatured with 2% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 2.5 mM TCEP, 10 mM chloroacetamide at 95°C for 10 min. Lysates were prepared with in-StageTip (iST) processing method for LC-MS/MS as previously described by Kulak et al. 2014. Briefly, Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 volume of 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digestion was stoped with 2 volumes of 1% TFA in isopropanol. Digested peptides were purified with Empore SDB-RPS (styrenedivinylbenzene - reverse phase sulfonate) disks in stage tip (3M Empore) and were dried for LC-MS/MS. Dried peptides of each sample were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile / 1% (v/v) formic acid solution. Peptides were separated with Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused-silica column packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and kept at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Individual peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 120 min, followed by a step-wise increase to 76% acetonitrile in 6 min, which was kept for another 9 min and sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1,650 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 20 ms and AGC target value of 3 x 106. The 15 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation (Top 15) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Th. MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 25ms, AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions were then fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27; and the dynamic exclusion was set to 25s to minimize the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.17 with default settings using human trypsin digested “one sequence per gene” proteome database (Homo sapiens SwissProt database [TaxID:9606, version 2020-03-12]) with label free quantification (Cox & Mann, 2008). Carbamidomethyl fixed modification and acetyl and methionine oxidation dynamic modifications were set. Protein quantification and data normalization relied on the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014) and used for statistical analysis. Proteins only identified by a single modified peptide, matching to the reversed and contaminants were removed. Only well-quantified proteins and showing no missing value in any of the samples were used for statistical analysis. Significantly altered proteins were determined by a two-sided, unpaired Student`s t-test (p-value <0.05) adding minimum fold-change cut-off (>= 0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is responsible for clearance of an extensive portfolio of cargoes, which are sequestered into vesicles, called autophagosomes, and are delivered to lysosomes for degradation. The pathway is highly dynamic and responsive to several stress conditions. However, the phospholipid composition and protein contents of human autophagosomes under changing autophagy rates are elusive so far. Here, we introduce an antibody-based FACS-mediated approach for the isolation of native autophagic vesicles and ensured the quality of the preparations. Employing quantitative lipidomics, we analyze phospholipids present within human autophagic vesicles purified upon basal autophagy, starvation, and proteasome inhibition. Importantly, besides phosphoglycerides, we identify sphingomyelin within autophagic vesicles and show that the phospholipid composition is unaffected by the different conditions. Employing quantitative proteomics, we obtain cargo profiles of autophagic vesicles isolated upon the different treatment paradigms. Interestingly, starvation shows only subtle effects, while proteasome inhibition results in the enhanced presence of ubiquitin-proteasome pathway factors within autophagic vesicles. Thus, here we present a powerful method for the isolation of native autophagic vesicles, which enabled profound phospholipid and cargo analyses.

### Keywords
Hela, Label free quantification, Autophagosome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Haus 75 60590 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
 Süleyman Bozkurt

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


