### Accession
PXD013273

### Title
Tandem LysC/trypsin digestion performs efficient in detergent conditions and under constant denaturating environments

### Description
All shotgun proteomics experiments rely on efficient proteolysis steps for sensitive peptide/protein identification and quantification. Continuous protocol improvement is therefore a constant topic in proteomics research. Previous reports suggest that the sequential tandem LysC/trypsin digest yields higher recovery of fully tryptic peptides than single-tryptic proteolysis. Based on the previous studies, it is assumed that the advantageous effect of tandem proteolysis requires a high sample denaturation state for the initial LysC digest. Therefore, to date, all systematic assessments of LysC/trypsin proteolysis were done in chaotropic environments such as urea. Here we show that the LysC/trypsin digestion can be carried with high efficiency in MS-compatible detergents resulting in higher yields of fully cleaved peptides. We show that higher cleavage efficiency of tandem digests has an impact on absolute protein quantification using iBAQ values. By additionally testing different urea tandem conditions our data implies that beneficial effects of the initial LysC digest do not depend on the sample denaturation state, but more likely, are due to different target specificities of LysC and trypsin. The observed detergent compatibility enables tandem digestion schemes to be implemented in efficient cellular solubilization proteomics procedures without the need for buffer exchange to chaotropic digestion environment.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli strain K-12 substr. MG1655 was used as a model organism. E.coli cultures were cultivated overnight in Luria Broth medium, washed twice with phosphate buffered-saline, to remove traces of the growth medium. Cell pellets (50 ± 10 mg) were collected in 2 mL sterile safe-lock microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). Four biological replicates were processed and used for the protein extraction. All cell pellets were stored at -80 °C until further use.  For initial cell lysis and protein solubilization, the frozen cell pellets were resuspended and sonicated (Hielscher Ultrasound Technology) in 2% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate ((SLS, Sigma Aldrich), dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer)). Further samples were incubated at 95 °C for 30 min in the presence of 5 mM TCEP (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a reducing agent. Following, all samples were allowed to cool and were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) at 25 °C for 30 min. The concentration of proteins in each sample was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.  For protein precipitation, 1.5 mg of total solubilized proteins was precipitated with acetone/methanol precipitation. Eight sample volumes of freezer cold acetone and one sample volume of freezer cold methanol was mixed with the each sample in chemically resistant tubes. Next, the samples were let to precipitate for 2 hours at -80 °C. Afterwards, the precipitated proteins were pelleted (21,120 × g for 15 min), washed twice with freezer cold methanol and air-dried pellets were stored at -80 °C until further use.  The frozen protein pellets were resuspended in 2% SLS or 2% DOC (Sigma-Aldrich) in ABC buffer, sonicated for 20 sec and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The concentration of proteins in each sample after precipitation was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.  For protein digestion step, 50 μg of total precipitated protein from each sample was used. For in-solution digestion (ISD), the detergents were diluted to 0.5% using ABC buffer. The digestion was carried out in either tandem or trypsin-only digestion formats as follows: (1) For the tandem (LT) strategy, proteins were digested by 0.5 µg LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH) and incubated for 4 h at 30 °C, followed by trypsin (1 μg, Promega) digestion overnight at 30 °C. (2) The single-trypsin proteolysis was carried out only by trypsin (1 μg, Promega) digestion and incubated overnight at 30 °C. Before LC-MS analysis, SDC or SLS were precipitated using 2% trifluoroacetic acid, and all protein digests were desalted using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with packed in-house C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were first loaded onto a C18 precolumn (preconcentration setup) and then eluted in backflush mode with a gradient from 96% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 20% solvent B over 70 min, continued from 25% to 35% of solvent B for additional 20 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/ min. The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60000 (m/z 200) with scanning range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS shots, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (both MS and MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106 for MS survey scans and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
For all identification-based (ID) experiments, the MS raw data was converted into MASCOT-compatible mgf files using Thermo Proteome Discoverer Daemon (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Further assessments were performed by searching raw data using MASCOT (v.2.5, Matrix Science) against the E. coli strain K-12 protein database (downloaded 03/09/2016, 4306 proteins) containing 386 common contaminant/background proteins that were manually added. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M) set as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions for high energy-collision dissociation (HCD). The data was further evaluated within Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for ID-based assessment of the data. Discovery-LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0).  MS raw files were imported into Progenesis and the output data (MS/MS spectra) were exported in mgf format. MS/MS spectra were then searched using MASCOT against a decoy database of the predicted proteomes from E. coli strain K-12 downloaded from UniProt database. The search criteria were set as for ID-based evaluation of the data. Results from the database search were imported back to Progenesis in order to map peptide identifications to MS1 features. The peak heights of all MS1 features annotated with the same peptide sequence were summed and peptide abundance ratios across different digestion conditions and accompanying q-values (i.e., p-values adjusted for multiple testing) were calculated using SafeQuant R-package version 2.2.2, which is part of the BioConductor open development software project. MS raw files derived from each detergent digest condition were analyzed by LFQ separately to avoid potential quantification biases between each experimental condition.

### Publication Abstract
All shotgun proteomics experiments rely on efficient proteolysis steps for sensitive peptide/protein identification and quantification. Previous reports suggest that the sequential tandem LysC/trypsin digest yields higher recovery of fully tryptic peptides than single-tryptic proteolysis. Based on the previous studies, it is assumed that the advantageous effect of tandem proteolysis requires a high sample denaturation state for the initial LysC digest. Therefore, to date, all systematic assessments of LysC/trypsin proteolysis are done in chaotropic environments such as urea. Here, sole trypsin is compared with LysC/trypsin and it is shown that tandem digestion can be carried with high efficiency in Mass Spectrometry-compatible detergents, thereby resulting in higher quantitative yields of fully cleaved peptides. It is further demonstrated that higher cleavage efficiency of tandem digests has a positive impact on absolute protein quantification using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values. The results of the examination of divergent urea tandem conditions imply that beneficial effects of the initial LysC digest do not depend on the sample denaturation state, but, are mainly caused by different target specificities of LysC and trypsin. The observed detergent compatibility enables tandem digestion schemes to be implemented in efficient cellular solubilization proteomics procedures without the need for buffer exchange to chaotropic environments.

### Keywords
Trypsin, Lysc, Shotgun proteomics, Protein digestion

### Affiliations
Facility for Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Max-Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg/Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Facility for Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Max-Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg/Germany


