### Accession
PXD034089

### Title
Arabidopsis Circadian Clock RVE8 LNK1 LNK2 Interactome LC-MS

### Description
The timing of many molecular and physiological processes in plants occurs at a specific time of day. The circadian MYB-like transcription factor REVEILLE 8 (RVE8) interacts with its transcriptional coactivators NIGHT LIGHT INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK REGULATED 1 (LNK1) and LNK2 to promote the expression of evening-phased clock genes and cold tolerance factors. While genetic approaches have commonly been used to discover new connections within the clock and between other pathways, here we use affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry to discover time-of-day-specific protein interactors of the RVE8-LNK1/2 complex. Our clock proteins are tagged with a 6X-His-3X-FLAG C-terminal (HFC) affinity tag and purified through anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation and His-tag isolation affinity purification. We also performed affinity purification-mass spectrometry of 35S::YFP-COR27 and 35S::GFP-COR28, which were immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP TRAP beads. Experiment was performed on 10-day-old seedlings grown under 12 hours light: 12 hours dark 22 degrees Celsius.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification-mass spectrometry was performed on 5 grams of tissue from 10-day-old seedlings grown under 12 hour light: 12 hour dark 22 degrees Celsius conditions. Proteins were coprecipitated with HFC-tagged bait proteins through anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation followed by His-tag isolation using NTA-coated affinity beads. YFP/GFP-tagged COR27/28 bait proteins were immunoprecipitated using anti-GFP TRAP beads. Affinity purified samples were digested on beads with trypsin. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS with a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were resolved using 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MS data were converted into mgf. Database searches were done using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.5.0) using the TAIR10 database (20101214, 35,386 entries) and the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/).Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR; v.4.8) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Many molecular and physiological processes in plants occur at a specific time of day. These daily rhythms are coordinated in part by the circadian clock, a timekeeper that uses daylength and temperature to maintain rhythms of &#x223c;24 h in various clock-regulated phenotypes. The circadian MYB-like transcription factor REVEILLE 8 (RVE8) interacts with its transcriptional coactivators NIGHT LIGHT-INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK-REGULATED 1 (LNK1) and LNK2 to promote the expression of evening-phased clock genes and cold tolerance factors. While genetic approaches have commonly been used to discover connections within the clock and between clock elements and other pathways, here, we used affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (APMS) to identify time-of-day-specific protein interactors of the RVE8-LNK1/LNK2 complex in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Among the interactors of RVE8/LNK1/LNK2 were COLD-REGULATED GENE 27 (COR27) and COR28, which coprecipitated in an evening-specific manner. In addition to COR27 and COR28, we found an enrichment of temperature-related interactors that led us to establish a previously uncharacterized role for LNK1 and LNK2 in temperature entrainment of the clock. We established that RVE8, LNK1, and either COR27 or COR28 form a tripartite complex in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and that the effect of this interaction in planta serves to antagonize transcriptional activation of RVE8 target genes, potentially through mediating RVE8 protein degradation in the evening. Together, these results illustrate how a proteomic approach can be used to identify time-of-day-specific protein interactions. Discovery of the RVE8-LNK-COR protein complex indicates a previously unknown regulatory mechanism for circadian and temperature signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Circadian clock, Lcms, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center

### Submitter
Dmitri Nusinow

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitri Nusinow
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO


