### Accession
PXD019770

### Title
Acetyl-CoA flux maintains intracellular crosstalk and modulats engagement of the secretory pathway

### Description
Nε-lysine acetylation has emerged as a central mechanism to maintain quality control and protein homeostasis within the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) and secretory pathway. The ER acetylation machinery includes AT-1/SLC33A1, a membrane transporter that translocates acetyl-CoA from the cytosol to the ER lumen, and ATase1 and ATase2, two ER membrane-bound acetyltransferases that acetylate ER cargo proteins. Dysfunctional AT-1, as caused by loss-of-function mutations or gene duplication events, results in neurodevelopmental or neurodegenerative disorders. Experiments in our lab have demonstrated that these human diseases can be effectively recapitulated in mouse models.  In this thesis, we used two models of dysregulated acetyl-CoA flux: AT-1S113R/+, a model of AT-1 haploinsufficiency, and AT-1 sTg, a model of systemic overexpression of AT-1. First, we examined upstream processes of cytosol-to-ER acetyl-CoA flux by evaluating the cytosolic pool of acetyl-CoA. The aberrant AT-1 models demonstrated distinct metabolic reprogramming of lipid metabolism and mitochondria bioenergetics. Dysregulated acetyl-CoA flux resulted in global changes at the level of the proteome and the acetyl-proteome.  Second, we examined the downstream consequences of cytosol-to-ER acetyl-CoA flux. Specifically, we investigated the engagement and functional organization of the secretory pathway and used N-glycoproteomics to determine the quality of secreted proteins. Aberrant AT-1 models demonstrated reorganization of the ER, Golgi, and ERGIC, as well as a delay in glycoproteins clearing the Golgi apparatus. Additionally, AT-1 sTg mice showed a marked delay in protein trafficking to the cell surface. The N-glycoproteome revealed significant alterations, highlighting changes in the quality of the secretome.

### Sample Protocol
DiLeu labeling and proteomics method  12-plex DiLeu 1 labeling was conducted as in previous report (Dieterich, 2019). Briefly, Dissected brain region samples of AT-1 sTg, AT-1 KI and WT mouse models were homogenized, then lysed in 8M urea buffer with a probe sonicator. Lysate containing proteins was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 1h, followed by alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by adding DTT to 5mM. The alkylated protein was diluted and then digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio at 37 ºC for 18 hours. Tryptic peptides were desalted with C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB before labeling.  DiLeu tags were suspended in anhydrous DMF and combined with 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methyl-morpholinium tetrafluoroborate (DMTMM) and N-methylmorpholine (NMM) at 0.6×molar ratios to tags. The mixture was vortexed at room temperature for 1 h. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was immediately mixed with tryptic peptides from one condition (10:1 tag to peptide w/w), and vortexed at room temperature for 2 h. The reaction was quenched by NH2OH. Each batch of labeled peptides was combined respectively as 12-plex mixtures.  Glycopeptide Enrichment  DiLeu labeled glycopeptides were enriched using in-house packed SAX-HILIC SPE tips following previously reported procedure with minor modification.2,3 3mg of cotton wool was inserted into a 200 µL TopTip. SAX LP bulk material was dispersed in 1% TFA as a 10 mg/ 200 µL slurry and activated for 15 mins under vigorous vortexing. After activation, 60 µL slurry was added to the spin-tip. Solvent was removed by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 2 min, after which the SAX material was packed at the top of the tip. The stationary phase was then conditioned by 300 µL 1% TFA and 300 µL loading buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA), each repeated 3 times. 2 mg DiLeu labeled peptides were aliquoted to 200 µg. Each aliquot was dissolved in 300 µL loading buffer and loaded onto the tips by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 2 min, the flow through was collected and loaded again to ensure complete retention. The tips were then washed by 300 µL loading buffer for 6 times, after which the four eluted fractions of 300 µL 70% ACN with 0.2% FA, 53% ACN with 0.2% FA, 30% ACN with 0.2% FA and 5% ACN with 0.2% FA were collected in four separate PE tubes. Corresponding fractions from the ten aliquots were pooled and dried under vacuum before MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis of Intact Glycopeptides  Enriched glycopeptides in each fraction were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and subjected to reversed phase LC-MS/MS analysis with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on a 15 cm length, 75 μm i.d. custom-packed BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 130 Å, Waters) capillary column with a 80 min gradient from 0% to 30% ACN (0.1% FA). Mass spectrometer was operated in a top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode with HCD-product dependent-EThcD fragmentation. 4 Survey scans of peptide precursors from m/z 400 to 2000 were performed at resolving power of 120K and AGC target of 4×105 with a maximum injection time of 150 ms. Tandem MS acquisition was at resolving power of 60K, AGC target of 5×104 and dynamic exclusion of 12 s of 10 ppm mass tolerance. The top 20  intense precursor ions were selected and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 33%. If signature oxomium ions (HexNAc 204.087 m/z, HexNAcHex 366.140 m/z, HexNAc fragments 138.055 m/z and 168.065 m/z) of intact glycopeptides were detected by HCD survey scan, an EThcD hybrid fragmentation was triggered. ETD reaction time was set to 30, 20 or 10 ms when precursor charge states were z=2, 3-5 or 6-7. HCD supplemental activation energy was 33%. Maximum ion injection times for HCD survey scan and EThcD scan are 125 and 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis  Raw files were processed with Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc, San Carlos, CA) embedded within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mus musculus proteome database (August 13, 2016; 24903 entries). Trypsin digestion missed cleavage was set <3. The parent mass error tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.01 Da. Fixed modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) on C residues and 12-plex DiLeu (+145.12801 Da) on peptide N-terminus and K. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M (+15.99492 Da, rare1), deamidation (+0.984016 Da, rare1) of N or Q, and N-glycosylation (common1). Glycan modifications were specified as Byonic embedded mammalian N-glycan database (309 entries). Identifications were filtered to 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR). Gene ontology annotation of glycoprotein and student t-test of glycopeptide quantitation results were performed using Perseus software. 5  Riley et al. reported useful tools to analyze large-scale site-specific glycoproteomics data. 6Results were further processed by in-house written R scripts. Glycopeptides were exclusively categorized into five glycan type categories based on glycan composition: 1) sialic acid (containing NeuAc/NeuGc), 2) fucose (containing Fucose), 3) complex/hybrid (>2 NeuAc), 4) high-mannose (2 NeuAc and >5 Hex), 5) pausimannose (2 NeuAc and <5 Hex). The protein-glycan networks of significantly altered glycopeptides (p<0.05) were created in R 3.6.0 using the igraph and ggnetwork library. 7,8 Subcellular locations of glycopeptides were grouped from GO cellular component terms according to the same rules as in (Riley, 2019) 6. Pairwise Eauclidean distances between subcellular groups of significant glycopeptides from different quantitative experiments was calculated. Each GO group was considered as a 1707-dimension vector with each glycopeptide as a direction. The dimension vector was constructed by the union set of significantly altered glycopeptides across samples. The magnitude of the dimension is +1 or -1 for up- or down- regulated glycopeptides correspondingly. Upset plot of significant glycopeptides from eight quantitative experiments was constructed by R 3.6.0 with ComplexHeatmap library. 9 KEGG pathway enrichment and visualization of significant glycoproteins against Mus Musculus gene were performed with clusterProfiler library, 10 Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment was performed to an FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
N&#x3b5;-lysine acetylation in the ER is an essential component of the quality control machinery. ER acetylation is ensured by a membrane transporter, AT-1/SLC33A1, which translocates cytosolic acetyl-CoA into the ER lumen, and two acetyltransferases, ATase1 and ATase2, which acetylate nascent polypeptides within the ER lumen. Dysfunctional AT-1, as caused by gene mutation or duplication events, results in severe disease phenotypes. Here, we used two models of AT-1 dysregulation to investigate dynamics of the secretory pathway: AT-1 sTg, a model of systemic AT-1 overexpression, and AT-1<sup>S113R/+</sup>, a model of AT-1 haploinsufficiency. The animals displayed reorganization of the ER, ERGIC, and Golgi apparatus. In particular, AT-1 sTg animals displayed a marked delay in Golgi-to-plasma membrane protein trafficking, significant alterations in Golgi-based N-glycan modification, and a marked expansion of the lysosomal network. Collectively our results indicate that AT-1 is essential to maintain proper organization and engagement of the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Brain, Glycoproteomics, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53705, USA
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Yusi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53705, USA


