### Accession
PXD035234

### Title
Endometrial protein expression and phosphorylation landscape decipher aberrant insulin and mTOR signaling in patients with recurrent pregnancy loss

### Description
Research question: What are the proteomic and phosphoproteomic differences between the endometrium of women with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) and healthy control women during the proliferative (P) and secretory (S) phases of the menstrual cycle?  
Design: The present study collected a total of 54 endometrial samples during either P or S phases from women with RPL (n = 28) or healthy control (n = 26). Comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were conducted using label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (n = 44) and verified through western blotting (n = 10). Three comparison groups were established, including the total RPL endometrium compared to the total control (R/C), proliferating endometrium compared to control (RP/CP), and secretory endometrium compared to control (RS/CS). 
Results: Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) were respectively identified in the three comparison groups. Combining pathway enrichment, network analysis, and soft clustering analysis, we identified the insulin/cyclic nucleotide signaling pathway and AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway as the major contributors to the aberration of RPL endometrium. Western blotting verified altered expression of four proteins, including PRKAR1B, ADCY3, PRKAA2, and LPIN2.
Conclusions: This exploratory study provides insights into the differentiated protein expression and phosphorylation profiles of RPL endometrium in both P and S phases. The results highlight potential proteins associated with RPL pathogenesis that may serve as potential indicators for RPL. The findings contribute to the identification of potential targets for RPL treatment as well as the pathogenesis of RPL.

### Sample Protocol
Ethics declaration and patient recruitment
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Peking University Third Hospital (2016sz-007, date of approval 20th May 2016). Written informed consent was obtained from all the participants. Recruitment occurred from infertile patients who attended the Reproductive Medicine Centre of Peking University Third Hospital and met the indicators for hysteroscopy. RPL patients were diagnosed as having had two or more miscarriages of unexplained etiology. The inclusion criteria were set as follows: age under 40, menstrual cycle of 25–35 days, and two or more occurrences of recurrent pregnancy loss at the gestational age of 6–13 weeks. Patients were excluded if they met any of the following criteria: chromosomal abnormalities, history of other gynecological diseases, maternal anatomical abnormalities, immunological diseases, smoking, alcohol consumption, and ingestion of any chemical agent before termination of pregnancy. For the control group, age-matched women with no history of pregnancy loss were recruited.  Patient endometrium samples were only used for analysis after we confirmed their infertility was caused by non-endometrial reasons such as the fallopian tube obstruction. In total, 28 patients with unexplained RPL and 26 fertile control women were enrolled in this study and their detailed clinical characteristics were presented in TABLE 1. 
Collection of the endometrium biopsies through hysteroscopic examination
Endometrial biopsies in the secretory phase (S) were timed between 6 and 8 days after the luteal hormone surge (days 20–22 of the menstrual cycle) and endometrial biopsies in the proliferative phase (P) were collected on days 8–10 of the menstrual cycle. RPL endometrium samples were obtained from patients who underwent hysteroscopic examination more than three months after the last miscarriage.  During hysteroscopy, the endometrial samples from each patient were obtained using a Pipelle (LILYCLEANER, China) starting from the uterine fundus and moving down to the internal cervical ostium. The remaining biopsies after pathological examination were washed three times using ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), promptly frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored immediately at -80°C until further experiments.
Protein extraction, digestion, and phosphopeptide enrichment
Forty-four endometrium samples (RS=10, RP=13, CS=13, and CP=8) were extracted for total protein preparation. Endometrium tissues were weighed, ground into powder, and ultrasonicated with lysis buffer (8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl, 1% Protease Inhibitor, 1% Phosphatase Inhibitor). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C to remove the cell debris. The concentration of total protein was determined with the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
For trypsin digestion, we used lysis buffer to adjust the protein concentration of each sample to the same volume and took equal amounts for enzymatic digestion. Samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4°C for two hours. After three washes with ice-cold acetone, protein pellets were collected by centrifugation at 4,500 g for 5 min and dispersed in 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB). After overnight digestion with trypsin in a 1:50 mass ratio, the resulting solutions were treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 55°C and 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min at room temperature to shut the sulfhydryl group. The digested peptides were then desalted with C18 SPE (3M company) column and evaporated to dryness on CentriVap Concentrator (LABCONCO).
To enrich the phosphorylated peptides, the above digested peptides were redissolved in 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated with pre-equilibrated Immobilised Metal Chelate Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) microspheres (High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit). Following successive wash with buffer solutions of 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, the bound phosphopeptides were eluted in 10% ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore), and finally vacuum-lyophilized.
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of proteomics and phosphoproteomics
We dissolved the digested peptides in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and separated them on NanoElute Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system equipped with reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 um i.d). With a gradient increase of Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) set as 0–72 min, 7%~24%; 72–84 min, 24%~32%; 84–87 min, 32%~80%; 87–90 min, 80%, the peptides were gradually separated at a flow rate of 450 nL/min.
Subsequently, the peptides were ionized by Capillary ion source and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in TimsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, USA) with the voltage set at 1.6 kV. The secondary mass spectra's scan range was set as 100–1700 and parallel accumulated sequence fragmentation (PASEF) mode was employed for data collection. Ten PASEF acquisitions of secondary spectra with parent ion charges between 0 and 5 were conducted after the collection of a primary mass spectrum. The dynamic exclusion time for tandem mass spectrometry scans was adjusted to 30 seconds to prevent duplicate parent ion scans. 
Similarly, the enriched lysine phosphorylated peptides were separated by IonOpticks C18 reversed-phase analytical column using Buffer C (0.1% formic acid in water) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) with a 1-hour linear gradient (2 to 22% B, 0–50min; 22 to 35% B, 50–52 min; 35 to 90% B, 52–55 min; 90% B, 55–60 min) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min for phosphoproteomic analysis. 

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0) in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The tandem mass spectrum was retrieved from the human SwissProt database, which added a reverse decoy database to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matching. The FDRs for both peptide spectrum matching (PSM) and protein identification were set to 1%. The number of missed cut sites was set at 2, and trypsin was designated as the cleavage enzyme. Seven amino acid residues were chosen as the minimum peptide length and the maximum modification number of the peptide segment was set to 5. For the first search, the main search, and the second fragment ion, the mass error tolerance for the primary parent ion was set to 20 ppm, 20 ppm, and 20 ppm, respectively. Alkylation of cysteine was designated as a fixed modification, and oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (protein N-terminal) as variable modifications. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was also used as variable modifications in phosphoproteomics. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Cyclic nucleotide signaling, Proteomics, Ampk/mtor signaling, Endometrium, Rpl

### Affiliations
Peking University Third Hospital
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China;

### Submitter
Jing Hang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Hang
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China;


