### Accession
PXD013220

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics to Study Aging in Rabbit Liver

### Description
This project describes the quatitative changes in the rabbit liver in response of increasing age. Quantitative proteomics workflow was used to track metabolic changes that occur in the rabbit liver with elderly. Three age groups (young, middle, and old age rabbits were quantitatively compared and enrich classes of proteins involved in mitochondrial dysfunction, protein, carbohydrate, and fat metabolism were detected.

### Sample Protocol
Liver were dissected from young, middle, and old age rabbits. Proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin, lys-c mixture. Generated peptides were labeled by cPILOT and pooled together prior to basic pH reverse phase fractionation. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS and SPSMS3 on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v. 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the redundant rabbit UniProtKB database (08/19/2018, 21,177 sequences). SEQUEST HT search parameters were as follows: maximum two trypsin mis cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; static modifications were either light or heavy dimethyl/+28.031 or 36.028 Da (N-terminus) and carbamidomethyl modification/+57.021 Da (Cys); dynamic modifications were TMT 10-plex/+229.163 Da (Lys) and oxidation modification/+15.995 Da (Met). Decoy database search was employed to generate high (p<0.01) and medium (p<0.05) confidence peptide lists. Only rank 1 peptides were considered with peptide deviation of 10 ppm. TMT reporter ions (i.e. m/z 126 – 129) were identified with the following parameters:  most confident centroid and 30 ppm for reporter ion mass tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we present a proteomics dataset of liver proteins to understand aging in rabbits, which complements the publication "Quantitative proteomics to study aging in rabbit liver" [1]. This dataset was generated to understand the molecular basis and metabolic changes of aging processes in liver, which is the main organ involved in metabolism, detoxification, transport, and signaling. Proteins from young, middle, and old age rabbits were extracted and digested. Generated peptides were labeled with light or heavy dimethyl groups at their N-termini, while lysine amines were labeled with TMT10-plex using a cPILOT workflow [2]. Labeled peptides were fractionated by basic pH reverse phase chromatography and analyzed with online reverse phase LC coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS and MS<sup>3</sup>). The RAW files were generated using a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.2 to generate a list of identified and quantified proteins. Data was searched against the Rabbit UniProtKB redundant database. A total of 3,867 proteins were identified corresponding to 2,586 protein groups and 22,229 peptides. Dynamic levels of age-related proteins associated with fat metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, and protein degradation were detected. The mass spectrometry proteomics data (RAW files) and processed Proteome Discoverer 2.2 files (MSF files) have been deposited to the Proteomics Identification Database (PRIDE) ProteomeXchange Consortium and can be accessed with the dataset identifier PDX013220 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD013220).

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Cpilot, Liver, Enhanced multiplexing, Aging, Rabbit, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University 5423 Stevenson Center, Nashville, TN 37235

### Submitter
Bushra Amin

### Lab Head
Dr Renã AS Robinson
Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University 5423 Stevenson Center, Nashville, TN 37235


