### Accession
PXD040828

### Title
Uncovering the positive role of strigolactone perception in barley drought response I

### Description
Drought is a destructive abiotic stress, with plants possessing diverse strategies to survive periods of limited water resources. Previous results have described connections between strigolactone (SL) and drought, however, here we used the barley (Hordeum vulgare) SL-insensitive mutant hvd14 (dwarf14) to investigate the SL-dependent mechanisms related to water deficit response. By combining transcriptome, proteome with phytohormone analyses and physiological data, we describe the drought-mediated differences between wild-type and hvd14 plants. Our findings indicate that the drought sensitivity of hvd14 is related to weaker induction of abscisic acid-responsive genes/proteins, lower jasmonic acid content, higher reactive oxygen species content, and lower wax biosynthic and deposition mechanisms then wild-type plants. In addition, we identify a series of transcription factors (TFs) that are exclusively drought-induced in wild-type barley. Critically, we resolve a comprehensive series interestions between the drought-induced barley transcriptome and proteome responses that allow us to understand the impacts of SL in mitigating water limiting conditions. These data provide a number of new angles for the development of drought-resistant barley.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared from frozen ground tissue using an SDS-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 8.0). Samples were clarified by centrifuging at 20,000 x g for 15 min at room temperature. After quantification using a BCA assay (ThermoScientific, 23225), 500 µg of protein from each sample was aliquoted for processing. These samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95oC for five minutes, cooled, and alkylated by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide  for 30 min in the dark. Iodoacetamide was quenched by further addition of 10 mM of DTT. Samples were then prepared for trypsin digestion using a manual version of the R2-P1 protocol (Leutert et al., 2019). Briefly, proteins were bound to carboxylated magnetic beads, washed with 80% (v/v) ethanol to remove SDS, and then mixed with a solution of trypsin (at a 1:100  trypsin to protein ratio) (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin; Promega V5113). The digestion reaction was performed at 37oC overnight in a shaking incubator at 150 rpm. Digested peptides were eluted in water and desalted using ZipTips (MilliporeSigma, ZTC18S008) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.   Peptides were analysed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass-spectrometer. 1 µg of peptides were injected using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (ThermoScientific) and separated on a 50 cm Easy-Spray Pep-Map column (ES803A; ThermoScientific). Peptides were eluted with a 120 min linear solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in 80% acetonitrile) gradient (4% - 41% B) with an additional 5 min step (41%-98%). The acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode using the Universal Method (ThermoScientific). Full-scan MS1 spectra (350-2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with a normalized AGC target of 125% and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS2 was acquired in the ion-trap using quadrupole isolation in a window of 2.5 m/z with dynamic exclusion for 30s. Selected ions were HCD fragmented with 35% fragmentation energy, an AGC target of 200% and a maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spec files were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.14 (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Spectra were searched against a custom-made decoyed (reversed) version of the barley proteome from the r1 IBSC genome assembly (Phytozome genome ID: 462). Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavages and a protein and PSM false discovery rate of 1% each was applied. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and match between runs was enabled. Fixed modifications included cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications included methionine oxidation. MaxQuant results were then processed using Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Reverse hits and contaminants were removed, data was log-transformed and filtered by applying a threshold of valid quant values in at least 2 of 3 replicates in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution and significantly changing differentially abundant proteins were determined using a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p–value threshold of < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barley, Transcriptome, Abscisic acid, Proteome, Phytohormone, Strigolactone, Drought

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Glen Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences University of Alberta


