### Accession
PXD037459

### Title
DIA-MS Detect the Dephosphorylation of Tau by Phosphorylation Targeting Chimera (PhosTAC)

### Description
Microtubule-associated protein tau is essential for microtubule assembly and stabilization. Hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau plays an important pathological role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies, one of the greatest unmet demands in the clinic. In vivo studies using kinase inhibitors suggest that reducing tau phosphorylation levels has therapeutic potential; however, such approaches invariably showed limited benefits. We sought to develop our recently demonstrated Phosphorylation Targeting Chimera (PhosTAC) technology to specifically induce tau dephosphorylation. Herein, we use PhosTACs to recruit tau to PP2A, a native tau phosphatase. PhosTACs induced the formation of a stable ternary complex, leading to a rapid, efficient, and sustained dephosphorylation of tau, which also correlated the enhanced down regulation of tau. Mass spectrometry data validated that PhosTACs downregulated multiple phosphorylation sites of tau. We believe that PhosTACs present advantages over current strategies to modulate tau phosphorylation and represent a new avenue for disease-modifying therapies for tauopathies.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa tau/PP2A A expressing cells in 10 cm dishes were treated with doxycycline (2 μg mL−1) for 24 h to induce tau expression. The media was then replaced with fresh media supplemented with DMSO, PhosTAC7 (1 μM) or PhosTAC7F (1 μM) for another 24 h before harvest. The collected cell lysates were processed following previous protocol. For mass spectrometry samples, cells were treated with doxycycline (2 μg mL−1) for 24 h, and then incubated with DMSO, PhosTAC7 (1 μM), or tau2-8 (10 μM) for another 24 h. The cell lysates were collected by lysis buffer for halotrap pulldown. After halotrap pulldown, samples were eluted with 100 mM citric acid pH3.0 and pipetted up and down for 60 sec at room temperature. After spun down at 2,500 g for 5 min at 4C, supernatants were collected and neutralized by 1M Tris (pH10.4). The elution steps were repeated again to enrich all potential interacting proteins. The final samples were snap frozen by liquid nitrogen and submitted for mass spectrometry analysis.  As for the HalloTag pull down samples, due to the elution buffer with high concentration of salt, a 3kDa filter (PALL, # OD003C34 ) was used for the buffer change by three times at 14,000 g at 4 °C. The changed buffer composition is 5 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 contains cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, #11697498001). The reduction and alkylation were then conducted with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 56 °C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 45 min at room temperature. The samples were diluted by 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at ratio of 1:20 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The digested peptides purification was performed on C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC) and 1 µg of the peptide was injected for mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were measured by the data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) method as described previously. The Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) and EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). A 120-min gradient was used for the data acquisition at the flow rate at 300 nL/min with the column temperature controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The DIA-MS acquisition cycle consisted of one MS1 scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable isolated windows with 1 m/z overlapping between windows. The MS1 scan range was 350 – 1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution was 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2E6 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 with the MS2 scan range 200 – 1800 m/z and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 1.5E6 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data analysis was performed using Spectronaut v15 with directDIA algorithm by searching against the SwissProt downloaded mouse fasta file. The oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification. The phosphorylation at serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was set as variable modifications. In particular, the PTM localization score was strictly kept at 0.75 to ensure the phosphosites were localized by Spectronaut. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoffs (Qvalue) were controlled below 1% and the resulting quantitative data matrix were exported from Spectronaut. All the other settings in Spectronaut were kept as Default.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule-associated protein tau is essential for microtubule assembly and stabilization. Hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau plays an important pathological role in the development of Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies. <i>In vivo</i> studies using kinase inhibitors suggest that reducing tau phosphorylation levels has therapeutic potential; however, such approaches showed limited benefits. We sought to further develop our phosphorylation targeting chimera (PhosTAC) technology to specifically induce tau dephosphorylation. Herein, we use small molecule-based PhosTACs to recruit tau to PP2A, a native tau phosphatase. PhosTACs induced the formation of a stable ternary complex, leading to rapid, efficient, and sustained tau dephosphorylation, which also correlated with the enhanced downregulation of tau protein. Mass spectrometry data validated that PhosTACs downregulated multiple phosphorylation sites of tau. We believe that PhosTAC possesses several advantages over current strategies to modulate tau phosphorylation and represents a new avenue for disease-modifying therapies for tauopathies.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Phostac, Tau, Dia-ms, Dephosphorylation

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale Cancer Biology Institute

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute


