### Accession
PXD001481

### Title
H.pylori, N.gonorrhoeae, E.coli LC-MS/MS

### Description
We have developed approach and algorithm to annotated mass-spectra database creation and further spectral based amino acid substitution search. Algorithm is based on a robust procedure of spectral angle comparison. We have shown applicability of the algorithm to large scale datasets of Helicobacter pylori, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Escherichia coli

### Sample Protocol
Preparation for MS analysis H.pylori and N.Ghonnoreae The bacterial cells were suspended in 50 μL of  0.5 % (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters) and 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 1 µL of Protease inhibitor Mix (GE Healthcare) and incubated at 100 °C for 5 min. The pellet was discarded by centrifugation at 15,000 g, 4 °С for 5 min. To reduce disulfide bonds and to block cysteine residues the collected supernatant was added by DTT (BioRad) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min. Then the iodoacetamide (BioRad) was added to a final concentration of 30 mM; the sample  was incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Additionally the DTT (BioRad) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM; the sample was incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in a 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w) ratio at 37 °C overnight (approx 16 h). The TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5 %; the sample was incubated at 37°С for 45 min, and centrifuged at 13 000 g for 10 min to precipitate the RapiGest SF. The supernatant peptides were removed and used for LC-MS analysis. E.coli Cell were lysed by sonication (10 minutes incubation in sonication bath Elmasonic S 30H), protein extraction and trypsinolysis were performed by FASP method described by Erde, Loo and Loo (Enhanced FASP (eFASP) to increase proteome coverage and sample recovery for quantitative proteomic experiments. Erde J, Loo RR, Loo JA, J Proteome Res. 2014, 13(4), 1885-1895). Chromato-mass-spectrometry H.pylori and N.ghonnoreae Peptides were analyzed using a TripleTOF 5600+ (ABSciex) mass-spectrometer with NanoSpray III ion source and NanoLC Ultra 2D+ chromatograph (Eksigent). Chromatographic separation was carried out in the gradient of acetonitrile in water (5 to 40% of acetonitrile in 120 min.) with 0.1% formic acid on 75x150 mkm columns with Phenomenex Luna C18 3 mkm sorbent and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The IDA mode of a mass-spectrometer was used to analyze peptides. Based on the first MS1 spectrum (mass range for analysis and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z, signal accumulation was 250 ms), 50 parent ions with maximum intensity in the current spectrum were chosen for subsequent MS/MS analysis (resolution of quadrupole UNIT was 0.7 Da, measurement mass range was 200-1800 m/z, optimization of ion beam focus was to obtain maximal sensitivity, signal accumulation was 50 ms for each parent ion). Nitrogen was used for collision dissociation with fixed average energy of 40 V. Collision energy was linearly increased from 25 to 55 V during signal accumulation time (50 ms). Parental ions that had already been analyzed were excluded from analysis for 15 sec. E.coli LC-ESI-MS analyses of tryptic peptides were performed on a Bruker Maxis 3G after HDC-cell upgrade with nano-ESI source. Chromatographic separation was performed by Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLS system. Samples were loaded to a Zorbax 300-SB C18 precolumn with 0.1% FA and 5% acetonitrile in water. Samples were separated on a Zorbax 300-SB C18 column with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min with linear gradient (5–35%) of 100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in 110 minutes. The [MH]1+-3+ ions were detected in the 50–2200 m/z range.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files (.wiff file format) were converted to the Mascot generic format (.mgf file format) using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter version 1.3 and were searched using Mascot version 2.2.07. The Mascot searches were performed with the following parameters: tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides; maximum of one missed cleavage; a peptide charge state limited to 1+, 2+ and 3+; a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and variable modifications caused by oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation (C)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N.gonorrhoeae, H.pylori, E.coli lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
PhD, head of bioinformatics lab, Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine
Research Institute of Physical Chemical Medicine

### Submitter
Ilya Altukhov

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitry Alexeev
PhD, head of bioinformatics lab, Research Institute of Physical-Chemical Medicine


