### Accession
PXD001460

### Title
Activating Mutations in PIK3CA result in Widespread Modulation of the Tyrosine Phosphoproteome

### Description
The human oncogene PIK3CA is frequently mutated in human cancers. The two hotspot mutations in PIK3CA, E545K and H1047R, have been shown to regulate widespread signaling events downstream of AKT. However, the impact of these activating mutations on the tyrosine phosphorylation signaling in the cell has not been studied. Here, we performed a global phosphotyrosine profiling using isogenic knockin cell lines containing these activating mutations. We identified 824 unique phosphopeptides from 308 proteins. We found a surprisingly widespread modulation of tyrosine phosphorylation levels of proteins in the knockin mutant cells, with many of the regulated proteins involved in important biological processes, including those in the cytoskeletal migration pathways and kinase regulated signaling. We observed a widespread modulation of the tyrosine kinome, with 24 of the tyrosine kinases showing either upregulation or downregulation in phosphorylation levels. Many of the regulated phosphosites that we identified were located in the kinase domain or the canonical activating sites, indicating that the kinases were active and hence their downstream signaling pathways. Our study thus shows that the activating mutations in PIK3CA result in widespread tyrosine signaling regulation, in addition to the serine/threonine signaling pathways activated by the canonical PI3K-AKT axis.

### Sample Protocol
Three-state stable isotopic labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) of MCF10A parental cells, Ex9-KI and Ex20-KI cells was performed. Briefly, cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 SILAC media deficient in both L-lysine and L-arginine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ex20-KI cell culture media was then supplemented with either 12C6-lysine or 12C6-arginine to facilitate incorporation of the “light” labels. Ex9-KI cell culture media was then supplemented with 2H4-K and 13C6-R to facilitate incorporation of the “medium” labels. Lastly, parental MCF10A cell culture media was supplemented with 13C615N2-K and 13C615N4-R to facilitate “heavy” state labeling. Cells were seeded at 80% confluency in 5% horse serum with corresponding SILAC basal DMEM/F12 medium for 16 hours prior to harvest. Following cell culture, peptides were prepared in an in-solution tryptic digestion protocol with slight modifications.6 Briefly, cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate and 5mM sodium fluoride), sonicated and then cleared by centrifugation at 3,000 × g at 4ºC for 10 minutes. As determined by BCA assay, 8 mg protein from each SILAC-labeled cell lysate was isolated, then equal amounts of protein from all three SILAC states (light, medium, heavy) were mixed. The resultant mixture was then reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. For in-solution tryptic digestion, the resulting protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration lower than 2 M urea incubated with 1mg/mL TPCK-treated trypsin on an orbital shaker at 25ºC overnight. Protein digests were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion reaction and then subjected to centrifugation at 2000 x g at room temperature for 5 min. The resulting supernatants were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridge. Eluted peptides were lyophilized to dryness prior to phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment. Following lyophilization, desalted lyophilized tryptic peptide were reconstituted in 1.4 mL of IAP buffer (50mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl) and subjected to centrifugation at 2000 x g at room temperature for 5 min. Prior to IAP, anti-phosphotyrosine antibody beads (pY1000, Cell Signaling Technology) were washed with IAP buffer once. The reconstituted peptide mixtures were then incubated with anti-phosphotyrosine antibody beads on a rotator at 4 ºC for 30 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 1,500 x g for 1 minute and supernatant was removed. The beads were washed twice with IAP buffer and then twice with water. Residual water was removed. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the antibody beads by acidifying the bead mixture at room temperature with 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides eluents were desalted with C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried and stored at -80ºC prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.Data dependent LC-MS/MS analysis of phosphopeptides enriched by IAP was performed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-liquid chromatography system (Proxeon, Easy Nano-LC). During each LC-MS/MS run, 1uL of reconstituted peptide solution were injected onto a nano-c18 reversed phase column (10 cm × 75 µm, Magic C18 AQ 5 µm, 120 Å). Peptides were than fractionated across a 90-minute linear reversed phase HPLC gradient (from 5 to 60% Acetonitrile). High-resolution precursor scans (FTMS) were acquired within the Orbitrap analyzer across a mass range of 350-1,700 Daltons (with 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z). The ten most abundant precursor ions from each precursor scan were selected for High Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (isolation width of 1.90 m/z; 35% normalized collision energy and activation time of 0.1ms). High-resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired (at 15,000 resolution at 400 m/z) on the Orbitrap analyzer following fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) software package was used to facilitate downstream protein identification and quantitation. All acquired mass spectrometric data were searched within the Proteome Discoverer interface using both Mascot (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against Human RefSeq database v 59 (containing 33,249 entries). For both algorithms, search parameters were as follows: a maximum of one missed cleavage; a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation; variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling 13C6,15N2-lysine; 2H4-lysine; 13C6-arginine and 13C6,15N2-arginine; MS tolerance of +/-10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance of +/-0.1 Da. The Mascot and SEQUEST score cut-offs were set to a false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide level. The probability that an identified phosphorylation was modifying each specific Ser/Thr/Tyr residue on each identified phosphopeptide was determined from the PhosphoRS algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The human oncogene PIK3CA is frequently mutated in human cancers. Two hotspot mutations in PIK3CA, E545K and H1047R, have been shown to regulate widespread signaling events downstream of AKT, leading to increased cell proliferation, growth, survival, and motility. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to profile the global phosphotyrosine proteome of isogenic knock-in cell lines containing these activating mutations, where we identified 824 unique phosphopeptides. Although it is well understood that these mutations result in hyperactivation of the serine/threonine kinase AKT, we found a surprisingly widespread modulation of tyrosine phosphorylation levels of proteins in the mutant cells. In the tyrosine kinome alone, 29 tyrosine kinases were altered in their phosphorylation status. Many of the regulated phosphosites that we identified were located in the kinase domain or the canonical activation sites, indicating that these kinases and their downstream signaling pathways were activated. Our study demonstrates that there is frequent and unexpected cross-talk that occurs between tyrosine signaling pathways and serine/threonine signaling pathways activated by the canonical PI3K-AKT axis.

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosine, Pik3ca, Phosphoproteomics, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


