### Accession
PXD031326

### Title
Ddp1 cooperates with Ppx1 to counter a stress response initiated by non-vacuolar polyphosphate

### Description
In diverse cells from bacterial to mammalian species, inorganic phosphate is stored in long chains called polyphosphates (polyP). These near universal polymers, ranging from 3 to thousands of phosphate moieties in length, are associated with molecular functions including energy homeostasis, protein folding, and cell signaling. In many cell types, polyphosphate is concentrated in subcellular compartments or organelles. In the budding yeast S. cerevisiae, polyP synthesis by the membrane-bound VTC complex is coupled to its translocation into the lumen of the vacuole, a lysosome-related organelle, where it is stored at high concentrations. In contrast, ectopic expression of bacterial polyphosphate kinase, PPK, results in the toxic accumulation of polyP outside of the vacuole. In this study, we used label-free mass spectrometry to investigate the mechanisms underlying this toxicity. We find that PPK expression results in the activation of a stress response mediated in part by the Hog1 and Yak1 kinases, and Msn2/Msn4 transcription factors. This response is countered by the combined action of the Ddp1 and Ppx1 polyphosphatases that function together to counter polyP accumulation and downstream toxicity. In contrast, ectopic expression of previously proposed mammalian polyphosphatases did not impact PPK-mediated toxicity in the yeast model, suggesting either that these enzymes do not function directly as polyphosphatases in vivo or that they require co-factors unique to higher eukaryotes. Our work provides a mechanistic explanation for why polyP accumulation outside of lysosome-related organelles is toxic. Further, it serves as a resource for exploring how polyP may impact conserved biological processes at a molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were diluted to OD600 = 0.2 in SC-Ura with 2 % glucose and grown at 30 C with shaking until OD600 = 1. Yeast pellets of approximately 50 OD600 units in size were resuspended in 600 µL of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50mM TEAB, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablets (Roche)) and the 2 mL screwcap tube was filled to capacity with acid-washed glass beads. Cells were lysed with 12 x 1 minute pulses on a BioSpec mini bead-beater with incubation on ice in between pulses. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15 000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 15 000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C before being collected again and frozen at -80 °C. Frozen protein extracts were shipped overnight on dry ice to the UC Davis Proteomics core. Trypsin digestion was performed using S-Trap Mini spin columns (PROTIFI) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Digested peptides were first separated using Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source. Digested peptides were loaded on a 100 micron x 25 mm Magic C18 100 Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted on-line before being separated using a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column. Peptides were eluted using a 140 minute gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl/min into a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass spectrometer. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range of 350-1600. MS/MS spectra were acquired with the top 15 ions in the MS spectra subjected to High Energy Collisional Dissociation, with a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 at the MS1 and MS2 levels, respectively, at 400 m/z. For precursor ion selection, an isolation mass window of 1.6 m/z was used. A normalized collision energy of 27% was used for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set for fifteen seconds.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using the msConvert program. X!Tandem (the gmp.org; version X! Tandem ALANINE (2017.2.1.4)) was used to analyze MS/MS spectra and identify peptide sequences.  The X!Tandem program was used to search the SwissProt Uniprot S. cerevisiae database (proteome UP000002311, date of download = 2018.12.21), along with 110 common lab contaminants (thegpm.org/crap/) and the E. coli PPK sequence, and all sequences were reversed for a decoy database search. A database search was performed on MS/MS spectra from precursor ions with charge state of at most 4. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme. Using X!Tandem two-pass search, the initial search was performed with one miscleavage considered, and a refinement search looked for additional unanticipated miscleavages in peptides from proteins identified in the first pass. Fragment ion and parent ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm. Single amino acid polymorphisms were checked for each peptide residue in the first search, using a default list of polymorphisms from the SNP annotations in ENSEMBL. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and selenocysteine were specified as fixed modifications. Variable modifications included were: glutamic acid->pyro-glutamic acid of the N-terminus, glutamine->pyro-glutamine of the N-terminus, ammonia loss of the N-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation and dioxidation of both methionine and tryptophan, N-terminal acetylation. Validation of peptide and protein identifications was done using the Scaffold program (version 4.11.1 from Proteome Software, Inc, Portland OR). The ProteinProphet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58) was used to assign protein probabilities. Peptide identifications associated with an FDR < 1% were deemed of high confidence. Protein identifications with an FDR < 1% and association with at least 2 high-confidence peptides were then used in all downstream analyses. Proteins were grouped into protein groups if they shared significant peptide evidence. To satisfy the principles of parsimony, proteins with the same peptides were grouped if it was not possible to differentiate them based on MS/MS analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada  Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Iryna Abramchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Downey
Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada  Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada


