### Accession
PXD025079

### Title
Proteomic analysis of exosomes isolated from human umbilical cord serum by mass spectrometry and preliminary study of their biological activities in cultured hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines

### Description
Exosomes are membranous extracellular vesicles 50–100 nm in size and are involved in cellular communication via the delivery of proteins, lipids, and RNAs. Emerging evidence shows that exosomes play a critical role in cancer. A recent study has revealed that maternal and umbilical cord serum-derived exosomes may enhance endothelial cell proliferation and migration. However, the role of exosomes isolated from the human umbilical cord in cancer development has not been investigated. To explore the potential differences in the composition and function of proteins from umbilical cord blood exosomes and maternal serum exosomes, we conducted a proteomic analysis of exosomes by mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analysis. We used the CCK-8 assay and flow cytometry to study the biological effects of umbilical serum exosomes on hepatoma cells. Our study shows that umbilical cord blood is enriched with proteins involved in ECM-receptor interactions, which may be closely related to cell metastasis and proliferation. Our findings indicate that exosomes derived from human umbilical serum can suppress the viability of hepatoma cells and may induce apoptosis of hepatoma cells. This evidence suggests that umbilical cord serum-derived exosomes may be potential leads for the development of biotherapy for liver cancer.

### Sample Protocol
1. Trypsin Digestion Dithiothreitol was added to the protein samples for reduction to adjust the concentration to 5 mM. Then, iodoacetamide was added to the samples to adjust the concentration to 11 mM, and the samples were incubated for 15 min in the dark. Next, we diluted the urea concentration of the samples to less than 2 M. Finally, we added trypsin at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) for digestion at 37°C overnight. On the second day, we added trypsin at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin:protein) for further digestion for 4 h. 2. TMT/iTRAQ Labelling The peptides digested by trypsin were desalted by Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and freeze-dried in vacuum. Then, we dissolved the samples with 0.5 M TEAB and labelled  the peptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 3. HPLC Fractionation We used high pH reverse-phase HPLC to separate the peptides with an Agilent 300Extend C18 column. Briefly, we fractionated the peptides into 60 fractions with acetonitrile (8%-32%) at pH 9 for 60 min. Then, the samples were combined into 18 components, and the combined peptides were freeze-dried in vacuum for further experiments. 4. LC-MS/MS Analysis We dissolved the samples with 0.1% aqueous formic acid as the mobile phase using liquid chromatography. The peptides were separated with EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The peptides separated by UPLC were then subjected to an NSI source. The ion source voltage was set at 2.0 kV. An Orbitrap was used to detect and analyse the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments. The data acquisition mode used a dependent scanning (DDA) program. Finally, the peptides were analysed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus instrument (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
1.Database Search We used the MaxQuant search engine to process the mass spectrometry data. The cleavage enzyme was set as trypsin/P, and up to 2 missing cleavages were allowed. The minimum length of the peptide segment was set to 7 amino acids, and the maximum modification number of the peptide segment was set to 5.  2. Bioinformatics Methods 2.1 GO Annotation Gene ontology analysis, or GO analysis, is a kind of bioinformatics analysis method that can organically link genes with various information on gene products (such as proteins) to provide statistical information. We converted the protein ID to the UniProt ID based on the UniProt-GOA database and used the UniProt ID to match the GO ID. Finally, we retrieved the corresponding information from the UniProt-GOA database based on the GO ID. 2.2 Domain Annotation The protein domain consisted of 25-500 amino acids and was a specific protein region conserved in sequence that could function independently in general. We used the InterProScan and InterPro domain databases to annotate the protein domains of the identified proteins. 2.3 KEGG Pathway Annotation We integrated the network information of protein interactions according to the KEGG database. We annotated the identified proteins using KAAS and matched the annotated proteins to the corresponding pathways using KEGG mapper. 2.4 Subcellular Localization The main subcellular localization of eukaryotic cells included extracellular, cytoplasmic, nuclear, mitochondrial, Golgi, vacuole, cytoskeleton, nucleoplasm, ribosome and so on. We used wolfpsort to predict subcellular localization. 2.5 Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis The enriched proteins based on GO analysis could be divided into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. Two-tailed Fisher's exact test was used to clarify the differentially expressed proteins. 2.6 Enrichment of pathway analysis Enrichment of pathway analysis was based on the KEGG database. Two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to determine the enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins. Finally, these pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. 2.7 Enrichment of protein domain analysis The InterPro database was used to analyse the enrichment of the functional domains of the differentially expressed proteins. Two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins. 2.8 Enrichment-based Clustering Hierarchical clustering based on the functional enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins in different groups was used to investigate the potential associations and differences in specific functions (GO, KEGG pathway, protein domain, etc.) of the proteins. First, we collected the functional classification information after enrichment and the corresponding enrichment p-value. Then, we screened out the functional classifications that were enriched in at least one of the clusters (p-value <0.05). The filtered p-value data matrix was -log10 transformed, and then, the transformed data matrix was classified by Z transformation for each functional category. Finally, the dataset obtained after the Z transformation was analysed by one-way hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are membranous extracellular vesicles 50-100 nm in size, which are involved in cellular communication via the delivery of proteins, lipids and RNA. Emerging evidence shows that exosomes play a critical role in cancer. It has recently been revealed that maternal and umbilical cord serum (UCS)-derived exosomes may enhance endothelial cell proliferation and migration. However, the role of exosomes isolated from the human umbilical cord in cancer development has not been investigated. To explore the potential differences in the composition and function of proteins from umbilical serum exosomes (UEs) and maternal serum exosomes, a proteomic analysis of exosomes was conducted using mass spectrometry and bioinformatics. Moreover, Cell Counting Kit-8 assays and flow cytometry were used to study the biological effects of UEs on liver cancer cell lines. The present study demonstrated that UCS was enriched with proteins involved in extracellular matrix-receptor interactions, which may be closely related to cell metastasis and proliferation. The findings further indicated that exosomes derived from human umbilical serum could inhibit the viability and induce apoptosis of liver cancer cells. This suggests that UCS-derived exosomes may represent potential leads for the development of biotherapy for liver cancer.

### Keywords
Exosomes; proteomic analysis; human umbilical cord serum; mass spectrometry; hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi

### Submitter
Donglie Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Donglie Zhu
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi


