### Accession
PXD023648

### Title
A sub-optimal protein precipitation method to improve identification of low molecular weight less abundant proteins

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics studies have enabled identification and quantification of thousands of proteins from biological samples. High molecular weight abundant proteins are readily sampled in global proteomics studies compared to low molecular weight less abundant proteins. Although extensive fractionation can facilitate identification of low molecular weight less abundant proteins, it requires additional infrastructure, mass spectrometry time and labour. There is a need for a simple method that can deplete high molecular weight proteins and enrich for low molecular weight proteins to improve their coverage in proteomics studies. We developed a simple method that depletes high molecular weight proteins from various biological samples including cell lines, tissues, and serum. Using this strategy, we demonstrate identification of proteins that are often underrepresented in proteomics datasets. This approach also enabled identification of low abundant serum proteins that are often not detected using immunodepletion strategy. We also identified several novel proteins encoded by annotated non-coding regions in the human genome including lncRNAs and UTRs. Our approach can complement existing proteomics workflows to increase detection and coverage of low molecular weight less abundant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands were distained using 40 mM TABC in 40% acetonitrile till completely destained with gentle shaking at room temperature. Reduction was performed on destained gel bands using 5 mM dithiothreitol with gentle shaking at 60 °C for 30 mins. Alkylation was performed using 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 mins. Reduced and alkylated samples were in-gel digested using MS-grade trypsin, with the enzyme and substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C with gentle shaking. After in-gel digestion, trypsin was inactivated using 0.1 % formic acid with vigorous shaking at 37 °C for 10 mins and supernatants were collected. In-gel digested peptides were extracted using 5 % formic acid in 40 % acetonitrile twice with vigorous shaking at 37 °C for 15 mins and supernatant collected. Final peptide extraction was performed using 100 % acetonitrile once with vigorous shaking at 37 °C for 20 mins or till gel turn opaque. All collected supernatants were pooled and vacuum dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 with the setting of DriPure® at 30 °C. Dried protein pellet was resuspended in 200 μl 0.1 % formic acid and peptide clean-up was performed using C18 stage tips as per manufacturers instruction. Cleaned-up peptides were vacuum dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 with the setting of DriPure® at 30 °C.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis MS/MS spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer Version 2.2.0.0388 with the processing workflow of spectrum files>spectrum selector>Sequest HT>percolator. All input setting was default with the following changes: spectrum selector – min. precursor mass 350 Da, Sequest HT – max. missed cleavage sites: 2, min. peptide length: 7, max peptide length: 150, precursor mass tolerance: 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.5 Da, static modification on cystine residues (Carbamidomethyl - +57.021 Da), dynamic modification on methionine resides (Oxidation - +15.995 Da) and protein terminus dynamic modification (Acetyl [N-terminus] – +42.011 Da) and percolator – maximum delta Cn: 0.05, target FDR (Strict) peptide level: 0.01, target FDR (Relaxed) peptide level: 0.05, validation based on: q-Value. UniProt homo sapiens reviewed proteome database (downloaded on 30th January 2020) comprising a common list of contaminants (including trypsin) were appended to the database for searching. Proteogenomics Analysis MS/MS spectra were searched as per mass spectrometry data analysis method stated above with the change of proteome database to OpenProt (3-frame translated database, download on 16th September 2020), precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. Peptides derived from OpenProt database were filtered for only peptide passing 1 % FDR score threshold. Peptides that have spectra that matched to known or multiple different proteins were not considered for further analysis. Spectra that match to unique peptides derived from novel proteins were considered for further analysis. For peptides derived from pseudogenes, at least 2 amino acid mismatches must be present compared to parental protein sequence to be considered unique. The filtered novel peptide list was manually verified a second time using BlastP to validate for uniqueness. Lastly, list of novel peptides was manually verified to check the confidence of spectral assignment by the search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revolutionized global proteomic profiling. Although high molecular weight abundant proteins are readily sampled in global proteomics studies, less abundant low molecular weight proteins are often underrepresented. This includes biologically important classes of low molecular weight proteins including ligands, growth factors, peptide hormones and cytokines. Although extensive fractionation can facilitate achieving better coverage of proteome, it requires additional infrastructure, mass spectrometry time and labour. There is need for a simple method that can selectively deplete high molecular weight abundant proteins and enrich for low molecular weight less abundant proteins to improve their coverage in proteomics studies. We present a simple organic-solvent based protein precipitation method that selectively depletes high molecular weight proteins and enriches low molecular weight proteins in the soluble fraction. Using this strategy, we demonstrate identification of low molecular weight proteins that are generally underrepresented in proteomics datasets. In addition, we show the utility of this approach in identifying functional cleavage products from precursor proteins and low molecular weight short open reading frame proteins encoded by non-coding regions such as lncRNAs and UTRs. As the method does not require additional infrastructure, it can complement existing proteomics workflows to increase detection and coverage of low molecular weight proteins that are less abundant.

### Keywords
Breast cacner cell line, Small protein, Protein precipitation, Low molecular weight protein, Serum, Tumour

### Affiliations
Genetics and Computational Biology Department, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
PARTHIBAN PERIASAMY

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Genetics and Computational Biology Department, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia


