### Accession
PXD016415

### Title
Protein components of infective endocarditis vegetations and insights on their proteolysis using mass spectrometry-based N-terminomics

### Description
Infective endocarditis results in the growth of a vegetative mass on native or bio prosthetic valves hindering function and increasing risk of thromboses. This study set out to determine the proteomic composition of these vegetations including the influence of different micro-organisms and the proteases known to be present. Our data has allowed us to describe for first time the influence different infectious organisms have on vegetation growth. Including the contribution the immune response and circulatory proteins/cells make in composing a vegetation. Furthermore, we describe the protease activity and both known and novel cleavage sites in a plethora of targets. This data provides a deep insight into the homogeneity and heterogeneity of vegetation composition.

### Sample Protocol
Vegetation tissue from patients with infective endocarditis were removed and flash frozen. Proteins were extracted using t-per followed by GuHCL and mechanical disruption. Proteins were labeled at the protein level with dimethyl formaldehyde and digested with trypsin. A small sample aliquot (30ug) was removed for Shotgun analysis and the remaining was treated with a hyperbranched polyglycerol polyaldehyde derivatised polymer that bound to free, unlabeled, N-termini created by the trypsin digestion. The polymer was removed by cellulose filtration enriching for labeled Neo N-termini. Samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns and ran on a Fusion Lumos 2-hour gradient with a 3-sec MS2 window.

### Data Protocol
Individual LC-MS/MS raw files were searched against human and pathogen databases (Uniprot.org) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) and search parameters specified in the Online Supplement. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to identify high confidence proteins. The human database included all reviewed proteins with experimental evidence. Pathogen databases included all predicted proteins and were searched on a human database background to compensate for the limited number of proteins in pathogen databases. The protein and peptide data from each extraction were pooled to provide the proteome of each sample. Data was analyzed using Microsoft Excel to determine which proteins were common between samples and in SA and NSA datasets. PANTHER software (pantherdb.org) was used for pathway analysis and GO annotations. Proteins were sorted based on annotations and cross-referenced with lists of previously performed specific tissue analyses. TAILS peptides were identified by the presence of an N-terminal dimethyl label or other N-terminal blocking entity. These were analyzed with CLIPPER V 1.0 to assign the position of N-terminal peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Infective endocarditis is a life-threatening infection of heart valves and adjacent structures characterized by vegetations on valves and other endocardial surfaces, with tissue destruction and risk of embolization. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to define the proteome of staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations and Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to define their proteolytic landscapes. These approaches identified over 2000 human proteins in staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations. Individual vegetation proteomes demonstrated comparable profiles of quantitatively major constituents that overlapped with serum, platelet, and neutrophil proteomes. Staphylococcal vegetation proteomes resembled one another more than the proteomes of non-staphylococcal vegetations. TAILS demonstrated extensive proteolysis within vegetations, with numerous previously undescribed cleavages. Several proteases and pathogen-specific proteins, including virulence factors, were identified in most vegetations. Proteolytic peptides in fibronectin and complement C3 were identified as potential infective endocarditis biomarkers. Overlap of staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetation proteomes suggests a convergent thrombotic and immune response to endocardial infection by diverse pathogens. However, the differences between staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations and internal variance within the non-staphylococcal group indicate that additional pathogen- or patient-specific effects exist. Pervasive proteolysis of vegetation components may arise from vegetation-intrinsic proteases and destabilize vegetations, contributing to embolism.

### Keywords
Staph a., Infective endocarditis, Ie, Tails

### Affiliations
Apte Lab, departemnt of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Apte Lab, departemnt of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic


