### Accession
PXD027038

### Title
Colobanthus quitensis differential proteomics

### Description
Global warming is strongly affecting the Maritime Antarctica climate and the consequent melting of perennial snow and ice covers resulted in increased colonization by plants. Colobanthus quitensis is a vascular plant highly adapted to the harsh environmental conditions of Antarctic Peninsula and understanding how the plant is responding to global warming is a new challenging target for modern cell physiology. To this aim, we performed differential proteomic analysis on C. quitensis plants grown in natural conditions compared to plants grown for one year inside Open Top Chambers (OTCs) which determine an increase of about 4 °C at midday, mimicking the effect of global warming. A thorough analysis of the up- and down-regulated proteins highlighted an extensive metabolism reprogramming leading to the hypothesis that (i) photorespiration could play an important role in reducing ROS-mediated photodamage improving OTC plants protection against photoinhibition; (ii) OTC plants activate stronger antioxidant defenses as confirmed by enzymatic activity and TBARS content measurement; (iii) the deposition of cell wall components is impaired in OTC plants due to the down-regulation of many enzymes involved in their biosyn-thesis; (iv) OTC plants could suffer of a reduced freezing tolerance due to lower concentration of soluble sugars acting as osmoprotectants.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates for both OTC and OUT samples were finely grinded using a mortar and pestle under continuous addition of liquid nitrogen and then a protein extrac-tion buffer (4% SDS, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), protease inhibitor cocktail) was added. Approximately 300 µL of buffer was add-ed to each sample, afterwards incubated for 30 minutes at 4 °C on a stirring wheel and then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 30 minutes. After centrifugation, supernatants contain-ing the protein fraction were collected and protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bio-rad, Hercules, CA).  Fifty micrograms of protein extracts from two biological replicates of both OTC and OUT samples were diluted in Laemmli buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), boiled for 10 minutes, and loaded onto a 10% bis-acrylamide gel. After SDS-PAGE separation, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, and 19 slices were cut from each lane. Each slice was subjected to in situ digestion with trypsin. Finally, the obtained peptide mixtures were collected, vacuum-dried, and then resuspended in 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out onto an LTQ Orbitrap XL (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with a nanoLC system (nanoEasy II). Peptide mixtures were separated onto a C18 capillary column (200 mm, 75 µm ID, 5 µm, 120 Å, Nanoseparation, NL) by using a linear gradient of eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile LC-MS Grade) from 5% to 95% in 87 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometry analyses were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode: from each MS scan in the range from 400 to 1800 m/z, the ten most abundant ions were selected and fragmented in collision-induced dissociation (CID) conditions, applying a dynamic exclusion window of 40 seconds. Each sample was run in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.2 integrated with Andromeda search engine, and the customized “Colobanthus quitensis protein database” was used for protein identification. The parameters employed for protein identification were: minimum 4 peptides, at least 2 unique; methionine oxidation and pyroglutamate formation on N-terminal glutamine as variable modifications; 20 ppm was the accuracy for the first search, then lowered to 4.5 ppm in the main search; 0.01 FDR with a reverse database for decoy was used. Protein quantification was carried out for proteins showing minimum 2 unique and razor peptides identified. The only modification allowed for quantification was the carbamidomethylation of Cys residues. Protein relative quantification was obtained by using a Spectral Counts (SpCs) based method. In details, SpCs from MaxQuant were normalized by using RSC method [20], and the means were calculated for technical duplicates. The obtained values were introduced in Multi experiment Viewer (MeV), performing the un-paired Student’s t-test imposing a cutoff p-value<0.01 for the statistical significance. The protein normalized spectral counts in both conditions (OTC and OUT) were used to calculate the Fold Change (FC) as log2 OTC/OUT with cutoff values spanning from -0.5 to 0.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colobanthus quitensis; differential proteomic analysis; open top chambers; response to stress; temperature changes

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80126, Italy 
CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80145, Italy
1. Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80126, Italy  2. CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80145, Italy

### Submitter
ilaria iacobucci

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Maria Monti
1. Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80126, Italy  2. CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80145, Italy


