### Accession
PXD012910

### Title
Mass spectrometry data of human urine

### Description
Based on UPLC-Q-TOF-MS metabolomics technology, urine samples of 1072 subjects from 9 centers, including normal control, phlegm and blood stasis (PBS) syndrome and Qi and Yin deficiency (QYD) syndrome, and other syndromes of CHD, were conducted to find biomarkers. Among them, the discovery set (n = 125) and the test set (n = 337) were used to identify and validate biomarkers, and the validation set (n = 610) was used for the application and evaluation of the support vector machine (SVM) prediction model.

### Sample Protocol
Each of samples was thawed at 4℃. After the samples were completely thawed, 300μl of each was taken in a centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 4℃ and 10000 r/min for 10 min. After that, 150μl of the supernatant was added and 150μl of distilled water was added to mix 1:1. Vortex with a vortexer for 1 min. After centrifugation at 13000 r/min for 15 min, 200μl of the supernatant was analyzed in the vial for metabolomic analysis. MS was performed on a Waters Micro mass Q/TOF micro Synapt High Definition Mass Spectrometer. Electrospray ionization source (ESI source) was used for mass spectrometric detection in positive ionization mode. The MS analysis parameters were as follows: a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, drying gas temperature of 325℃, drying gas flow of 10 ml/min, desolvation gas flow of 600 l/h, source temperature of 120℃, desolvation temperature of 350℃ and cone gas flow of 50 l/h.

### Data Protocol
The data were exported using MarkerLynx (Version 4.1) software, and the resulting data consisted of retention time, M/Z value and normalized peak area. A multivariate analysis was performed using the software of SIMCA-P 11.0. An unsupervised model of principal component analysis (PCA) was used to determine the similarity between the groups to eliminate outlier samples. And a supervised model of partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was used to identify significantly changed metabolites among groups with an important contribution to the classification according to its variable important in the projection (VIP). In addition, the Student t test was also applied to measure the significance of each metabolite. Subsequently, the m/z values of the candidate markers were searched in the HMDB database (http://www.hmdb.ca/), and the final markers were further determined based on the mass spectroscopic secondary fragment information.

### Publication Abstract
Coronary heart disease (CHD) threatens human health. The discovery and assessment of potential biometabolic markers for different syndrome types of CHD may contribute to decipher pathophysiological mechanisms and identify new targets for diagnosis and treatment. On the basis of UPLC-Q-TOF/MS metabolomics technology, urine samples of 1072 participants from nine centers, including normal control, phlegm and blood stasis (PBS) syndrome and Qi and Yin deficiency (QYD) syndrome, and other syndromes of CHD, were conducted to find biomarkers. Among them, the discovery set ( n = 125) and the test set ( n = 337) were used to identify and validate biomarkers, and the validation set ( n = 610) was used for the application and evaluation of the support vector machine (SVM) prediction model. We discovered 15 CHD-PBS syndrome biomarkers and 12 CHD-QYD syndrome biomarkers, and the receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) area-under-the-curve (AUC) values of them were 0.963 and 0.990. The established SVM model has a good diagnostic ability and can well distinguish the two syndromes of CHD with a high predicted accuracy &gt;98.0%. The discovery of biomarkers and metabolic pathways in different syndrome types of CHD provides a basis for the diagnosis and evaluation of CHD, thereby improving the accurate diagnosis and precise treatment level of Chinese medicine.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Uplc-q/tof-ms

### Affiliations
Tianjin university of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Tianjin university of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 300193, China

### Submitter
Yubo Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yubo Li
Tianjin university of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 300193, China


