### Accession
PXD000980

### Title
The proteome of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 cells grown under light-activated heterotrophic growth

### Description
Cyanobacteria are photoautotrophic prokaryotes with a plant-like photosynthetic machinery. Besides being able to grow photoautotrophically, some cyanobacteria are also capable to grow photoheterotrophically, where they use reduced organic compounds as carbon source, or even completely heterotrophically by using reduced organic compounds as carbon and energy source. The well characterized cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 can grow in darkness under light-activated heterotrophic growth (LAHG) conditions by using glucose as carbon and energy source. In the present work, we combined pre-fractioning of Synechocystis cellular membranes with a global proteome and lipidome analysis, to shift the analytical focus towards the rearrangement of the internal thylakoid membrane system observed in Synechocystis cells under LAHG conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For protein analysis, 5 µg proteins were loaded onto a SDS-gel. Electrophoresis was stopped when the migrating front entered the separating gel, resulting in one single, clearly focused band per sample. The gel was stained with Comassie blue and then the protein-bands were cut out and digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel with 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile/1 % (v/v) formic acid. The lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 20 µL buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) right before MS-measurement. LC-MS analysis was performed as described previously, with slight modifications (18). For reversed-phase chromatography, a linear gradient of 90 min from buffer B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) was used with a flow rate of 400 nL/min (nanoAcquity, Waters). For MS analysis, a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in duty cycle, consisting of one 300-2000 m/z FTMS and four MS-MS LTQ scans. Acquisition of MS and MS/MS data was carried out using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Sequest algorithm implemented in the proteome discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific). For peptide identification, spectra were matched to a database derived from the genome sequence of Synechocystis. Trypsin was selected as the specified enzyme and maximal two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. False discovery rates were calculated by the number of spectral matches to a decoy database. Filters were set to achieve a false discovery rate of 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria are photoautotrophic prokaryotes with a plant-like photosynthetic machinery. Because of their short generation times, the ease of their genetic manipulation, and the limited size of their genome and proteome, cyanobacteria are popular model organisms for photosynthetic research. Although the principal mechanisms of photosynthesis are well-known, much less is known about the biogenesis of the thylakoid membrane, hosting the components of the photosynthetic, and respiratory electron transport chain in cyanobacteria. Here we present a detailed proteome analysis of the important model and host organism Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 under light-activated heterotrophic growth conditions. Because of the mechanistic importance and severe changes in thylakoid membrane morphology under light-activated heterotrophic growth conditions, a focus was put on the analysis of the membrane proteome, which was supported by a targeted lipidome analysis. In total, 1528 proteins (24.5% membrane integral) were identified in our analysis. For 641 of these proteins quantitative information was obtained by spectral counting. Prominent changes were observed for proteins associated with oxidative stress response and protein folding. Because of the heterotrophic growth conditions, also proteins involved in carbon metabolism and C/N-balance were severely affected. Although intracellular thylakoid membranes were significantly reduced, only minor changes were observed in their protein composition. The increased proportion of the membrane-stabilizing sulfoqinovosyl diacyl lipids found in the lipidome analysis, as well as the increased content of lipids with more saturated acyl chains, are clear indications for a coordinated synthesis of proteins and lipids, resulting in stabilization of intracellular thylakoid membranes under stress conditions.

### Keywords
Light-activated heterotrophic growth, Synechocystis, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Faculty of biology and biotechnology  Plant biochemistry  Ruhr-Univerity Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Nicole Plohnke

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Rexroth
Faculty of biology and biotechnology  Plant biochemistry  Ruhr-Univerity Bochum Germany


