### Accession
PXD027358

### Title
A streamlined data analysis pipeline for the identification of sites of citrullination

### Description
Citrullination is an enzyme-catalyzed post-translational modification (PTM) that is essential for a host of biological processes including gene regulation, programmed cell death, and organ development. While this PTM is required for normal cellular functions, aberrant citrullination is a hallmark of numerous autoimmune disorders as well as cancer. Although aberrant citrullination is linked to human pathology, the exact role of citrullination in disease remains poorly characterized, in part because of the challenges associated with identifying the specific arginine residues that are citrullinated. Tandem mass spectrometry is the most precise method to uncover sites of citrullination, however, due to the small mass shift (+0.984 Da) that results from citrullination, current database search algorithms commonly misannotate spectra leading to a high number of false-positive assignments. To address this challenge, we developed an automated workflow to rigorously and rapidly mine proteomic data to unambiguously identify the sites of citrullination from complex peptide mixtures. The crux of this streamlined workflow is the ionFinder software program, which classifies citrullination sites with high confidence based on the presence of diagnostic fragment ions. These diagnostic ions include the neutral loss of isocyanic acid, which is a dissociative event that is unique to citrulline residues. Using the ionFinder program, we have mapped the sites of autocitrullination on purified protein arginine deiminases (PADs 1-4) and mapped the global citrullinome in a PAD2 over-expressing cell line. The ionFinder algorithm is a highly versatile, user-friendly, and open-source program that is agnostic to the type of instrument and mode of fragmentation that is used.

### Sample Protocol
For PAD autociturllination samples, purified PADs (30 µg) were treated with 5 mM CaCl2 to induce autociturllination. Proteins were precipitated with TCA, reduced, alkylated and digested with GluC and LysC in combination, Trypsin and GluC, or Trypsin alone. For The HEK-PAD2 citrullinome samples, HEK293T cells stably expressing PAD2 were treated with 2 mM CaCl2 and 5 mM ionimycin to induce citrullination of cellular proteins. Whole cell lysate (50 µg) was TCA precipitated, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide digest was then fractionated off-line into a 96-well plate on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC coupled to a Gilson FC203B fraction collector, then concatenated into 12 pooled fractions. Samples (purified PADs) or chromatographic fractions, were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) coupled to a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) using a 60 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The data obtained for the autocitrullinated PADs was searched against an E. coli SwissProt database FASTA file that included the sequences corresponding to the PAD proteins, and the HEK-PAD2 samples were searched against the Human SwissProt database. Both searches were performed using Mascot Server 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd). The search parameters included searching specific protease cleavage sites with 2 maximum missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl cysteine modifications were set as a fixed modification, while variable modifications included: peptide N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate, and citrullination of arginine. In addition to these modifications, the deamidation of Asn and Gln was set as variable modifications. A 10 ppm m/z cutoff was employed for the precursor mass and 0.05 Da for the fragment ion mass tolerance.  Protein identification and validation was done using Scaffold 4.10.0 (Proteome Software Inc.), employing 1% FDR threshold for peptides, and a 99% probability threshold for protein identification, using Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination

### Affiliations
Boston College Chemistry Department
Chemistry Department, Boston College

### Submitter
Aaron Maurais

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Chemistry Department, Boston College


