### Accession
PXD001260

### Title
Identification of miR-145 targets using SILAC

### Description
miR-145 is downregulated in multiple cancers. The introduction of miR-145 could alleviate the tumor burden in the pancreatic cancer mouse model. However, how miR-145 mediates the tumor suppression is still an open question. In this study, we aimed to identify the targets of miR-145 using a SILAC approach.

### Sample Protocol
MiaPaCa-2 cells were grown in SILAC DMEM labeled with heavy isotopes (K8,R10) or light isotopes. miR-145 mimic oligos 50 nM or scramble RNA control were transfected into the media for 48 hours.  Protein lysates were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, respectively. In-gel and in-solution trypsin digestion was done at 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio overnight. Strong cation exchange fractionation was carried out using PolySULPHOETHYL A column and Agilent HPLC system. OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent) with 0.5% ampholytes were also used. For mass spectrometry analysis, LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was coupled to Agilent 1200 nano-HPLC system. The MS1 scans were acquired in the m/z range of 350-1800 while MS2 scans were in 100-2000 using HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against Human RefSeq protein database using Proteome Discoverer platform. Mascot and SEQUEST search algorithm were used with FDR 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was designated as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini, deamidation of glutamine/asparagine and SILAC labeling were used for variable modification. Mass tolerance at MS and MS/MS were 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression and protein synthesis. To characterize functions of miRNAs and to assess their potential applications, we carried out an integrated multi-omics analysis to study miR-145, a miRNA that has been shown to suppress tumor growth. We employed gene expression profiling, miRNA profiling and quantitative proteomic analysis of a pancreatic cancer cell line. In our transcriptomic analysis, overexpression of miR-145 was found to suppress the expression of genes that are implicated in development of cancer such as ITGA11 and MAGEA4 in addition to previously described targets such as FSCN1, YES1 and PODXL. Based on miRNA profiling, overexpression of miR-145 also upregulated other miRNAs including miR-124, miR-133b and miR-125a-3p, all of which are implicated in suppression of tumors and are generally co-regulated with miR-145 in other cancers. Using the SILAC system, we identified miR-145-induced downregulation of several oncoproteins/cancer biomarkers including SET, RPA1, MCM2, ABCC1, SPTBN1 and SPTLC1. Luciferase assay validation carried out on a subset of downregulated candidate targets confirmed them to be novel direct targets of miR-145. Overall, this multi-omics approach provided insights into miR-145-mediated tumor suppression and could be used as a general strategy to study the targets of individual miRNAs.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mirna, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


