### Accession
PXD009088

### Title
SWATH-LC/MS/MS of the proteomic response in Campylobacter jejuni 81-176 to sublethal concentrations of seven different bile acids

### Description
To characterize the adaptation processes of C. jejuni to sublethal concentrations of bile acids, that are a crucial component of the intestinal antimicrobial defense, including cholic- , chenodeoxycholic-, taurocholic-, glycocholic-, deoxycholic-, lithocholic-, and ursodeoxycholic acid, we used proteome profiling by label-free mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS). The most toxic bile acids, deoxycholic- and chenodeoxycholic acid induced the most significant changes in protein expression. In detail we found a significant down-regulation of in principle all basic biosynthetic pathways and a general decrease of the transcription machinery. Concurrently, an induction of factors involved in detoxification of reactive oxygen species, protein folding, and bile acid exporting efflux pumps was detected. The metabolism was optimized in such a way that the more energy-efficient aerobic respiration pathway was increased, while the energy-inefficient anaerobic branches of the electron transport chain were down-regulated. Uptake of amino acids in order to catabolize them was also increased. These results show that C. jejuni has a well-built, differentiated system of adaptation to bile acids stress. The findings of this study will enhance the understanding of the biology on the interaction of C. jejuni with the human intestine, and may provide clues to future medical treatment and prevention of C. jejuni infections.

### Sample Protocol
C. jejuni 81-176 was cultured in CDB at 37°C for 12 h while shaking at 150 rpm supplemented with the following bile acid concentrations: [CA]= 0.075% (1.74 mM), [CDCA]= 0.05% (1.21 mM), [TCA]= 0.485% (9.02 mM), [GCA]= 0.370% (7.59 mM), [DCA]= 0.030% (0.72 mM), [LCA]= 0.500% (13.28 mM), and [UDCA]=0.485% (12.35 mM). Cultures were harvested by centrifuging at 1700 g (4000 rpm, Eppendorf Centrifuge 5417R) for 10 min. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of 0.9% aqueous sodium chloride solution. The suspensions were sonicated on ice using 5 bursts at a setting of 3 and 30% duty cycles (Branson Model 250) for 30 s with 30 s intervals. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 15,300 g (12,000 rpm) at 4°C for 15 min. The harvested proteins were separated by 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis and visualized by Colloidal Coomassie staining. Protein concentration in the supernatants was quantified performing the Bradford method (λ=595 nm) using a NanoDrop2000 pedestal model (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Finally, the extracted proteins were purified by precipitation using acetone precipitation (acetone:sample 4:1, v/v, -20°C, overnight). Protein pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone, air-dried and redissolved using sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1, 3-dioxolan-4-yl) methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (Rapigest, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) cleavable surfactant. After reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, proteins were digested using sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (w:w). Following acidic cleavage of the surfactant. The resulting fatty acids were pelleted and removed by centrifugation. The resulting peptide mixtures were dried in a SpeedVac Concentrator centrifuge (Thermo Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) and stored at -20 °C prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4304 (AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) at “thorough” settings. A total of 551.443 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the C. jejuni 81-176 proteome from UniProtKB (revision 07-2016, 1804 protein entries) supplemented with 51 commonly observed lab and workflow contaminants. Global false discovery rates (FDR) were adjusted to 1% at both the protein and peptide level using a forward/reverse decoy database approach.  SWATH peak extraction was achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time alignment on a set of 12 endogenous peptides, peak areas were extracted for up to the eight highest scoring peptides per protein group at 6 transitions per peptide, an extracting ion current (XIC) width of 75 ppm and an XIC window of 8 min, and filtered to an estimated FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bile acids, Swath, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Core Facility Proteomics Institute of Clinical Chemistry University Medical Center Göttingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics Institute of Clinical Chemistry University Medical Center Göttingen


