### Accession
PXD020954

### Title
Chicken microbiome LC - MS / MS

### Description
Bacteroidaceae are common gut microbiota members in all warm-blooded animals. However, if Bacteroidaceae are to be used as probiotics, the species selected for different hosts should reflect the natural distribution. In this study, we therefore evaluated host adaptation of bacterial species belonging to the family Bacteroidaceae. B. dorei, B. uniformis, B. xylanisolvens, B. ovatus, B. clarus, B. thetaiotaomicron and B. vulgatus represented human-adapted species while B. gallinaceum, B. caecigallinarum, B. mediterraneensis, B. caecicola, M. massiliensis, B. plebeius and B. coprocola were commonly detected in chicken but not human gut microbiota. There were 29 genes which were present in all human-adapted Bacteroides but absent from the genomes of all chicken isolates and these included genes required for the pentose cycle, and glutamate or histidine metabolism. These genes were expressed during an in vitro competitive assay, in which human-adapted Bacteroides species overgrew the chicken adapted isolates. Not a single gene specific for the chicken-adapted species was found. Instead, chicken adapted species exhibited signs of frequent horizontal gene transfer, of KUP, linA and sugE genes in particular. The differences in host adaptation should be considered when the new generation of probiotics for humans or chickens is designed.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial isolates were subcultured in anaerobic atmospheric conditions consisting of 85% N2, 10% CO2 and 5% H2 on BHI agar at 37 °C for 3 days. Equal volumes of all isolates were mixed to form the inoculum. An aliquot of the inoculum was taken for real-time PCR to determine strain ratios prior growth competition, and 500 µl of the mixture was used for the inoculation of 20 ml of BHI broth or BHI broth supplemented with mucin, cellulose, starch and pectin in 200 ml plastic bottles. All the supplements were used at 0.5 % concentration. After three-day incubation under the anaerobic conditions described above, 500 µl of culture was used for inoculation of new batches of nutrient broths. The subculturing was repeated three times so that together with the first culture, we obtained bacterial mass from 4 consecutive batches. The bacterial mass from each broth and subculture was collected from 1.5 ml of medium by 1 min centrifugation at 13,000 g and the pellets were frozen at -20 °C until use. By mass spectrometry were analyzed first and fourth batch and these bacterial strains: B. dorei An41, B. uniformis An67, B. xylanisolvens An109, B. ovatus An161, B. clarus An43, B. gallinaceum An269, B. caecigallinarum An406,  M. massiliensis An421, B. plebeius  An426 and B. coprocola An767.  Bacterial pellets were lysed in 1 ml of Tri Reagent and processed following the manufacturer’s recommendations (MRC). Obtained proteins were further processed by the filter aided sample preparation method and analysed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatograph (Dionex) connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed in three technical replicates using an EASY-Spray C18 separation column (15 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a two hour-long acetonitrile gradient. High resolution (30,000 FWHM at 400 m/z) MS spectra were acquired for the 390–1700 m/z interval in an Orbitrap analyser with an AGC target value of 1 × 106 ions and maximal injection time of 100 ms. Low resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired in Linear Ion Trap in a data-dependent manner and the top 10 precursors exceeding a threshold of 10,000 counts and having a charge state of +2 or +3 were isolated within a 2 Da window and fragmented using CID.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4). MS/MS spectra identification was performed by SEQUEST using isolate-specific protein database deduced from their known whole genomic sequence. Only peptides with a false discovery rate FDR ≤ 5 % were used for protein identification. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) counts were finally used as a quantitative parameter for each protein in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiota, Chicken, Bacteroides, Microbiome, Caecum

### Affiliations
Veterinary Research Institute
Hudcova 296/70
621 00 Brno
Czech Republic
Veterinary Research Institute Department:MICROBIOLOGY AND ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE Hudcova 296/70 621 00 Brno Czech Republic

### Submitter
Zuzana Seidlerova

### Lab Head
Dr doc. RNDr. RYCHLÍK Ivan, Ph.D.
Veterinary Research Institute Department:MICROBIOLOGY AND ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE Hudcova 296/70 621 00 Brno Czech Republic


