### Accession
PXD029338

### Title
Proteomic profiling of canine fibrosarcomas and adjacent unaffected peritumoral tissue using laser-capture microdissected FFPE tissue

### Description
Proteomic profiling of canine fibrosarcomas and adjacent unaffected peritumoral tissue using laser-capture microdissected FFPE tissue

### Sample Protocol
Fibrosarcoma and matched adjacent peritumoral tissue (skeletal muscle (SM), adipose tissue (AT) and connective tissue (CT)) were concurrently isolated using laser-capture microdissection from FFPE tissue of 30 canine FSA samples.  After rehydration, the excised tissue pieces, lysis and digestion of samples was performed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). Dried peptides were re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS-solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for LC-MS-Analysis on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Samples were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column and peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1400 m/z) at a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3 000 000, followed by HCD fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. Only precursors with intensity above 250 000 were selected for MS/MS. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
direct DIA analysis in Spectronaut v14.9.201124 with factory setting using the Uniprot Canis Lupus familiaris (downloaded 29.07.2019), carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and oxidation (M) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrosarcoma (FSA) are rare soft tissue tumors that display aggressive local behavior and invasive growth leading to high rates of tumor recurrence. While the low incidence in humans hampers detailed understanding of the disease, FSA are frequent in dogs and present potential models for the human condition. However, a lack of in-depth molecular characterization of FSA and unaffected peritumoral tissue (PTT) in both species impedes the translational potential of dogs. To address this shortcoming, we characterized canine FSA and matched skeletal muscle, adipose and connective tissue using laser-capture microdissection (LCM) and LC-MS/MS in 30 formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens. Principal component analysis of 3'530 different proteins detected across all samples clearly separates the four tissues, with several targets strongly differentiating tumor from all three PTTs. 25 proteins were exclusively found in tumor tissue in &#x2265;80% of cases. Among these, CD68 (a macrophage marker), Optineurin (OPTN), Nuclear receptor coactivator 5 (NCOA5), RAP1GDS1 (Rap1 GTPase-GDP dissociation stimulator 1) and Stromal cell derived factor 2 like 1 (SDF2L1) were present in &#x2265;90% of FSA. Protein expression across all FSA was highly homogeneous and characterized by MYC and TP53 signaling, hyperactive EIF2 and immune-related changes as well as strongly decreased oxidative phosphorylation and oxidative lipid metabolism. Finally, we demonstrate significant molecular homology between canine FSA and human soft-tissue sarcomas, emphasizing the relevance of studying canine FSA as a model for human FSA. In conclusion, we provide the first detailed overview of proteomic changes in FSA and surrounding PTT with relevance for the human disease.

### Keywords
Fibrosarcoma and matched adjacent peritumoral skeletal muscle, Canis lupus familiaris, Abel-free quantification, Adipose and connective tissue, Shotgun proteomics, Dia

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstr. 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Laura Kunz

### Lab Head
Dr Enni Markkanen
Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstr. 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


