### Accession
PXD017109

### Title
Identification of cGAS acetylation and phosphorylation

### Description
DNA derived from the genetic material of pathogens or from cellular DNA damage provides a molecular pattern that can be sensed by pattern-recognition receptors of the mammalian innate immune system. In recent years, the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) protein has been characterized as a primary cytosolic DNA sensor during infection with bacteria, DNA viruses, or retroviruses. While the role of cGAS in downstream immune signaling through STING-TBK1-IRF3 proteins is well-defined, regulatory mechanisms of cGAS activity, such as through post-translational modifications (PTMs), are still an active area of research. Here, we report a comprehensive characterization of cGAS phosphorylations and acetylations in three different cell types. Data-dependent proteomic analyses of immunoaffinity purified cGAS was performed in HEK293T cells under control and DNA-challenged conditions (N = 3 each) and human fibroblasts (HFF) cells under control and HSV-1 infected conditions (N = 4 each) to generate candidate cGAS PTM sites. Using parallel reaction monitoring, a total of 11 PTMs (4 phosphorylations and 7 acetylations) were validated in HEK293T, HFF, and THP-1 cells. Of these, 3 phosphorylations and 5 acetylations have not been previously identified. The functions of these modifications were by generating a series of mutants and measuring cGAS-dependent apoptotic and immune signaling activities.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purified cGAS was resolved by SDS-PAGE and processed by in-gel digestion. The region of the gel corresponding to either GFP-cGAS or untagged cGAS were excised and the in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin. Peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS stage tips, concentrated to near dryness by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 1% formic acid (4 µl). Desalted peptides (2 µl) were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS using a Top 15 acquisition strategy on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos-ETD (Velos) or Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (QE) mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray or Thermoflex ion source, respectively, and interfaced with Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLCs (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, peptides were separated by direct injection over an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column (2 μm; 25 cm x 75 μm, Velos) or self-packed Reprosil C18-AQ column (1.9 μm; 20 cm x 75 μm, QE) for 90 min (Velos) or 60 min (QE) at 250 nl min-1 with a reverse phase linear ACN gradient from 4 to 40% (Velos) or 5 to 32% (QE) solvent B (B: 97% ACN/0.1% formic acid/2.9% water, A: 0.1% formic/99.9% water). One cycle of data-dependent acquisition consisted of a precursor scan in the orbitrap at resolution of 30,000 (Velos) or 120,000 (QE), followed by MS/MS on the top 15 precursors using collision-induced dissociation (CID, Velos) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, QE). Fragment ions were detected in the ion trap (Velos) or orbitrap (QE).

### Data Protocol
Raw instrument files were processed through either Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific)/Scaffold 4.6.2 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR), or Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific), using default parameters with modifications, as noted. The processing of raw data files consisted of 1) extraction of MS/MS spectra and assignment of the monoisotopic precursor peak, 2) Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) assignment using SEQUEST HT (v1.3 or 1.17) against a database of human and herpesvirus protein sequences appended with common contaminants (UniProt Reference Proteome, 2015-09; 70,155 sequences or UniProt Swiss-Prot, 2016-04; 22, 213 sequences), 3) validation of primary search scores using Scaffold or Percolator (v3.0), and 4) scoring of phosphosites by phosphoRS (v3.1) or ptmRS (v2.2). For ion trap-CID spectra, SEQUEST was configured as follows: precursor and fragment tolerances, 10 ppm and 0.5 Da; full trypsin specificity with maximum of 2 missed cleavages; static modification of Cys carbamidomethyl; variable modification of STY phosphorylation. For matching of HCD spectra (Q Exactive HF), SEQUEST was configured as follows: precursor and fragment tolerances, 4 ppm and 0.02 Da; full trypsin specificity with maximum of 3 missed cleavages; static modification of carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications of deamidation (N), phosphorylation (STY), and protein terminus MetLoss+Acetyl. Scaffold and X! Tandem (ref) were used for post-processing of SEQUEST PSMs from Proteome Discoverer 1.4. X! Tandem re-search was performed in Scaffold with the subset database enabled. SEQUEST and X! Tandem PSMs were combined and assigned peptide probabilities using the Scaffold LFDR algorithm (ref). Percolator (ref) was used with default settings for post-processing of SEQUEST PSMs from Proteome Discoverer 2.2. For all workflows, PSM were filtered to a peptide false discovery rate of 1%, based on PSM score distributions for reverse database searches. Manual inspection of MS/MS spectra assigned to post-translationally modified cGAS peptides was performed using Scaffold or consensus workflows (PD 2.2). Only PTM sites with site localizations scores > 0.75 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) protein is a pattern-recognition receptor of the mammalian innate immune system that is recognized as a main cytosolic sensor of pathogenic or damaged DNA. cGAS DNA binding initiates catalytic production of the second messenger, cyclic GMP-AMP, which activates the STING-TBK1-IRF3 signaling axis to induce cytokine expression. Post-translational modification (PTM) has started to be recognized as a critical component of cGAS regulation, yet the extent of these modifications remains unclear. Here, we report the identification and functional analysis of cGAS phosphorylations and acetylations in several cell types under basal and immune-stimulated conditions. cGAS was enriched by immunoaffinity purification from human primary fibroblasts prior to and after infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), as well as from immune-stimulated STING-HEK293T cells. Six phosphorylations and eight acetylations were detected, of which eight PTMs were not previously documented. PTMs were validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry in fibroblasts, HEK293T cells, and THP-1 macrophage-like cells. Primary sequence and structural analysis of cGAS highlighted a subset of PTM sites with elevated surface accessibility and high evolutionary sequence conservation. To assess the functional relevance of each PTM, we generated a series of single-point cGAS mutations. Stable cell lines were constructed to express cGAS with amino acid substitutions that prevented phosphorylation (Ser-to-Ala) and acetylation (Lys-to-Arg) or that mimicked the modification state (Ser-to-Asp and Lys-to-Gln). cGAS-dependent apoptotic and immune signaling activities were then assessed for each mutation. Our results show that acetyl-mimic mutations at Lys384 and Lys414 inhibit the ability of cGAS to induce apoptosis. In contrast, the Lys198 acetyl-mimic mutation increased cGAS-dependent interferon signaling when compared with the unmodified charge-mimic. Moreover, targeted PRM quantification showed that Lys198 acetylation is decreased upon infections with two herpesviruses-HSV-1 and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), highlighting this residue as a regulatory point during virus infection.

### Keywords
Human, Immune response, Ptm, Affinity purification, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


