### Accession
PXD000269

### Title
Minimalistic sample processing

### Description
Proteomic sample preparation typically involves multi-step workflows that can potentially perturb the biological system under analysis. These datasets were used to demonstrate that the entire processing pipeline, from cell lysis through elution of purified peptides, can be performed in a single, enclosed volume. This in-StageTip sample preparation method largely eliminates contamination or losses and is extremely robust and scalable. Peptides can be eluted in several fractions or in one step for single-run proteomics. In one day of gradient time we obtained the largest proteomes for budding and fission yeast to date. Applying the in-StageTip method to quadruplicate measurements of a human cell line yielded copy number estimates for more than 9000 human proteins. Data Analysis: MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.10.12) and peak lists were searched either against the human Uniprot FASTA database version 2/25/2012 (81213 entries), against the S. cerevisiae Uniprot FASTA database version 2/25/2012 (6649 entries) or the SGD based S. cerevisiae Fasta database orf_trans.20100105 (5904 entries), or against the S. pombe Uniprot FASTA database version 4/2/2013 (5096 entries) or pompep FASTA database version 4/2/2013 (5031 entries) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by Andromeda search engine with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, and a maximum of 2 miscleavages allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation 20 ppm. Quantification of SILAC pairs was carried out by MaxQuant with standard settings and without the re-quantification option.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Yeast, Copy number, In-depth proteome

### Affiliations
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head


