### Accession
PXD007062

### Title
Proteome analyses define marked differences between N. caninum isolates throughout the tachyzoite lytic cycle

### Description
Neospora caninum has been recognised as the main cause of transmissible abortion in cattle worldwide. Although the pathogenesis of this disease remains largely unknown, different factors associated to both the host and the parasite have influence in the dynamics of the disease. Intraspecific variation in virulence have been widely shown among N. caninum isolates. However, the molecular basis that govern such variability and the outcome of the infection have not been well-established yet. This study aims to improve the knowledge on the factors governing intra-specific variation in virulence in N. caninum. Quantitative label free LC-MS/MS was used to investigate proteome differences between the high virulent isolate Nc-Spain7 and the low virulent isolate Nc-Spain1H through tachyzoite lytic cycle: at the end of invasion (12 hours), during exponential growth (36 hours) and at early egress (56 hours). The results showed the higher differences in abundance of proteins at invasion and egress, 77 and 62 proteins, respectively. At 36 h, during active parasite replication only 19 proteins were found differentially abundant between isolates. Microneme protein repertoire, involved in parasite invasion and egress, was more abundant in Nc-Spain1H isolate, which displays a lower invasion rate. Soluble effectors related to Toxoplasma gondii virulence (ROP and GRA), proteins of carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism and stress responses also showed different abundance between isolates. Differential expression analysis by RNAseq technology during tachyzoite egress from the host-cell (56 hours) was also performed showing an expression profile of genes associated with the bradyzoite stage the low virulent and low growing NcSpain1H isolate. The differences in proteome and RNA expression profiles between these two isolates reveal interesting insights into likely mechanisms involved in specific phenotypic traits and virulence in N. caninum.

### Sample Protocol
Tachyzoite pellets were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and RapiGestTM (Waters MS Technologies) for protein solubilisation, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodocetamida for trypsin digestion. Then, digests were analysed on LC-MS/MS system comprise of an Ultimate 3000 nano system coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reversed phase liquid chromatography was performed using the Ultimate 3000 nano system by a linear gradient of 5-40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis QI (version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics). Replicate runs were time-aligned using default settings and an auto-selected run as a reference. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis QI and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science) search engine and the database ToxoDB-26_Ncaninum LIV_Annotated Proteins (version 26, ToxoDB). Finally, protein abundance (iBAQ) was calculated as the sum of all the peak intensities (from Progenesis output) divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides for a given protein. The identified proteins were classified according to their parasite localisation and functionality according to Gene Ontology (GO) terms (annotated and predicted) on ToxoDB website (Gajria et al., 2007) for Nc-Liverpool isolate ("ToxoDB-26_NcaninumLIV_AnnotatedProteins), T.gondii syntenic homologues (version 26, ToxoDB) and previous reports (according Xia et al., 2008; Sheiner et al., 2011; Pollo-Oliveira et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tachyzoite, Virulence., Neospora, Lytic cycle

### Affiliations
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University.
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Dong Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Wastling
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University.


