### Accession
PXD001648

### Title
Characterization of the E.coli proteome and its modifications during growth and ethanol stress

### Description
We set out to provide a resource to the microbiology community especially with respect to systems biology based endeavors. To this end, we generated a comprehensive dataset monitoring the changes in protein expression, copy number, and post translational modifications in a systematic fashion during growth and ethanol stress in E.coli. We utilized high-resolution mass spectrometry combined with the Super-SILAC approach. In a single experiment, we have identified over 2,300 proteins, which represent approximately 88% of the estimated expressed proteome of E. coli and estimated protein copy numbers using the Intensity Based Absolute Quantitation (IBAQ). The dynamic range of protein expression spanned up to six orders of magnitude, with the highest protein copy per cell estimated at approximately 300,000. We focused on the proteome dynamics involved during stationary phase growth. A global up-regulation of proteins related to stress response was detected in later stages of growth. We observed the down-regulation of the methyl directed mismatch repair system containing MutS and MutL of E. coli growing in long term growth cultures, confirming that higher incidence of mutations presents an important mechanism in the increase in genetic diversity and stationary phase survival in E.coli. During ethanol stress, known markers such as alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase were induced, further validating the dataset. Finally, we performed unbiased protein modification detection and revealed changes of many known and unknown protein modifications in both experimental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The E. coli BW25113 strain was employed in all experiments conducted in this study. Each experiment was performed in two biological replicates. E. coli cells were grown in minimal M9 media containing stable isotope-labeled (heavy) L-Lysine-13C6,15N2 in batch culture. Aliquots of batch culture were removed at each specific growth stage (7 time points) in the growth experiment or collected at pre stress, 10 minutes, and 2 hours post ethanol stress in the ethanol stress experiment (Supplementary Fig.1). Separately, cells were grown in unlabeled (light) L-Lysine-12C6,14N2 at the exact seven different phases of growth or collected at 10 minutes and 2 hours post ethanol stress. The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4,000g for 10 min, media was removed and cells were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80˚C. The cell pellets were resuspended in the appropriate amount of YPER lysis buffer (ref) plus 50μg/ml lysozyme. Cell wall lysis was performed at 37 °C for 20 min , followed by brief sonication on ice (1 min at 40% amplitude) to remove DNA . Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000g for 30 min. The crude protein extract was precipitated via the methanol/chloroform approach and the proteins were resuspended in denaturation buffer containing 6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany). Protein extracts obtained from L-Lysine-13C6, 15N2 labelled cells were mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1 for growth, and 1:1:1 for ethanol stress to obtain the Super-SILAC standard for each respective experiment. Proteins labeled with L-Lysine-12C6,14N2 were then mixed in an equimolar ratio with the Super-SILAC standard, resulting in 7 protein samples per biological replicate. Crude protein extracts were digested via in-solution prior to peptide separation. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide, predigested with 1:100 (w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C and digested with 1:100 (w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C. The protein digest was acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1 % (v/v) to stop the protein digestion. In the case of samples fractionated using Off-Gel fractionation no TFA was added. For the intensity-based absolute quantification of proteins (iBAQ), the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard set (Sigma-Aldrich) was spiked in prior to digestion. Peptides were separated using the OFFGEL 3100 Fractionator (Agilent) following the experimental steps as previously reported (Hubner et al., 2008). Separation was performed on a 13 cm Immobiline DryStrip (GE Healthcare) with a PH separation gradient of 3-13 to a maximum of 50 μA for 20 kVh. Peptides were acidified using an acidic solution (30% ACN, 5% Acetic acid, 10%TFA), followed by a cleanup step using Stage-Tips loaded with C18 material (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Protein separation via SDS-PAGE followed by an In-Gel digestion was used for one biological replicate from each Super-SILAC experiment. Briefly, crude protein extracts were separated on a NuPage Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient gel (Invitrogen). After staining the gel with Coomassie Blue, protein lanes with cut into 12 equal slices. Coomassie Blue stain was subsequently removed from each gel slice via washing with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v). Protein slices were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 20 mM (ABC) for 45 min at 56°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide IAA in 20 mM ABC for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Gel slices were washed twice with 5 mM ABC, followed by a dehydration step by incubating with 100% ACN at room temperature. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako) (12.5 ng/μL in 20 mM ABC) at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were recovered from each gel slice using three consecutive extraction steps: I) 3% TFA in 30% ACN II) 0.5% acetic acid in 80% ACN III) 100% ACN. Resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips (Ishihama et al., 2006). All samples were measured on an EASY-nLC II nano-LC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software suite (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.2.2.9. Briefly,the SILAC labeling parameter was set to a multiplicity of Two (Lys0,Lys8). After all peptides were quantified, a database search was performed using the MaxQuant internal search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Full enzyme specificity was required, with an allowance of up to two missed cleavages. Lys-C was specified as the protease. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Escherichia coli K12 database (taxonomy reference: 833333), complete proteome set containing 4,303 protein entries, downloaded Dec 24, 2012. For absolute protein quantification analysis, MS/MS spectra were also searched against another FASTA file containing the Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (UPS2, Sigma) with a total of 48 entries. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. MS scan mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm. For CID fragmentation, the MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da, whereas for HCD fragmentation the mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm.Peptides and assembled proteins were searched at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A minimum of two quantified peptides per protein were required for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
We set out to provide a resource to the microbiology community especially with respect to systems biology based endeavors. To this end, we generated a comprehensive dataset monitoring the changes in protein expression, copy number, and post translational modifications in a systematic fashion during growth and ethanol stress in E. coli. We utilized high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) combined with the Super-SILAC approach. In a single experiment, we have identified over 2300 proteins, which represent approximately 88% of the estimated expressed proteome of E. coli and estimated protein copy numbers using the Intensity Based Absolute Quantitation (iBAQ). The dynamic range of protein expression spanned up to six orders of magnitude, with the highest protein copy per cell estimated at approximately 300,000. We focused on the proteome dynamics involved during stationary phase growth. A global up-regulation of proteins related to stress response was detected in later stages of growth. We observed the down-regulation of the methyl directed mismatch repair system containing MutS and MutL of E. coli growing in long term growth cultures, confirming that higher incidence of mutations presents an important mechanism in the increase in genetic diversity and stationary phase survival in E. coli. During ethanol stress, known markers such as alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase were induced, further validating the dataset. Finally, we performed unbiased protein modification detection and revealed changes of many known and unknown protein modifications in both experimental conditions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001648.

### Keywords
Super-silac, Quantitative proteomics, E.coli, Absolute quantitation, Stress response

### Affiliations
Protoeme Center Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, Germany
Proteome Center

### Submitter
Karsten Krug

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Protoeme Center Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, Germany


