### Accession
PXD001127

### Title
C-terminal Domain Small Phosphatase 1 and MAP kinase reciprocally control REST stability and neuronal differentiation.

### Description
The RE1 Silencing Transcription Factor (REST) in stem cells represses hundreds of genes essential to neuronal function.  During neurogenesis, REST is degraded in neural progenitors to promote subsequent elaboration of a mature neuronal phenotype.  Prior studies indicate that part of the degradation mechanism involves phosphorylation of two sites in the C-terminus of REST that require activity of the E3 ubiquitin ligase, bTrCP.  We identify a new proline-directed phosphorylation motif, at Serines 861/864 upstream of these sites, which is a substrate for the Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans Isomerase, Pin1, as well as the ERK1/2 kinases. Mutation at S861/864 stabilizes REST, as does inhibition of Pin1 activity.  Interestingly, we find that C-Terminal Domain Small Phosphatase1 (CTDSP1) is recruited by REST to neuronal genes, is present in REST immunocomplexes, dephosphorylates S861/864 and stabilizes REST.  Expression of a REST peptide containing S861/864 in neural progenitors inhibits terminal neuronal differentiation. Together with previous work indicating that both REST and CTDSP1 are expressed to high levels in stem cells and down regulated during neurogenesis, our results suggest that CTDSP1 activity stabilizes REST in stem cells, and that ERK dependent phosphorylation combined with Pin1 activity promotes REST degradation in neural progenitors.

### Sample Protocol
Ten 150mm plates of PC12 tet-on FLAG-REST cells were treated with 10mM MG132 for 5 h prior to immunoprecipitation with FLAG antibody (M2 agarose; Sigma). Samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA (iodoacetamide) and digested overnight with the following enzymatic conditions: Trypsin and GluC, GluC only, and GluC + Asp-N.

### Data Protocol
For analysis on the mass spectrometer each protein digest was analyzed by LC-MS using an Agilent 1100 series capillary LC system (Agilent Technolgies Inc, Santa Clara, CA) and an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).  Electrospray ionization was performed with an ion max source fitted with a 34 gauge metal needle (ThermoFisher, cat. no. 97144-20040) and 2.7 kV source voltage. Samples were applied at 20 µL/min to a trap cartridge (Michrom BioResources, Inc, Auburn, CA), and then switched onto a 0.5 x 250 mm Zorbax SB-C18 column with 5 mM particles (Agilent Technologies) using a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid, 7-30% acetonitrile gradient over 95 min, and 10 µL/min flow rate. Data-dependent collection of MS/MS spectra used the dynamic exclusion feature of the instrument’s control software (repeat count equal to 1, exclusion list size of 50, exclusion duration of 30 sec, and exclusion mass width of -1 to +4) to obtain MS/MS spectra of the three most abundant parent ions (minimum signal of 10,000) following each survey scan from m/z 400-2000. The tune file was configured with no averaging of microscans, a maximum MS1 inject time of 200 msec, a maximum MS2 inject time of 100 msec, and automatic gain control targets of 3 x 104 in MS1 mode and 1 x 104 in MS2 mode.

### Publication Abstract
The repressor element 1 (RE1) silencing transcription factor (REST) in stem cells represses hundreds of genes essential to neuronal function. During neurogenesis, REST is degraded in neural progenitors to promote subsequent elaboration of a mature neuronal phenotype. Prior studies indicate that part of the degradation mechanism involves phosphorylation of two sites in the C terminus of REST that require activity of beta-transducin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase, &#x3b2;TrCP. We identify a proline-directed phosphorylation motif, at serines 861/864 upstream of these sites, which is a substrate for the peptidylprolyl cis/trans isomerase, Pin1, as well as the ERK1/2 kinases. Mutation at S861/864 stabilizes REST, as does inhibition of Pin1 activity. Interestingly, we find that C-terminal domain small phosphatase 1 (CTDSP1), which is recruited by REST to neuronal genes, is present in REST immunocomplexes, dephosphorylates S861/864, and stabilizes REST. Expression of a REST peptide containing S861/864 in neural progenitors inhibits terminal neuronal differentiation. Together with previous work indicating that both REST and CTDSP1 are expressed to high levels in stem cells and down-regulated during neurogenesis, our results suggest that CTDSP1 activity stabilizes REST in stem cells and that ERK-dependent phosphorylation combined with Pin1 activity promotes REST degradation in neural progenitors.

### Keywords
Neuronal differentiation., Rest, Btrcp, Ctdsp1, Pin1, Re1 silencing transcription factor, Erk

### Affiliations
OHSU
Vollum Inst., OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Gail Mandel
Vollum Inst., OHSU


