### Accession
PXD011902

### Title
Proteomics analysis of EndoC-betaH1 cells treated with IL-1b and IFN-g

### Description
EndoC-betaH1 cells were treated with IL-1b and IFN-g for 48h, digested with trypsin, multiplexed with TMT-10, fractionated by high pH reverse-phase chromatography and analyzed by tandem LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were submitted to Metabolite, Protein and Lipid Extraction (MPLEx), as previously described (Nakayasu et al., 2016 - PMID: 27822525 ). Treated and control EndoC cells were resuspended in milliQ water, and 5 volumes of 2:1 (v:v) chloroform:methanol solution was added. The samples were then incubated on ice for 5 min, vigorously vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4 ºC for 10 min. The protein disk was collected and washed by adding cold (-20 ºC) methanol and centrifuging at the same conditions, while the lipid and metabolite fractions were isolated and saved for future analyses. Protein pellets were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 8 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol. After incubating for 1 h at 37 ºC with shaking at 800 rpm, 400 mM iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM, and the mixture incubated for another hour at the same conditions. The reaction mixture was then diluted 8 folds with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 1 M CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. Proteins were digested for 5 h at 37 ºC using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. Digested peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using C18 cartridges (Discovery, 50 mg, Sulpelco) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were then labeled and sorted into 2 sets of tandem mass tags (TMT-10plex, ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer's recommendations and desalted again using C18 cartridges. Labeled peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions using high-pH reversed phase chromatography, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Wang et al., 2011 - PMID: 21500348). Peptides were analyzed on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC system with a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out with a gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) both containing 0.1% formic acid (1-8% B in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min). Eluting peptides were directly analyzed by nanoelectrospray ionization and full-MS scans were collected over 400–2000 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 at 400 m/z. The top 12 most intense parent ions were submitted to high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z), before being dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were converted to DTA peak lists using Decon2LS_V2 (Mayampurath et al., 2008 - PMID: 18304935)using default parameters. MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014 - PMID: 25358478) was then used to search peptide spectra against islet protein sequences based on the RNAseq data from a previous study (Eizirik et al., 2012 - PMID: 22412385) deposited in RefSeq and supplemented with keratin sequences (32,780 total protein sequences). As searching parameters, the parent ion mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, tryptic digestion in at least one of the termini was considered, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal/lysine TMT addition were searched as static modifications, whereas methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Spectral-peptide matches were first filtered using a MSGF probability ≤ 1.0E −9, and then further filtered at protein level with a probability ≤ 1.0E −10, resulting in <1% false-discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta cells, Cytokines, Type 1 diabetes, Cell death, Proteomics, Tmt-10

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Metz
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


