### Accession
PXD003854

### Title
Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analyses of Yeast Reveal the Global Cellular Response to Sphingolipid Depletion

### Description
Sphingolipids are essential components of eukaryotic cells with important functions in membrane biology and cellular signaling. Their levels are tightly controlled and coordinated with the abundance of other membrane lipids. How sphingolipid homeostasis is achieved is not yet well understood. Studies performed primarily in yeast showed that the phosphorylation states of several enzymes and regulators of sphingolipid synthesis are important, although a global understanding for such regulation is lacking. Here, we used high-resolution mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics, in combination with data from a chemical genetic screen, to analyze the cellular response to sphingolipid synthesis inhibition. Our dataset reveals that changes in protein phosphorylation, rather than protein abundance, dominate the response to blocking sphingolipid synthesis. We identified Ypk1 signaling as a major pathway that is activated under these conditions, and we confirmed and identified Ypk1 targets. We also revealed key aspects of the cellular response to sphingolipid deprivation, including nodes that intersect with sterol metabolism and modification of lipid transport. Our data provide a rich resource for on-going mechanistic studies of key elements of the cellular response to the depletion of sphingolipid levels and the maintenance of sphingolipid homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Reversed-phase chromatography was performed on a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) through a nano-electrospray ion source. 5 µl Peptides per sample were separated on a 50 cm column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) with an inner diameter of 75 μm packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Baden-Würtemberg, Germany). Peptides were eluted from with a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 5%–27% in 0.1% formic acid for 240 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was kept at 45 °C by an oven (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Baden-Württemberg, Germany) with a Peltier element. Eluted peptides from the column were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired on the Q Exactive HF in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 20 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z = 200 (300–1,650 m/z). The ten most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 1.4 Th and fragmented with higher energy collision dissociation (20) with normalized collision energies of 27. Target values for MS/MS were set at 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z = 200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set at 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by the MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 software package with its integrated ANDROMEDA search algorithms [31]. Peak lists were searched against the UNIPROT database for S. cerevisiae with common contaminants added. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho (STY) as variable modifications, and “match between runs” (MBR) was enabled with a matching time window of 0.5 min. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for MS peaks and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Maximum missed cleavages were 2. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. Maximum false discovery rates were 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. The minimum required peptide length was six residues. All calculations and plots were done with the R software package. Significances were calculated according to significance A [32].

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids are essential components of eukaryotic cells with important functions in membrane biology and cellular signaling. Their levels are tightly controlled and coordinated with the abundance of other membrane lipids. How sphingolipid homeostasis is achieved is not yet well understood. Studies performed primarily in yeast showed that the phosphorylation states of several enzymes and regulators of sphingolipid synthesis are important, although a global understanding for such regulation is lacking. Here, we used high-resolution MS-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics to analyze the cellular response to sphingolipid synthesis inhibition. Our dataset reveals that changes in protein phosphorylation, rather than protein abundance, dominate the response to blocking sphingolipid synthesis. We identified Ypk signaling as a pathway likely to be activated under these conditions, and we identified potential Ypk1 target proteins. Our data provide a rich resource for on-going mechanistic studies of key elements of the cellular response to the depletion of sphingolipid levels and the maintenance of sphingolipid homeostasis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003854 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD003854).

### Keywords
Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Sphingolipid depletion, Qexactive hf

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health
Tobias C. Walther Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases Harvard School of Public Health 655 Huntington Avenue Boston, MA 02115  AFFILIATION: 1 Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
romain christiano

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias C Walther
Tobias C. Walther Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases Harvard School of Public Health 655 Huntington Avenue Boston, MA 02115  AFFILIATION: 1 Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA


