### Accession
PXD012561

### Title
Progressive Changes in Human Follicular Fluid Composition over the Course of Ovulation: Quantitative Proteomic Analyses.

### Description
The composition of follicular fluid reflects crucial paracrine signalling between granulosa- and theca cells and the oocyte. Dynamic changes in the protein composition of human follicular fluid across multiple time points in the period where final meiotic maturation and release of the oocyte take place are previously undescribed.  Twenty-five women undergoing IVF- or ICSI treatment in a standard antagonist protocol with agonist ovulation trigger were included in this prospective cohort study. From each patient one follicle was aspirated by transvaginal ultrasound guided puncture at one of five specific time points either before ovulation induction (T=0) or 12-, 17-, 32- or 36 hours after ovulation induction (five patients/time point). Proteomics was carried out by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. In total, 400 proteins were identified (FDR<0.05) and 30 were significantly regulated across time points (one-way ANOVA, adjusted p<0.05). Compared to compiled human plasma proteome sets, 47 proteins were unique to follicular fluid. Enriched biological functions among differentially expressed proteins included immune functions, wound healing and functions related to blood coagulation (FDR<0.02). The most profound changes occurred shortly after ovulation induction. We confirmed parallel protein expression to known granulosa cell mRNA changes and described many hitherto unknown protein expression profiles during ovulation. Thus, the study endorsed important biological functions of some proteins and suggested additional proteins, which may be crucial to intrafollicular signalling and oocyte competence that should be further investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Sample order was randomized before starting sample preparation. Quantification of total protein concentration in the samples was carried out by the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) assay method (Smith et al., 1985). Samples (100 µg of total protein per sample) were dissolved in 1.6% of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM of Ambic. The disulfide bonds were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated 1h at 37°C. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetic acid (IAA) to a final concentration of 25 mM, and the reaction proceeded for an additional 30 min at room temperature in darkness. The SDC was diluted to 0.5% prior to trypsin digestion (enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio of 1/100) for 16h at 37°C. The SDC was precipitated by adding 20% of formic acid to the sample before filtering the samples through a polypropylene filter plate with hydrophilic PVDF membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm, Porvair Filtration Group, Fareham, United Kingdom). LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim1 PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 µm, 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 25 cm, 75 µm i.d., PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) using a 150 min acetonitrile (ACN) gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 45°C. We selected the 20 most intense ions for fragmentation, full MS scans at m/z 375-1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3×106 and intensity (IT) of 100 ms, fragmentation in high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision cell with a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 28 and MS/MS spectra acquisition in the Orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200) with a maximum IT of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis For peptide and protein identification, we used Proteome Discoverer v 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA). Peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProt human database (http://www.uniprot.org) integrated into Proteome Discoverer. The search was performed with the following parameters applied: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, 10 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance. Up to one missed cleavage for tryptic peptides was allowed. The filters used were high (FDR<0.01) and medium confidence (FDR<0.05) at peptide and protein level, respectively, according to the Proteome Discoverer software.  Statistical analysis Baseline descriptive parameters were compared across the groups with the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Bonferroni post hoc test, using SPSS® (v25, IBM, NY, USA). The outputs from Protein Discoverer were imported into R software (R/RStudio, Boston, USA, 2016) (Team R Core, 2016; Team Rstudio, 2016) and Perseus (v1.6.0.2, Munich, Germany) (Tyanova et al., 2016). For the differential expression analysis, only proteins with at least three out of five measured were considered, valid values at one or more time points. Missing values were replaced by a data imputation algorithm (Perseus, width = 0.3, downshift = 1.8, random numbers from a normal distribution), which assigned signal values under the assumption that missing values were biased toward the lower detection limit of the MS measurement. The signal intensities were normalized by log2 transformation and standardised by subtracting the median. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were determined by a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) detecting overall differences, and Tukey HSD post hoc test detecting differences between individual time points. An adjusted p-value<0.05 following the Tukey HSD test was considered significant. Principal Component Analysis (PCA), hierarchical clustering (distance: “Euclidean”; linkage method: “complete”) and heat map were performed to visualise the behaviour of DEPs across time points. Functional enrichment analysis was performed using the FunRich tool (v.3.1.3) (Pathan et al., 2015) to identify the major differences in the biological processes between total protein content, proteins unique to FF and DEPs. The String database (String DB) (v10.5, www.string.org) (Szklarczyk et al., 2017) was used to identify protein interactions and enriched biological functions among the DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
Follicular fluid (FF) acts as a vehicle for paracrine signalling between somatic cells of the follicle and the oocyte. To investigate changes in the protein composition of FF during ovulation, we conducted a prospective cohort study including 25 women undergoing fertility treatment. Follicular fluid was aspirated either before or 12, 17, 32 or 36&#x202f;h after induction of ovulation (five patients per time point). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify FF proteins. In total, 400 proteins were identified and the levels of 40 proteins changed significantly across ovulation, evaluated by analysis of covariance (adjusted p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05) and on-off expression patterns. The majority peaked after 12-17&#x202f;h, e.g., AREG (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.0001), TNFAIP6 (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.0001), and LDHB (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.0316), while some increased to peak after 36&#x202f;h e.g., ACPP (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.0001), TIMP1 (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.0001) and SERPINE1 (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.0002). Collectively, this study highlights proteins and pathways of importance for ovulation and oocyte competence in humans.

### Keywords
Human, Proteome, Follicular fluid, Ovulation, Oocyte maturation

### Affiliations
Deputy head of department at Department of Translational Medicine. Lund University. Principal investigator at CEBMMS PI. Professor at Clinical Chemistry, Malmö Professor at Clinical Protein Science and Imaging Professor at Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
Lund university

### Submitter
Indira Pla Parada

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malm
Deputy head of department at Department of Translational Medicine. Lund University. Principal investigator at CEBMMS PI. Professor at Clinical Chemistry, Malmö Professor at Clinical Protein Science and Imaging Professor at Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund


