### Accession
PXD006834

### Title
Transposon sequencing uncovers an essential regulatory function of phosphoribulokinase for methylotrophy

### Description
Methylotrophy is the ability of organisms to grow at the expense of reduced one-carbon compounds such as methanol or methane. Here, we used transposon sequencing combining hyper-saturated transposon mutagenesis with high-throughput sequencing to define the essential methylotrophy genome of Methylobacterium extorquens PA1, a model methylotroph. To distinguish genomic regions required for growth only on methanol from general required genes, we contrasted growth on methanol with growth on succinate, a non-methylotrophic reference substrate. About 500'000 insertions were mapped for each condition, resulting in a median insertion distance of 5 base pairs. We identified 147 genes and 76 genes as specific for growth on methanol and succinate, respectively, and a set of 590 genes as required under both growth conditions. For the integration of metabolic functions, we reconstructed a genome-scale metabolic model and performed in silico essentiality analysis. In total, the approach uncovered 95 previously not described genes as crucial for methylotrophy, including genes involved in respiration, carbon metabolism, transport, and regulation. Strikingly, regardless of the absence of the Calvin cycle in the methylotroph, the screen led to the identification of the gene for phosphoribulokinase as essential during growth on methanol but not on succinate. Genetic experiments in addition to metabolomics and proteomics revealed that phosphoribulokinase serves a key regulatory function. Our data support a model according to which ribulose-1,5 bisphosphate is an essential metabolite that induces a transcriptional regulator driving one-carbon assimilation.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cell pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M Urea and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Bacterial cells were lysed with a combination of indirect sonication (2 x 1 min and 1 x 30 s, 100% amplitude, 0.8 cycle time) in a VialTweeter (HIFU, Hielscher) and bead beating for 15 min at 30 Hz (TissueLyser II, QIAGEN) using 0.1 mm silica beads. Insoluble parts were removed by centrifugation using SPIN module recovery tubes at 13'000 g for 15 min at 4°C and protein concentration of supernatant was determined using BCA assay kit according to manufactures instructions. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 5 mM tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubation for 30 min at 37°C and cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubation for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were subsequently diluted 1:5 with freshly prepared 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to achieve an urea concentration below 2 M. Sequencing grade modified trypsin was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with shaking at 300 rpm. Subsequently, trypsin was inactivated by addition of 1% formic acid and incubation at 95°C for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 20000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak Vac C18 reversed phase columns, pre-washed with 100% methanol. For the C18 clean up the columns were activated using buffer A containing 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA and equilibrated with buffer B containing 3% ACN and 0.1% FA. After careful loading of samples, columns were washed 4 times using buffer B before samples were eluted by gravity flow with buffer C containing 50% ACN and 0.1% FA. Eluted samples were dried under vacuum and re-solubilized in 3% ACN and 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 0.1-1.0 mg/ml. To create an artificial alignment reference that contains the most feature information, equal amounts of all samples were pooled. Finally, iRT peptides were added to each sample. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis of peptide samples was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatographic separation was performed using an ACN/water solvent system containing two channels with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for channel A and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 3 μL of peptides was loaded on an EASY-Spray C18 LC column (75 μm × 500 mm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) heated to 50°C and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 2% to 30% B in 115 min, 47% B in 4 min, and 98% B in 10 min. The mass spectrometer was configured to acquire mass spectra in data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1700 m/z and a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x 10E6. HCD peptide fragments (isolation window 2 m/z) were obtained using a normalized collision energy of 25 with an AGC target value of 5 x 10E4 at 35000 resolution. To avoid multiple scans of dominant ions, dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Sample measurements were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10124 and 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
Label-Free Protein Quantification and Protein Identification. The acquired raw MS files were loaded into the commercial software package Progenesis LCMS. Data were loaded using the option High Mass Accuracy Instrument. Automatic alignment was performed using the run containing the most features, automatically chosen by Progenesis. In the aligning step, 3−5 vectors along the retention time gradient were manually seeded to give the automatic alignment a good starting point. From each Progenesis peptide ion (default sensitivity in peak picking) a maximum of the top five tandem mass spectra were exported using the charge deconvolution and deisotoping option and a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The Mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched using the Mascot Server against a forward and reversed protein sequence database containing the 4829 annotated proteins of M. extorquens PA1 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_010172.1) concatenated with 6721 yeast proteins, 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants, and the 11 iRT peptides. Parameters for precursor tolerance and fragment ion tolerance were set to ±10 ppm and ±0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme, and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of Met was set as variable. The Mascot results were loaded into Scaffold using 5% peptide and 10% protein false discovery rate (FDR). The Scaffold Spectrum Report was exported and imported back into Progenesis LCMS. Normalization was performed using all proteins except for Prk (WP_012252675.1), which was knocked out or overexpressed in the different conditions. For quantification, all proteins identified with at least two unique peptide ions were assessed. A false discovery rate on quantified proteins was estimated at 0.16%. Proteins were grouped with Progenesis and the normalized abundance from the three most abundant peptide ions (relative quantification using Hi-N with N=3) from the same protein group were averaged together individually for each sample. This generates the normalized quantitative protein abundance. For statistical testing, a One-way ANOVA was applied on the normalized protein abundance. The cutoffs for significant regulation were p<0.05 and a fold-change larger than 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Methylotrophy is the ability of organisms to grow at the expense of reduced one-carbon compounds, such as methanol or methane. Here, we used transposon sequencing combining hyper-saturated transposon mutagenesis with high-throughput sequencing to define the essential methylotrophy genome of Methylobacterium extorquens PA1, a model methylotroph. To distinguish genomic regions required for growth only on methanol from general required genes, we contrasted growth on methanol with growth on succinate, a non-methylotrophic reference substrate. About 500,000 insertions were mapped for each condition, resulting in a median insertion distance of five base pairs. We identified 147 genes and 76 genes as specific for growth on methanol and succinate, respectively, and a set of 590 genes as required under both growth conditions. For the integration of metabolic functions, we reconstructed a genome-scale metabolic model and performed in&#xa0;silico essentiality analysis. In total, the approach uncovered 95 genes not previously described as crucial for methylotrophy, including genes involved in respiration, carbon metabolism, transport, and regulation. Strikingly, regardless of the absence of the Calvin cycle in the methylotroph, the screen led to the identification of the gene for phosphoribulokinase as essential during growth on methanol, but not during growth on succinate. Genetic experiments in addition to metabolomics and proteomics revealed that phosphoribulokinase serves a key regulatory function. Our data support a model according to which ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate is an essential metabolite that induces a transcriptional regulator driving one-carbon assimilation.

### Keywords
Methylobacterium extorquens pa1, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lucas Hemmerle

### Lab Head
Dr Julia A. Vorholt
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


