### Accession
PXD002426

### Title
Quantitative lipoproteomics in Clostridium difficile reveals a role for lipoproteins in sporulation

### Description
Bacterial lipoproteins are surface exposed, anchored to the membrane by S diacylglyceryl modification of the N-terminal cysteine thiol. They play important roles in many essential cellular processes including, in bacterial pathogens, at the host-pathogen interface. Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive anaerobe that causes severe gastrointestinal disease. Its lipoproteome remains poorly characterized, but is likely to be important in colonization of the host and in transmission of infection. This dataset utilised metabolic tagging with alkyne-tagged lipid analogues, followed by click ligation to biotin and affintiy enrichment, in combination with diemthyl albelling based quantitative proteomics to profile protein lipidation across diverse C. difficile strains. Additionally, the lipoproteomes of mutants inactivated in specific components of the lipoprotein biogenesis pathway and a mutant in the spo0A gene are included. For all strains a complementary global proteome is provided, split into soluble and insoluble fractions and quantifed by dimethyl labelling.

### Sample Protocol
Alkyne-tagged myristic acid labelled lipoproteome samples (200 ug of protein) were pre-precipitated to deplete LTAs, ligated to a biotin containing capture reagent by click chemistry and affinity enriched on NeutrAvidin beads. Following stringent washing the samples were reduced (10 mM DTT in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate), washed, alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide/ 50 mM AMBIC), washed and digested with trypsin (1 ug) at 37 C overnight. Digested peptides were removed from the beads and desalted and dimethyl labelled on StageTips, according to Li, N.; et al, Nat Protoc 2013, 8 (6), 1155-68. Global proteome samples were reduced (5 mM DTT), alkylated (5 mM Iodoactamide) and digested (1 ug trypsin, 37 C overnight) in solution (50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate), then desalted and dimethyl labelled on StageTips.  In both cases, dimethyl labelled peptides were mixed 1:1 or 1:1:1 and dried under reduced pressure. The peptides were resuspended in 0.5% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. the peptide mixtures separated on an Easy-Nano LC1000 (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column and an EASY-Spray 50 cm x 75 µm Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) eluting running a gradient of 2 % Acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA, to 98 % Acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA in water at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1, over 2 hours. All solvents used were LCMS grade; a typical injection volume of 2 to 3 µL of samples was used for samples prepared by on-bead digest, from 200 µg of protein pre-pull down, or 1 µL for a digest of 25 µg of lysate. The nano-LC was connected directly to a Q Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for MS/MS analysis, via a heated EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) operated at a spray voltage of 1.7 kV. The Q Exactive was run in positive ion mode, using data dependant (Top 10) acquisition with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z. Ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25 W; the ion target value was set to 106 for MS and 105 for MS/MS. The nano-LC-MS/MS was set up, calibrated and controlled by Tune and Xcalibur used to load samples (both Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Thermo .RAW files generated by Xcalibur were processed using MaxQuant 1.3.0.519, searching against the corresponding database using the Andromeda search engine20. All databases to search against were created by extracting the complete proteome of the relevant C. difficile strain from Uniprot; common contaminants were included in the search. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications and cysteine S-carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The multiplicity and labels were set depending on the experiment, allowing a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide. A total of 5 modifications per peptide, 2 missed cleavages and a maximum charge of +7 was allowed. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites was used for identification; the minimum peptide length allowed was 7 amino acids. For protein identification the minimum number of peptides and razor + unique peptides allowed was set to 1. Razor peptides are non-unique peptides which are assigned to a group of proteins, rather than to an individual protein; both razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. All other parameters were left as pre-set; when possible (for biological or technical repeats) the match between runs feature was selected, with a time window of 2 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial lipoproteins are surface exposed, anchored to the membrane by S-diacylglyceryl modification of the N-terminal cysteine thiol. They play important roles in many essential cellular processes and in bacterial pathogenesis. For example, Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive anaerobe that causes severe gastrointestinal disease; however, its lipoproteome remains poorly characterized. Here we describe the application of metabolic tagging with alkyne-tagged lipid analogs, in combination with quantitative proteomics, to profile protein lipidation across diverse C.&#xa0;difficile strains and on inactivation of specific components of the lipoprotein biogenesis pathway. These studies provide the first comprehensive map of the C.&#xa0;difficile lipoproteome, demonstrate the existence of two active lipoprotein signal peptidases, and provide insights into lipoprotein function, implicating the lipoproteome in transmission of this pathogen.

### Keywords
630, Clostridium difficile, Ynmyr, Lipoproteome, Peptoclostridium difficile, R20291

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Thomas Charlton

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Imperial College London, United Kingdom


