### Accession
PXD017267

### Title
Ribosomal and tRNA Biogenesis Interact to Control Hypoxic Injury and Translation

### Description
Protein translation is an essential cellular process, but paradoxically, it can also promote aging and other stresses. In a screen for mutations that protect C. elegans from hypoxic stress, we isolated multiple genes that impact translation, including a ribosomal RNA helicase gene, ddx-52, tRNA biosynthesis genes, and a gene controlling amino acid availability. To better define the mechanisms whereby these genes control hypoxic injury, we performed a second screen for genetic suppressors of the ddx-52(lf) phenotypes. This screen identified multiple genes involved in ribosome biogenesis. Surprisingly, the suppressor mutations were able to restore normal hypoxic sensitivity and protein synthesis to the tRNA biosynthesis mutants, but not to the mutant reducing amino acid uptake. Proteomic characterization of the mutants demonstrated that reduced tRNA biosynthetic activity produces a corresponding reduction in ribosomal structural subunits. Our study uncovers an uncharacterized regulatory interaction between ribosomal biogenesis and tRNA abundance controlling translation and hypoxic survival. A proteomic analysis of a threonyl-tRNA synthetase mutant with and without the ribosomal biogenesis suppressors revealed an uncharacterized feedback mechanism whereby disruption of tRNA aminoacylation results in a corresponding reduction in ribosomal subunits, thereby explaining the ability of enhanced ribosomal biogenesis to suppress reduced tRNA aminoacylation.

### Sample Protocol
Gravid worms were washed and resuspended in 2 ml of M9 and then treated with 1ml Alkaline Hypochlorite Solution (per volume: 60% bleach and 40% 4M NaOH) for ~ 4 minutes. Eggs were washed with M9 and transferred to Agarose plates seeded with ET505 bacteria (CGSC, Yale). ET505 is defective in the synthesis of Lysine. To grow ET505 we used lysine drop-out EZ rich defined medium (Teknova) supplemented with tetracycline (10 μg/ml) and 0.4 mM lysine. To label ET505 bacteria with heavy lysine, we grew it in the presence of 0.4 mM L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6 (Thermo). Full labeling of ET505 was assessed by LC/MS/MS analysis of proteome digested with Endoproteinase LysC (New England Biolabs). Worms were transferred from light lysine to heavy lysine plates by washing the worms off with M9. For protein extraction, L4 stage worms were washed 2x with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and then resuspend in 8M Urea. Samples were sonicated, and then TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride) was added to 5 mM final concentration and incubated at room temp for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was then added to 10 mM final concentration and incubated at room temp for 30 min. Samples were then diluted 10x with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. Protein concentration was quantified with BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). 100 μg of protein lysate was digested with 2 mg of LysC overnight at 37°C.  The digest was desalted with C18 Sep-Pak solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by a Thermo Easy-nanoLC coupled with Thermo Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Approximate 1 µg of sample was loaded onto an in-house fabricated 40 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm diameter, 100 Å pore size MichromMagic beads), and separated with a 90 min 10–30% B gradient (flow rate : 300 nL/min, A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at temperate of 40°C. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition method was applied for MS data acquisition using following parameters: full MS scan resolution 70 k, AGC target 1e6, maximum ion injection time 100 mS, scan range 400~2000 m/z; MS/MS scan resolution 17.5 k, AGC target 5e4, maximum ion injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, HCD NCE 35, scan range 200~ 2000 m/z. Data dependent setting parameter settings were loop count 20, underfill ratio 1%, intensity threshold 5e3, dynamic exclusion 10 sec. Two technical replicates were carried out for each sample.    For TMT labeling, 100 µg protein lysates were reduced, alkylated, digested, and desalted using the same procedures described above except that trypsin was used as digestion enzyme.  The speed vacuum dried tryptic digests were reconstituted in 20 µL 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5).  Four TMT labels (126, 128, 129, and 131, 800 µg each) from a TMT 6-plex kit (ThermoFisher) were dissolved in 40 uL anhydrous ACN.  100 µg TMT label was added to each digest at a TMT label-to-peptide ratio of 1:1. The TMT-digest mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h, and the labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 5% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%.  The labeling mixture was speed vacuumed to dryness and reconstituted in 0.1% FA and stored at -80°C for later LC/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
Database search for protein identification: The MS raw files were searched against a target-decoy proteome database of C. elegans downloaded from Uniprot (53758 entries including both targets and decoys) using Comet (version 2018.01) with the following parameters: precursor peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, allowing for 0, + 1, + 2, or +3 13C offsets; fragment ion mass tolerance 0.02 Da; static modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da) and fixed modification of peptide N-termini and lysines of 229.162932 Da only for TMT data search; variable modifications, methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da), lysine 13C isotope labeling 6.020129 Da only for SILAC data search; digestion enzyme, Lys-C for SILAC and LFQ data, trypsin for TMT data. Peptide spectra matches (PSMs) from two technical replicates were compiled by PeptideProphet, and filtered with 0.5% PSM false discovery rate. Protein half-life measurements by SILAC labeling: MasschroQ (version 2.2.12) was applied for retention time alignment of technical replicates and extraction of peak areas of precursor ions of light peptides and their co-eluting heavy counterparts. For each PSM, the log transformed heavy labeling fraction (LTHLF), express as -In(1-FH), where FH=heavy peak area/(light peak area + heavy peak area) was calculated. Within each biological replicate, the LTHLF measured for PSMs belonging to the same protein were grouped, and the median LTHLF after outlier removal was assigned as the LTHLF for this protein at specific time point. The protein turnover rate was estimated from the slope of linear regression of LTHLF versus SILAC labeling time (0 hr, 12 hr, 24 hr), and the results were filtered by correlation coefficient threshold of 0.9. The protein half-life was calculated by Ln2 divided by the slope of linear regression. LFQ analysis: MasschroQ (version 2.2.12) was employed to conduct LC retention time alignment and peak area extraction for all the identified peptides. Within each biological replicate, technical replicates from LC-MS runs of all four strains were grouped for retention time alignment. The peak areas under curves from extracted ion chromatograms were integrated for all input PSMs with 20 ppm mass tolerance of precursor ion. Within each biological replicate, the output peak area values from two technical replicates of each strain were averaged and converted to log2(mutant/WT) for each PSM. All the measured log2 ratios from PSMs belonging to one protein were grouped, and the median ratio after outlier rejection was assigned as the protein expression ratio measured for this biological replicate. Discrepancy of protein lysate amount used for digestion and instrument performance variation were normalized by the median log2(mutant/WT) ratio of all quantified proteins within each biological replicate.  TMT analysis: Only those proteins that were identified with minimal two unique peptides and FDR < 1% were selected for quantifications.  Relative abundances of proteins were calculated based on the mean values of isotope impurity-corrected reporter ion intensities (I126, I128, I129, and I131) of all peptides using Libra module implemented in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
The translation machinery is composed of a myriad of proteins and RNAs whose levels must be coordinated to efficiently produce proteins without wasting energy or substrate. However, protein synthesis is clearly not always perfectly tuned to its environment, as disruption of translation machinery components can lengthen lifespan and stress survival. While much has been learned from bacteria and yeast about translational regulation, much less is known in metazoans. In a screen for mutations protecting C.&#xa0;elegans from hypoxic stress, we isolated multiple genes impacting protein synthesis: a ribosomal RNA helicase gene, tRNA biosynthesis genes, and a gene controlling amino acid availability. To define better the mechanisms by which these genes impact protein synthesis, we performed a second screen for suppressors of the conditional developmental arrest phenotype of the RNA helicase mutant and identified genes involved in ribosome biogenesis. Surprisingly, these suppressor mutations restored normal hypoxic sensitivity and protein synthesis to the tRNA biogenesis mutants, but not to the mutant reducing amino acid uptake. Proteomic analysis demonstrated that reduced tRNA biosynthetic activity produces a selective homeostatic reduction in ribosomal subunits, thereby offering a mechanism for the suppression results. Our study uncovers an unrecognized higher-order-translation regulatory mechanism in a metazoan whereby ribosome biogenesis genes communicate with genes controlling tRNA abundance matching the global rate of protein synthesis with available resources.

### Keywords
Ribosomal biogenesis, Hypoxic sensitivity, Silac analysis of protein synthesis rate, Lfq and tmt quantification

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA

### Submitter
Xiaoting Tang

### Lab Head
Dr James E Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA


