### Accession
PXD002528

### Title
Inferior Temporal Gyrus in Human Ageing: a Quantitative Protein Profiling Work based on Chinese Human Brain Bank

### Description
The temporal lobe is the cerebral cortex with critical function. The superior and middle gyrus of temporal lobe have been well studied, however, present perceptions on inferior temporal gyrus remains limited. The understanding of age-related protein profile change in human inferior temporal gyrus has not yet been well established.  This 3-plex TMT labeled proteomic study is performed based on the human brain bank at the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College. Age distribution of the donors ranges from 22 to 90 years old, and were assigned to three age groups: 20-50, 50-70, and 70-90 years of death age. In this ageing cohort, no neurodegenerative disorders or major stroke events were identified via standard neuropathological classification. Proteomics and bioinformatics strategies were applied to identify the perturbations of protein expression and associated pathways. Among all the ITG samples, 3113 proteins were isolated, with 37 proteins upregulated and 21 proteins downregulated.

### Sample Protocol
Temporal lobes as part of the human postmortem tissue were prepared under modified standard autopsy procedures and stored under -80 °C cryopreservation ready for use. Then the temporal tissue was homogenized with ice-cold homogenization buffer composed of 8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× cocktail, and 1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min at 12,000 rpm removed cell debris, and the clarified supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5 ml tube. Determine the protein concentration via Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) under standard instructions of the manufacturer. Since equal amounts of 25 μg protein were required from the clarified supernatants, different volumes of sample should be obtained according to respective protein concentrations. On the basis of the grouping method (via death age) introduced above, all the sample are divided into 3 groups (group A: aged 20-50, group B: aged 50-70, and group C: 70-90). Samples in the same group were mixed together to yield three pooled extracts, each had a total of 100 μg proteins amount.

### Data Protocol
2.4 TMT labeling At this stage, treated the extracts with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 55 °C, then 25 mM IAA for 30 min (in dark) at room temperature, then digested them with 1:100 w/w endopeptidase Lys-C overnight at 37 °C. Diluted the extracts with PBS (pH 8.0) to an aimed urea concentration of 1.0 M, and digested with 1:50 w/w trypsin overnight. The next morning, first acidified the extracts with 1% formic acid (FA) and then desalted them with reverse-phase column (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA). Later, dried the extracts with vacuum concentrator and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, got the peptides ready to be labeled with TMT reagents. Different TMT labels were used to label different groups: TMT-126 for group A, TMT-129 for group B, and TMT-130 for group C. Namely, added the prepared TMT reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl of 99.9% acetonitrile) to corresponding solutions and allowed the labelling reaction to progress at room temperature. Terminated the reaction 1 h later by addition of 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and reacted for 5 min. All the labeled extracts from the three pools were mixed, desalted, dried as previously described, and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1% FA.  2.5 High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation According to prior research, the labeled peptides were fractionated. Firstly, transfer the TMT labeled peptides (100 μl in 0.1% FA) to MS tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) analysis. Secondly, an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (1 ml/min, 4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 μm, Waters) was maintained at 45 °C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min for further fractionation, and was detected through UV absorbance at 214 nm. Then collected the fractions every 1.5 min equally in 50 tubes, and dissolved within 20 μl 0.1% FA for next step study of liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  2.6 Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). Separated the fractions with a 120 min gradient elution at 0.30 μl/min flow rate. The UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) was interfaced with the Thermo Q Exactive Benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). The column used for analysis was silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA). To set the Q Exactive mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode, we utilized Xcalibur 2.1.2 software for manipulation. With the use of Orbitrap (400-1,800 m/z, 60,000 resolution), the single full-scan mass spectrum was conducted before the 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, HCD). Utilizing Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific), the human FASTA database from UniProt released on July 9 2014 was selected to run the MS/MS spectra of each LC-MS/MS run. The criteria for searching was set as the software recommended, mild modifications as follows: required full tryptic specificity with no more than two missed cleavages permitted, set carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (lysine, K and any N-terminal) as static modifications, oxidation (methionine，M) as dynamic modification, manipulated the fragment ion mass tolerance at 20 mmu (all MS2 spectra) and the precursor ion mass tolerances at 20 ppm (all MS in an orbitrap mass analyzer). Based on the reporter ion intensities per peptide, protein was relatively quantified under manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative precision was presented with protein ratio variability. The ratio relationships of the extracts from each group were predetermined as: group B/A, group C/A. Set-point of thresholds for up-/down-regulation were 1.25 and 0.80.

### Publication Abstract
The temporal lobe is a portion of the cerebral cortex with critical functionality. The age-related protein profile changes in the human temporal lobe have not been previously studied. This 4-plex tandem mass tag labeled proteomic study was performed on samples of temporal lobe from Chinese donors. Tissue samples were assigned to four age groups: Group A (the young, age: 34&#xb1;13 years); Group B (the elderly, 62&#xb1;5 years); Group C (the aged, 84&#xb1;4 years) and Group D (the old, 95&#xb1;1 years). Pooled samples from the different groups were subjected to proteomics and bioinformatics analysis to identify age-related changes in protein expression and associated pathways. We isolated 5072 proteins, and found that 67 proteins were downregulated and 109 proteins were upregulated in one or more groups during the aging process. Western blotting assays were performed to verify the proteomic results. Bioinformatic analysis identified proteins involved in neuronal degeneration, including proteins involved in neuronal firing, myelin sheath damage, and cell structure stability. We also observed the accumulation of extracellular matrix and lysosomal proteins which imply the occurrence of fibrosis and autophagy. Our results suggest a series of changes across a wide range of proteins in the human temporal lobe that may relate to aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders.

### Keywords
Inferior temporal gyrus; tmt; proteomics; ageing; chinese human brain bank.

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of Immunology; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine; Peking Union Medical College
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of Immunology; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine; Peking Union Medical College


