### Accession
PXD005677

### Title
A glucagon variant, glucagon 1-61, identified in man, controls blood glucose through regulation of  insulin secretion and hepatic glucose production

### Description
Glucagon is secreted from pancreatic α-cells, and hypersecretion (hyperglucagonemia) contributes to diabetic hyperglycemia. Molecular heterogeneity in hyperglucagonemia is poorly investigated. By screening human plasma by high-resolution-proteomics, we identified several glucagon variants among which proglucagon 1-61 (PG 1-61) appears to be the most abundant form. PG 1-61 was secreted in obese subjects before and as well after gastric bypass surgery with protein and fat as the main drivers for secretion before surgery, but glucose after. Studies in hepatocytes and in β-cells demonstrated that PG 1-61 dose-dependently increased levels of cAMP, through the glucagon receptor, and increased insulin secretion and protein levels of enzymes regulating glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. As a consequence, PG 1-61 increased blood glucose and plasma insulin and decreased plasma levels of amino acids in vivo. Glucagon variants, such as PG 1-61, may contribute to glucose regulation by stimulating hepatic glucose production and insulin secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were analyzed using a novel mass-spectrometry driven platform (Wewer Albrechtsen et al., 2016a), with antibody-independent prefractionation steps providing unbiased estimation of the various glucagon forms. In short, plasma fractions were digested in a time course (0,30 min, 60 min and overnight) with either LysC, GluC or Chymotrypsin.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) and processed with MaxQuant software (1.5.3.14) (Tyanova et al., 2016). We employed the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008), which is integrated into MaxQuant, to search MS/MS spectra against the human UniProtKB FASTA database (91,649 forward entries; version of 2015). We employed MaxQuant “semi specific” search option in order to discover endogenous cleavage products. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide level. The cut-off score (delta score) for accepting individual MS/MS was 17. For bioinformatic analysis as well as visualization, we used the open PERSEUS environment, which is part of MaxQuant. For several calculations and plots we also used the R framework (Team, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucagon, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


