### Accession
PXD018374

### Title
Tandem affinity purification of monobodies against STAT3

### Description
The aim of the proteomics experiment was to determine the specificity of the generated monobodies for the target protein STAT3. This was done in an affinity-enrichment experiment using two endogenously expressed and tandem-affinity-tagged monobodies in two different cell lines (Jurkat and K562). Eluted proteins after affinity purification were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and analysed using bottom-up proteomics workflow including tryptic digestion, LC-MS/MS, database-search and spectral counting.

### Sample Protocol
Monobodies cloned into an IRES-GFP retroviral tandem affinity purification (TAP) tagged vector were used to establish Jurkat and K562 stable cell lines. Cells expressing the IRES-GFP were selected and sorted using FACS. The TAP purification consisted in the lysis of used >10 power 9 cells. Briefly, the elution of the protein complexes following two steps of affinity purification was performed using 0.1 M hydrochloric acid immediately followed by the neutralization using 0.5 M Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then boiled and 10% of the eluates were resolved by SDS-PAGE (4–20% gel; Bio-rad) and silver stained to assess the efficiency of the pull-down. The rest of the eluates were then separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with R-250 Coomassie Blue Solution. The entire bands were excised and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and ^dri^ed under a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were next resuspended for LC-MS/MS analysis and were separated by reversed phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Q-exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.2.2 against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot human protein database and monobodies sequences. Data was further processed and inspected in Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA) and spectra of interest were manually validated.  DATABASE SEARCHING: All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search contaminants.fasta; Uniprot_Human_and_Monbodies.fasta (95796 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the Uniprot_Human_and_Monbodies_contaminants database also assuming trypsin digestion. Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Gln-&gt;pyro-Glu of glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and phospho of serine were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln-&gt;pyro-Glu of glutamine, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and phospho of serine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION: Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 64.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0%. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm or by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor STAT3 is frequently activated in human solid and hematological malignancies and remains a challenging therapeutic target with no approved drugs to date. Here, we develop synthetic antibody mimetics, termed monobodies, to interfere with STAT3 signaling. These monobodies are highly selective for STAT3 and bind with nanomolar affinity to the N-terminal and coiled-coil domains. Interactome analysis detects no significant binding to other STATs or additional off-target proteins, confirming their exquisite specificity. Intracellular expression of monobodies fused to VHL, an E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor, results in degradation of endogenous STAT3. The crystal structure of STAT3 in complex with monobody MS3-6 reveals bending of the coiled-coil domain, resulting in diminished DNA binding and nuclear translocation. MS3-6 expression strongly inhibits STAT3-dependent transcriptional activation and disrupts STAT3 interaction with the IL-22 receptor. Therefore, our study establishes innovative tools to interfere with STAT3 signaling by different molecular mechanisms.

### Keywords
Tap, Monobody, Stat3, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Station 19, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Philipps-University of Marburg, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 1, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

### Submitter
Grégory La Sala

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Hantschel
Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Philipps-University of Marburg, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 1, 35032 Marburg, Germany.


