### Accession
PXD019526

### Title
The skeletal proteome of the feather star Anneissia japonica

### Description
Skeletal elements from the feather star Anneissia japonica were isolated and stripped of organic material. The skeleton was then demineralized and the occluded proteins isolated. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The results were compared to predicted proteins encoded by the genome. The proteins found in the organic matrix of the skeleton were compared to those found in other skeletons both within Echinodermata and to other taxa.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation  All of the submitted sample was processed by SDS-PAGE using a 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) with the MES buffer system, the gel was run approximately 5cm.  The mobility region was excised into 20 equal sized segments for further processing by in-gel digestion. In-gel digestion was performed on each submitted sample using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol:  • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing.   Mass Spectrometry  Each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing  Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database: Custom Anneissia japonica (concatenated forward and reverse plus common potential contaminants). Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  20 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.025 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold algorithm for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample.  Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Echinoderms are an exceptional group of bilaterians that develop pentameral adult symmetry from a bilaterally symmetric larva. However, the genetic basis in evolution and development of this unique transformation remains to be clarified. Here we report newly sequenced genomes, developmental transcriptomes, and proteomes of diverse echinoderms including the green sea urchin (L. variegatus), a sea cucumber (A. japonicus), and with particular emphasis on a sister group of the earliest-diverged echinoderms, the feather star (A. japonica). We learned that the last common ancestor of echinoderms retained a well-organized Hox cluster reminiscent of the hemichordate, and had gene sets involved in endoskeleton development. Further, unlike in other animal groups, the most conserved developmental stages were not at the body plan establishing phase, and genes normally involved in bilaterality appear to function in pentameric axis development. These results enhance our understanding of the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes almost 500 Mya.

### Keywords
Anneissia japonica

### Affiliations
California State University Long Beach
MS Bioworks

### Submitter
Michael Ford

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Livingston
California State University Long Beach


