### Accession
PXD032002

### Title
Characterization of the Chemotherapy-treated PyMT Matrisome

### Description
Cytotoxic chemotherapy is used to treat many thousands of patients across many cancer types annually. Recent studies have demonstrated that chemotherapy causes systemic response that can be exploited to promote cancer cell survival and dissemination, termed “chemotherapy-induced metastasis. However, there have been no studies investigating how chemotherapy alters the extracellular matrix of breast tumors, or if those changes might help to support metastatic dissemination. Here, we report the first characterization of the chemotherapy-treated breast cancer matrisome using the MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model of breast cancer. We identify distinct changes induced by different cytotoxic chemotherapies. In particular, we identify collagen IV as significantly associated with taxane-based chemotherapy treatment. Biological validation confirmed collagen IV as chemotherapy-associated and identified collagen IV-driven Src and FAK signaling as important mediators of invasion in the post-chemotherapy tumor microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
PyMT tumors with or without chemotherapy treatment were decellularized using a gentle detergent treatment. These decellularized ECM scaffolds were digested to obtain peptides suitable for mass spec, which were then deglycosylated and alkylated. Peptides were labeled with TMT10Plex isobaric labels and run on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. A technical error was made with two samples (TMT 126 and 127N) so these were excluded from downstream analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were searched for peptide hits using Proteome Discoverer and the results were loaded into Scaffold 3 for analysis. Quantification of tandem mass tags was done using the Scaffold Q+ function and significance was determined using a Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected t test with a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Extracellular matrix, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Tufts university
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University

### Submitter
Jackson Fatherree

### Lab Head
Dr Madeleine J Oudin
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University


