### Accession
PXD015979

### Title
Proteomics pinpoint alterations in grade I meningiomas of male versus female patients

### Description
Meningiomas are among the most common primary tumors of the central nervous system (CNS) and originate from the arachnoid or meningothelial cells. Risk factors for the disease include exposure to ionizing radiation, head trauma, and family history. Surgery is the first option of treatment for meningioma, but depending on the location and invasion patterns, complete removal of the tumor is not always feasible.  Literature shown several specific unfoldings of this disease when comparing male versus female patients; for example, in one hand, its incidence is higher in female patients, on the other hand, male patients usually develop the malignant and more aggressive type. Here, we compare the proteomic profile of tumor biopsies of male and female patients diagnosed with grade I meningioma and list several differentially abundant proteins between the two groups that ultimately reflected in different enriched pathways.  For male patients, the enriched pathways were mostly involved in neutrophil degranulation, cell-matrix organization, antigen processing, and the presentation of exogenous peptides; for the female group, pathways related to the organization of cellular components and organelles, and RNA splicing. Tackling on these differences is important to better understand this disease and, ultimately, provide individual treatments.

### Sample Protocol
The twelve tissue samples from male (n=6) and female (n=6) grade I meningiomas were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, as previously described (14). Briefly, the protein extraction was made in a solution of 0.1% of RapiGest TM (w/v) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Subsequently, the extracted proteins were centrifuged at 18,000 x g at 4 ̊C, during 15 minutes. Then, the protein content was quantified by a ﬂuorimetric assay using the Qubit® 2.0 platform, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, 180 µg of proteins from each sample were reduced with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 ̊C for 30 min. Then, all samples were cooled to room temperature and incubated in the dark with 25 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min. Afterwards, the samples were digested for 20 hours with high sequence grade modified trypsin at a 1:50 (E/S) ratio at 37 ̊C. Following digestion, all reactions were acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% v/v final concentration) to stop proteolysis and degrade RapiGest™. The samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 18,000 x g at 20 ̊C to remove insoluble materials. Then, peptides were desalted with a C18 spin column, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Harvard Apparatus).

### Data Protocol
2.5. Peptide spectrum matching (PSM) Our bioinformatic analysis was guided by the steps described in the PatternLab for proteomics protocol (15); the software version we used was PL 4.1.1.17 that is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org. The H. Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (16) was downloaded on February 19th, 2019; a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants was included. The search considered semi-tryptic and   fully-tryptic peptide candidates. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. 2.6. Validation of PSMs The Search Engine Processor (SEPro), built into PatternLab, was used for converging to a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, as previously described (17). Briefly, the identifications were grouped by charge state (2+ and ≥3+), and then by tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, the XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peaks Matched values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in non-decreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on the number of labeled decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR that was independent of charge state or tryptic status. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six amino-acid residues was required. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with less than 10 ppm from the global identification average. One-hit wonders (i.e., proteins identified with only one mass spectrum) with the peptide having an XCorr of less than 2 were discarded. This last filter led to FDRs, now at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results.

### Publication Abstract
Meningiomas are among the most common primary tumors of the central nervous system (CNS) and originate from the arachnoid or meningothelial cells of the meninges. Surgery is the first option of treatment, but depending on the location and invasion patterns, complete removal of the tumor is not always feasible. Reports indicate many differences in meningiomas from male versus female patients; for example, incidence is higher in females, whereas males usually develop the malignant and more aggressive type. With this as motivation, we used shotgun proteomics to compare the proteomic profile of grade I meningioma biopsies of male and female patients. Our results listed several differentially abundant proteins between the two groups; some examples are S100-A4 and proteins involved in RNA splicing events. For males, we identified enriched pathways for cell-matrix organization and for females, pathways related to RNA transporting and processing. We believe our findings contribute to the understanding of the molecular differences between grade I meningiomas of female and male patients.

### Keywords
Grade i meningioma, Gender comparison, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz – Paraná, Brazil;
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Juliana Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho
Laboratory of Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz – Paraná, Brazil;


