### Accession
PXD035203

### Title
Detection and isolation of circulating tumor cells from breast cancer patients using CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) Detection and isolation of circulating tumor cells from breast cancer patients using CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) Detection and isolation of circulating tumor cells from breast cancer patients using CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1)

### Description
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and disseminated tumour cells with mesenchymal traits are difficult to detect by epithelial marker proteins. Particularly, triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) that are prone to therapy failure release a subpopulation of circulating tumour cells (CTCs) with mesenchymal traits. To provide tools that support their detection and analysis, the cell line BC-M1 established from disseminated tumour cells in the bone marrow of a breast cancer patient and a bone metastasis subline of MDA-MB-231 were analysed. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed high levels of CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) in BC-M1. CDCP1 was found in other carcinoma cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468) and other DTC cell lines (LC-M1, PC-E1) as well. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were virtually negative for CDCP1 by Western Blot and immunofluorescent staining. Presence of CDCP1 in CTCs was confirmed by CellSearch. Here, CDCP1 positive CTCs were detected in eight of 30 analysed breast cancer patients. For the isolation of CTCs from the blood of breast cancer patients, we established a sandwich magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS). The extracellular domain of CDCP1 served for cell catching and the cytoplasmic domain of CDCP1 for immunofluorescent detection of CDCP1 in CTCs. We showed that the MACS approach is suitable for the isolation of EpCam/keratin negative breast cancer cells from the blood and isolated CDCP1 positive CTCs from breast cancer patients by MACS. Hence, our approach is particularly suited for the detection and isolation of CTCs from TNBC when low EpCam or keratin levels limit the application of conventional approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion. Four hundred micrograms of SILAC labelled BC-M1 or MDA-MB-231 B02 samples were diluted with nine volumes of 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.3. The proteins were digested by Trypsin (Trypsin sequencing grade, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) by addition of 1 μg Trypsin per 20 μg of protein of the sample. The pH value of the samples was verified and for the subsequent analyses 380 μg of total protein of each cell line was combined in a 1:1 ratio. Thereafter the samples were incubated at 37 °C over night with vigorous shaking.  Peptide desalting. The desalting of the peptides after tryptic digestion was performed using the reversed phase Oasis HLB Plus Cartridge (225 mg, 60 μm; Waters, Manchester, United Kingdom). The cartridge was conditioned with 3 mL 100% methanol and equilibrated with 0.2 % formic acid in 3 ml 5% methanol in HPLC-H2O (Honeywell, Morris Plains, USA) using 5 mL syringes. Samples were diluted to a final volume of 1 mL using 1 % formic acid in 25 % methanol in HPLC-H2O and the peptide-solution was transferred to the column using a 1 mL-syringe. The flow-through was kept and stored at -20° C. The column was washed with 3 mL 0.2% formic acid in 5% methanol in HPLC-H2O. The peptides were eluted with 1.5 mL 50% methanol in in HPLC-H2O. The eluate was evaporated by using a vacuum speed vac for 3 hours. OFFGEL fractionation. The fractionation of the desalted and evaporated peptides was performed using the OFFGEL fractionator device (OFFGEL fractionator 3100, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). A 24 well tray and IPG strips (pH 3-10 non-linear, 24 cm; GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany) were used for isoelectric focusing (IEF) of the peptides. The samples were diluted in 3.6 mL 20% methanol in HPLC-H2O containing 1% IPG-buffer (pH 3-10; GE Healthcare). Forty microliter of the focusing buffer was added to each well and the gel was rehydrated for 45 minutes. Two hundred microliter of focusing buffer was added to wells 1 and 24 and 100 μl focusing buffer was added to the wells 2 to 23. One hundred microliter of the samples were added to each well. Each electrode was covered with 10 μl double-distilled H2O and 600 μl Dry Strip Cover Fluid (GE Healthcare) was added to each electrode. The IEF was performed with a voltage range from 300 V to 2783 V and a maximum current of 50 μA until 50 kVh were reached after 33 hours and 50 minutes. After successful fractionation, the samples were collected and evaporated using a vacuum speed vac. LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed by injecting the samples on a nano liquid chromatography system (nanoACQUITY, Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled via an electrospray ionization (ESI) interface to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap QExactive, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were loaded (5 μl/min) on a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 trap column, 180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å; buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-H2O; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with 2% buffer B. After sample loading the trapping column was washed for 5 min with 2% buffer B (5 μL/min) and the peptides were eluted (200 nL/min) onto the separation column (nanoAcquity UPLC column, BEH 130 C18, Waters; 75 μm × 250 mm, 1.7 μm, 100 Å; 200 nl/min, gradient: 2−30 % B in 30 min). The spray was generated from a fused-silica emitter (I.D. 10 μm, New Objective, Woburn, USA) at a capillary voltage of 1650 V. LC-MS/MS analysis were performed in positive ion mode. Precursor-ion scans were performed over an m/z range from 400-1500, with a resolution of 70000 FWHM at mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 200 (transient length= 256 ms, injection time= 100 ms, AGC target= 3e6). Fragment-ion scans were carried out in data dependant acquisition (DDA) mode (Top5), with a HCD collision energy of 30 %, a resolution of 17000 FWHM at m/z 200 (transient length= 64 ms, injection time= 100 ms, AGC target= 3e6), an underfill ratio of 1 % and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Data analysis of the LC-MS/MS data were performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Peptide and protein identification was carried out with Andromeda against a human (Swiss-Prot, www.uniprot.org, downloaded November 10, 2014, 20,161 entries) and a contaminant database (cRAP-database, http://www.thegpm.org/crap, 298 entries). The search was performed with a tolerance of 10 ppm on MS- and 20 ppm on MS/MS-level. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on cysteine residues. Oxidation on methionine as well as 13C6-label on lysine and arginine were set as variable modifications. The search was performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 on both peptide and protein level. SILAC quantification was carried out with MaxQuant (7), wherein only unique peptides were taken into account for SILAC quantification. Proteins for further analysis were only considered if unique peptides were detected in three out of four biological replicates and proteins were only included into the list of candidates if the protein was identified with at least two unique peptides. Proteins overexpressed in the cell line MDA-MB-231 B02 were considered to be differentially expressed if they have a fold change of two or higher for the intensity ratio heavy/light. Proteins overexpressed in the cell line BC-M1 were considered to be differentially expressed if they exhibit a fold change between 0 and 0.5 for the intensity ratio heavy/light. These expression ratio values for BC-M1 were converted into reciprocal values to facilitate the evaluation and the negative value was used to distinguish these values from those belonging to proteins overexpressed in the cell line MDA-MB-231 B02. The statistical analysis of the mass spectrometry data was performed with Student´s t-test. The ratios of the quantified unique peptides were correlated with a reference value set to one to determine if the fold-change could be considered as significant. A p-value below 0.005 was considered as significant. The represented MS1 mass spectra were generated with the software Xcalibur, version 4.2.28.14 and the MS2 mass spectra were generated with Proteome Discoverer, version 2.0.0.802 (both software Thermo Fisher).

### Publication Abstract
In cancer metastasis, single circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood and disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow mediate cancer metastasis. Because suitable biomarker proteins are lacking, CTCs and DTCs with mesenchymal attributes are difficult to isolate from the bulk of normal blood cells. To establish a procedure allowing the isolation of such cells, we analyzed the cell line BC-M1 established from DTCs in the bone marrow of a breast cancer patient by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and mass spectrometry. We found high levels of the transmembrane protein CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) in breast cancer cell lines with mesenchymal attributes. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were virtually negative for CDCP1. Confirmation <i>in vivo</i> by CellSearch revealed CDCP1-positive CTCs in 8 of 30 analyzed breast cancer patients. Only EpCam-positive CTCs were enriched by CellSearch. Using the extracellular domain of CDCP1, we established a magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) approach enabling also the enrichment of EpCam-negative CTCs. Thus, our approach is particularly suited for the isolation of mesenchymal CTCs with downregulated epithelial cancer that occur, for example, in triple-negative breast cancer patients who are prone to therapy failure.

### Keywords
Dissemination, Circulating tumour cells, Bone marrow, Breast cancer, Cdcp1

### Affiliations
Department of Tumor Biology University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Department of Tumor Biology
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf


### Submitter
Kai Bartkowiak

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Bartkowiak
Department of Tumor Biology University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf


