### Accession
PXD016637

### Title
Protein Pathways in Controls vs Progressive and NonProgressive Pulmonary Sarcoidosis

### Description
Investigate the differences between Sarcoidosis and Controls as well as between progressive and nonprogressive pulmonary sarcoidosis using 2D LC-MS/MS proteomics instrumentation and bronchoalveolar lavage samples. MaxQuant was used for database searches label free quantitation followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to identify pathways of differentially expressed proteins and potential biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and MS spectral-data acquisition:   Mixed BAL cell proteins:    BAL cells were resuspended in hypotonic lysis buffer [46] with HALT protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and lysed using sequential cell disruption techniques including a freeze-thaw at 98°C with vortexing and sonication on ice (Sonics) before buffering with 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma). The lysed cells were then centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 minutes, and the supernatant was collected for further processing. To increase the protein recovery, the pellet from this step was resuspended in a buffer (containing 7M aurea and 2M thiourea in 0.4M triethylammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5), freeze-thawed, vortexed and centrifuged at 15,000g for 15 minutes at 20°C. The supernatants from the two centrifugation steps were combined and concentrated using an Amicon 3-MWCO filter (Millipore). An equal amount of proteins was processed for in-gel cleanup and digestion (EMBL Method), reduced with dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich), treated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to block cysteine residues, digested with trypsin (Promega) and cleaned with an MCX stage tip (3M-Empore 2241). Isobaric labeling of digested peptides was carried out with TMT-10Plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) reagent followed by MCX and SPE cleanup with an appropriate buffer exchange and offline fractionation on Shimadzu Prominence with Xbridge 150x2.1mm column (Waters) with two-minute fractions at a flow rate of 200µL/min, and peptide amounts of 15mAU-equivalent aliquots from fractions 7-38 were concatenated. LC-MS data was acquired for each concatenated fraction using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific., Waltham, MA) in tandem with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (~500ng) were loaded directly onto a 30-cm x 100-m internal diameter fused silica PicoTip Emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µm particle, 120 Å pore; Dr. Maish GmbH Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was heated to 55°C, and a flow rate of 300 µL/minute was applied during the gradient. The gradient is as follows: 5-22% Buffer B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 45 minutes, 22-32% B for 25 minutes, and 32-95% B over 10 minutes. The column was mounted in a nanospray source directly in line with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Spray voltage was 2.1 kV in positive mode, and the heated capillary was maintained at 275°C. The orbital trap was set to acquire survey mass spectra (380-1580 m/z) with a resolution of 60,000 at 100 m/z with automatic gain control (AGC) 4.0E5, 50-ms min injection time and lock mass at 445.1200 m/z (polysiloxane). The 12 most intense ions (2-7 charged state) from the full scan were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy 35%, and detector settings of 60k resolution, AGC 5E4 ions, 50 ms maximum injection time and FT first mass mode fixed at 110 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40s with a 10 ppm high and low mass tolerance.    BALF protein detection: The BALF was processed using our previously published protocol. Briefly, BALF was sonicated (Sonics), centrifuged for 15 minutes at 14,000g at 4°C and filtered with pre-rinsed (5% methanol and water) syringe (Monoject, Covidien) and 0.22um PES filter to remove remaining particulates. The fluid was then concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters, and a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) was used to quantify protein. High abundance proteins were removed using a Seppro IgY 14 spin-column (Sigma-Aldrich) with appropriate buffer exchanges. An equal amount of enriched medium- and low- abundance protein fractions were processed for in-gel cleanup and digestion similar to the BAL cells above.  LC-MS data was acquired for each concatenated fraction using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in tandem with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using settings similar to BAL cells analysis with minor differences. The differences were 1) The column was heated to 50C and 2) the dynamic exclusion was set to 15s with a 10 ppm high and low mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral dataset analysis by sequence database search for protein identification and quantification: The BAL cell quantification was accomplished using TMT reagent, and the BALF dataset was analyzed using MS1 spectral quantification.  Identification and quantification of TMT-labeled cellular proteins: The spectral dataset was searched against the target-decoy version of the Human UniProt database along with the contaminant sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/).  Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to perform TMT-based peptide quantitation and protein identification. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.5% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least one peptide. The Protein Prophet algorithm assigned protein probabilities within Scaffold[50]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Channels were corrected according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA. Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity-weighting algorithm. The proteins that matched to the cRAP or the decoy sequence were removed from further analysis.  Identification and MS1quant label-free quantification of BALF proteins:  Raw files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with the cRAP database using the MaxQuant algorithm. Default search parameters were used as follows: peptide spectral matching and proteins with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) modifications include fixed carbamidomethyl of C, variable oxidation of M, and N-terminal acetylation. BALF samples were quantified in label-free quantification (LFQ) mode, and spectra were “matched between runs”.   Statistical Analysis The peptide-level data for the BALF was imported into the GalaxyP (http://galaxyp.org) framework for implementing the Peptide-level Expression Change Averaging (PECA)- procedure using the Bioconductor package (http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/PECA.html). The method differs from the common approach, where protein expression intensities are precomputed from the low-level peptide data. In the PECA package, an expression change between two groups of samples is first calculated for each measured peptide. The corresponding protein-level expression changes are then defined as medians over the peptide-level changes. The PECA procedure uses the direct measurement of peptides in a mass spectral dataset providing more accurate lists of differentially expressed protein than the conventional protein-level approach. For this analysis, we determined the modified t-statistic, which is calculated using the linear modeling approach in the Bioconductor limma (linear models for microarray data) package. To identify differential expression in the BALF dataset, the comparability of relative expression changes between alternative peptides was investigated by considering signal log-ratios by a two-sample t-test with a p-value  0.05 corrected for multiple hypotheses testing. For the intracellular proteins, given the substantially  higher number of proteins detetected, we used a conservative permutation test to decrease the possibility of type 1 error rate with an unadjusted significance level p  0.05 corrected by the Benjamini-Hochberg method for testing multiple hypotheses.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary involvement occurs in up to 95% of sarcoidosis cases. In this pilot study, we examine lung compartment-specific protein expression to identify pathways linked to development and progression of pulmonary sarcoidosis. We characterized bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and fluid (BALF) proteins in recently diagnosed sarcoidosis cases. We identified 4,306 proteins in BAL cells, of which 272 proteins were differentially expressed in sarcoidosis compared to controls. These proteins map to novel pathways such as integrin-linked kinase and IL-8 signaling and previously implicated pathways in sarcoidosis, including phagosome maturation, clathrin-mediated endocytic signaling and redox balance. In the BALF, the differentially expressed proteins map to several pathways identified in the BAL cells. The differentially expressed BALF proteins also map to aryl hydrocarbon signaling, communication between innate and adaptive immune response, integrin, PTEN and phospholipase C signaling, serotonin and tryptophan metabolism, autophagy, and B cell receptor signaling. Additional pathways that were different between progressive and non-progressive sarcoidosis in the BALF included CD28 signaling and PFKFB4 signaling. Our studies demonstrate the power of contemporary proteomics to reveal novel mechanisms operational in sarcoidosis. Application of our workflows in well-phenotyped large cohorts maybe beneficial to identify biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis and therapeutically tenable molecular mechanisms.

### Keywords
Pathways, Maxquant, Sarcoidosis, Balf, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Minnesota, United States

### Submitter
Kevin Viken

### Lab Head
Dr Maneesh Bhargava, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Minnesota, United States


