### Accession
PXD001050

### Title
Mariprofundus ferrooxydans proteomic profile

### Description
A proteomic profile of the chemolithoautotrophic, neutrophilic, iron-oxidizing Mariprofundus ferrooxydans was obtained in duplicates and analyzed via LC-MS/MS. Additionally, a proteomic analysis of the membrane fraction is included.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were harvested at late log phase by following the protocol in Barco and Edwards (2014). Briefly, proteins were extracted with 0.1N NaOH/2% SDS solution, clarified and concentrated by nanofiltration. The concentrated samples were run on SDS-PAGE gels in duplicate lanes. All the bands from each lane were excised and analyzed via LC-MS/MS. Membrane fractions were obtained in the following way: the cell-separation protocol was performed per Barco and Edwards (2014) and the cell pellet was resuspended in 0.5M NaCl/40mM Tri-base buffer at pH 8.5 and sonicated for 10 cycles of 30 secs pulses followed by 30 secs of cooling. This sample was clarified and the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 2 hrs. The reddish pellet was solubilized with 0.5% Ultrol Grade, n-Dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside and run on a SDS-PAGE gel.

### Data Protocol
Excised bands were trypsin-digested and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis which involved a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with an Eksigent Nanoliquid Chromatography 1-D plus system. The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the proteomes of Mariprofundus ferrooxydans strains PV-1(Uniprot database) and M34 (IMG database) using Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST Daemon search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Microaerophilic, neutrophilic, iron-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB) grow via the oxidation of reduced Fe(II) at or near neutral pH, in the presence of oxygen, making them relevant in numerous environments with elevated Fe(II) concentrations. However, the biochemical mechanisms for Fe(II) oxidation by these neutrophilic FeOB are unknown, and genetic markers for this process are unavailable. In the ocean, microaerophilic microorganisms in the genus Mariprofundus of the class Zetaproteobacteria are the only organisms known to chemolithoautotrophically oxidize Fe and concurrently biomineralize it in the form of twisted stalks of iron oxyhydroxides. The aim of this study was to identify highly expressed proteins associated with the electron transport chain of microaerophilic, neutrophilic FeOB. To this end, Mariprofundus ferrooxydans PV-1 was cultivated, and its proteins were extracted, assayed for redox activity, and analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for identification of peptides. The results indicate that a cytochrome c4, cbb3-type cytochrome oxidase subunits, and an outer membrane cytochrome c were among the most highly expressed proteins and suggest an involvement in the process of aerobic, neutrophilic bacterial Fe oxidation. Proteins associated with alternative complex III, phosphate transport, carbon fixation, and biofilm formation were abundant, consistent with the lifestyle of Mariprofundus.

### Keywords
Iron oxidation oxidizer mariprofundus zetaproteobacteria neutrophilic oxidizing

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Biology Program, University of Southern California
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Roman Barco

### Lab Head
Dr Katrina J. Edwards
Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Biology Program, University of Southern California


