### Accession
PXD010516

### Title
Mechanisms preserving insulin action during high dietary fat intake in healthy men

### Description
Prolonged intervention studies investigating molecular metabolism are necessary for a deeper understanding of dietary effects on health. Here we provide mechanistic information about  metabolic adaptation to fat-rich diets. Healthy men ingested saturated (SFA) or poly unsaturated  (PUFA) fat-rich diets for six weeks during weight maintenance. Hyperinsulinemic clamps combined with leg balance technique revealed unchanged peripheral insulin sensitivity, independent of fatty acid type. Both diets increased fat oxidation potential in muscle. Hepatic insulin clearance increased, while glucose production, de novo lipogenesis and plasma triacylglycerol decreased. High fat intake changed the plasma proteome in immune-supporting direction and the gut microbiome displayed changes at taxonomical and functional level with PUFA. In mice, eucaloric feeding of human PUFA and SFA diets lowered hepatic triacylglycerol content compared to low-fat fed control mice, and induced adaptations in the liver supportive of decreased gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis. Intake of fat-rich diets thus induces extensive metabolic adaptations enabling disposition of dietary fat without metabolic complications.

### Sample Protocol
Human and mice plasma were processed according to the fast and highly reproducible workflow (Geyer et al., 2016) using an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform. Samples were measured on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Kelstrup et al., 2014) coupled to an EASYnLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US) via a nano-electrospray ion source. About 1 μg of peptides were loaded on an in-house packed 40 cm HPLC-column.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse or human Uniprot database using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008)  version 1.5.3.23. Label-free quantification of the mice and human plasma data was performed with 591 the MaxLFQ algorithm using a minimum ratio count of 1. Data were interpreted using the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016), version 1.5.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
Prolonged intervention studies investigating molecular metabolism are necessary for a deeper understanding of dietary effects on health. Here we provide mechanistic information about metabolic adaptation to fat-rich diets. Healthy, slightly overweight men ingested saturated or polyunsaturated fat-rich diets for 6&#xa0;weeks during weight maintenance. Hyperinsulinemic clamps combined with leg balance technique revealed unchanged peripheral insulin sensitivity, independent of fatty acid type. Both diets increased fat oxidation potential in muscle. Hepatic insulin clearance increased, while glucose production, de novo lipogenesis, and plasma triacylglycerol decreased. High fat intake changed the plasma proteome in the immune-supporting direction and the gut microbiome displayed changes at taxonomical and functional level with polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA). In mice, eucaloric feeding of human PUFA and saturated fatty acid diets lowered hepatic triacylglycerol content compared with low-fat-fed control mice, and induced adaptations&#xa0;in the liver supportive of decreased gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis. Intake of fat-rich diets thus&#xa0;induces extensive metabolic adaptations enabling disposition of dietary fat without metabolic complications.

### Keywords
High fat diet

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Section of Molecular Physiology, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bente Kiens
Section of Molecular Physiology, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


