### Accession
PXD016336

### Title
BirA*-RAB18 proximity biotinylation in HeLa cells

### Description
Proximity labelling using transient expression of the same exogenous BirA*-RAB18 construct in wild-type HeLa cells and in otherwise isogenic RAB3GAP1-, RAB3GAP2- and TRAPPC9-null HeLa cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity-labelling in HeLa cells was carried out largely as described by Roux et al. ( https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201112098), but with minor modifications. HeLa cells were grown to 80% confluence in T75 flasks and then each flask was transfected with 1-1.5µg of the BirA*-RAB18 construct using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent in Optimem serum-free medium (ThermoFisher) for 4 hours, according to manufacturer’s instructions. 24 hours post-transfection, media was replaced with fresh media containing 50µM Biotin (Merck) and the cells were incubated for a further 24 hours. Cells were then trypsinised and washed twice in PBS before pellets were transferred to 2ml microcentrifuge tubes and snap-frozen. For each pellet, lysis was carried out in 420µl of a buffer containing 0.2% SDS, 6% Triton-X-100, 500mM NaCl, 1mM DTT, EDTA-free protease-inhibitor solution (Expedeon, Cambridge, UK), 50mM Tris pH7.4. Lysates were sonicated for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor device together with protein extraction beads (Diagenode, Denville, NJ). Each lysate was diluted with 1080µl 50mM Tris pH7.4, and they were then clarified by centrifugation at 20 000xg for 30 minutes at 4⁰C. Affinity purification of biotinylated proteins was carried out by incubation of clarified lysates with streptavidin-coated magnetic Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) for 24 hours at 4⁰C. Note that a mixture of Dynabeads - MyOne C1, MyOne T1, M270 and M280 – was used to overcome a problem with bead-clumping observed when MyOne C1 beads were used alone. Successive washes were carried out at room temperature with 2% SDS, a buffer containing 1% Triton-X-100, 1mM EDTA, 500mM NaCl, 50mM HEPES pH7.5, a buffer containing 0.5% NP40, 1mM EDTA, 250mM LiCl, 10mM Tris pH7.4, 50mM Tris pH7.4, and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Washed beads from BioID experiments with HeLa cells were subjected to limited proteolysis by trypsin (0.3 µg) at 27°C for 6.5hours in 2mM urea, 1mM DTT, 75mM Tris, pH=8.5, then supernatants were incubated overnight at 37°C. Samples were alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 20minutes, then acidified by addition of 8µl 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were generated using trypsin. Trypsin cleaves on the C-terminal side of lysine and arginine residues unless the C-terminal residue is proline. Hydrolysis is slower where the C-terminal residue is acidic. Peptides were loaded on to activated (methanol), equilibrated (0.1% TFA) C18 stage tips before being washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with 0.1% TFA/80 acetonitrile.  The organic was dried off, 0.1% TFA added to 15 µl and 5 µl injected onto LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate nano HPLC instrument (ThermoFisher), and analysed on either a Q Exactive Plus instrument (ThermoFisher). Three sets of replicate samples were used for the BioID-RAB18 experiment with HeLa cells. Two different wild-type clones and two different null-genotypes of each of the RAB3GAP1-, RAB3GAP2- and TRAPPC9-null cells were used. In each experiment, each set of samples was prepared independently and so these can be considered biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
After data-dependent acquisition of HCD fragmentation spectra, data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 2.2.0.0). The Uniprot Human 2022_05 database with 20594 entries was searched. 2 missed/non-specific cleavages were permitted. Fixed modification by carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered. Variable modification by oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal acetylation were considered. Mass error was set at 20 ppm for the first search tolerance and 4.5 ppm main search tolerance. Thresholds for accepting individual spectra were set at p<0.05. Single-peptide identifications of proteins were used in analysis of the BioID-RAB18 experiment with single peptide identifications made ‘by modification site only’ excluded. %FDR  for these single-peptide identifications, and that for the combined dataset, was estimated at <5% using the decoy search method. Quantification data were produced with MaxLFQ (https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.m113.031591). Data were first processed to remove any protein identified in samples from control (untransfected, biotin-treated) samples at high levels (>25% wild-type LFQ value) in any replicate from all replicates. Next, proteins identified in only one replicate sample-set were removed. For each sample set, LFQ values were normalized according to the quantity of RAB18 detected in each sample. GEF-null:wild-type ratios for each protein were calculated for each replicate sample set and then their means calculated for the experiment. A GEF-null:wild-type <0.5 criterion for selection of putative RAB18 effectors was used. This is an arbitrary cutoff rather than a measure of statistical validity.

### Publication Abstract
Loss of functional RAB18 causes the autosomal recessive condition Warburg Micro syndrome. To better understand this disease, we used proximity biotinylation to generate an inventory of potential RAB18 effectors. A restricted set of 28 RAB18 interactions were dependent on the binary RAB3GAP1-RAB3GAP2 RAB18-guanine nucleotide exchange factor complex. Twelve of these 28 interactions are supported by prior reports, and we have directly validated novel interactions with SEC22A, TMCO4, and INPP5B. Consistent with a role for RAB18 in regulating membrane contact sites, interactors included groups of microtubule/membrane-remodeling proteins, membrane-tethering and docking proteins, and lipid-modifying/transporting proteins. Two of the putative interactors, EBP and OSBPL2/ORP2, have sterol substrates. EBP is a &#x394;8-&#x394;7 sterol isomerase, and ORP2 is a lipid transport protein. This prompted us to investigate a role for RAB18 in cholesterol biosynthesis. We found that the cholesterol precursor and EBP-product lathosterol accumulates in both RAB18-null HeLa cells and RAB3GAP1-null fibroblasts derived from an affected individual. Furthermore, de novo cholesterol biosynthesis is impaired in cells in which RAB18 is absent or dysregulated or in which ORP2 expression is disrupted. Our data demonstrate that guanine nucleotide exchange factor-dependent Rab interactions are highly amenable to interrogation by proximity biotinylation and may suggest that Micro syndrome is a cholesterol biosynthesis disorder.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Bioid, Bira

### Affiliations
University of Leeds

### Submitter
Mark Handley

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Handley
University of Leeds


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: cervical carcinoma
- cell type: not available
- disease: normal, Warburg Micro syndrome
- label: label free sample
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive Plus

