### Accession
PXD018273

### Title
Zirconium(IV)-IMAC for phosphopeptide enrichment in phosphoproteomics

### Description
IMAC and MOAC magnetic microsphere materials were tested with ug amounts of protein extracts from HepG2/C3A cells. We compared Zirconium (IV) IMAC (Zr-IMAC) magnetic microspheres to commonly used Titanium (IV) IMAC (Ti-IMAC) and TiO2 magnetic microspheres for phosphopeptide enrichment from simple and complex protein samples prior phosphopeptide sequencing and characterization by mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We optimized sample-loading conditions to increase phosphopeptide recovery for Zr-IMAC, Ti-IMAC and TiO2 based workflows. Furthermore, optimized Zr-IMAC and Ti-IMAC magnetic microsphere format were compared to HPLC-based Fe(III)-IMAC for same sample amount (200 ug).

### Sample Protocol
HepG2/C3A human hepatocyte cells (ATCC CRL-10741) were in standard culture conditions (87.5% D-MEM (containing 1g glucose/L), 1% Non-Essential Amino Acids, 10% FCS, 0.5% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 1%GlutaMAX, 37oC, 5% CO2 95% air. Cells were collected at 85% confluence. The samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC. Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and suspended with gentle pipetting in cold lysis buffer (1%SDC, 100mM NH4HCO3, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, pH 8.5, one tablet cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1/2 tablet PhosSTOP) and ruptured with a probe sonicator in ice-bath. Liquid was heated at 80ºC for 10min. Proteins were precipitated with acetone (80%) overnight. Pellet was re-suspended in 5mL of 1% SDC + 50mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5. Protein concentration was measured and samples were aliquoted and stored at -80ºC. Protein extracts were digested with Trypsin at 2% w/w, incubated overnight at 37oC and terminated by adding TFA to 1%. Digest was centrifuged for 5 min at 14,000 rpm and the supernatant liquid was transferred to a new tube. Peptide samples were then de-salted using Sep-Pak tC18 3 cc Vac Cartridges according to manufactures’ protocol. Peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge concentrator and stored at -80oC. Tryptic peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1%TFA to a concentration of ~4 ug/uL and diluted to a final volume of 200uL with the corresponding binding solvent for enrichment. Maintaining a 1:2 peptide-to-beads weight ratio, the magnetic particles were first equilibrated with loading/binding (500uL) solvent for 5 min, followed by 20min incubation with the peptide mixture (200ug). Microspheres were then washed for 2 min each, first with solvent (S1-S5, 500uL), then wash solvent 1 (80%MeCN+1%TFA, 500uL) and lastly by wash solvent 2 (10%MeCN+0.2%TFA, 500uL). Phosphopeptides were eluted by 10min incubation in 1.25M of ammonium hydroxide solution (200uL). All steps were done with continuous mixing to keep a homogenous bead suspension. Collected peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80ºC prior analysis. LC based Fe(III)-IMAC was implemented using a ProPAC Fe-NTA column (2x50 mm) connected to a UPLC Ultimate 3000 system via an 800 uL injection loop. The IMAC column was charged with iron (III) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. Prior sample loading the column was equilibrated with 50% solvent C (100%MeCN) + 50% solvent A (99.9%H2O+0.1%TFA).  Approximately 200 ug of tryptic protein digest was dissolved in 0.1%TFA to 4ug/uL concentration and diluted to 710uL 50%MeCN+0.1%TFA.  Injection volume was 700uL. After sample loading, the column was washed for 5min with 50% solvent C + 50% solvent A followed by 50% solvent C + 50% solvent B (20mM NH4OH) for 2 min. Phosphopeptides were collected with 100% solvent B for 2 min and the column was re-equilibrated with 50% solvent C + 50% solvent A for 7 min. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifugal concentrator and stored at -80oC prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Dried phosphopeptides were dissolved in 10uL of 2%MeCN+0.1%FA. Using a trap column (300um i.d. x 5mm, 5um, 100Å) and an analytical column (75um i.d. x 30 cm, C18, 1.9um particle size) system, peptides were separated at 300nL/min with a linear gradient of 5%-35% solvent B (95%MeCN+0.1%FA) against solvent A (100%H20+0.1%FA) for 60min. For Sciex TripleTOF 6600: DDA mode. Mass spectra were acquired in the range m/z 400-1500 (2+ to 5+ charge states) using an accumulation time of 250 ms followed by 80 MS/MS events. MS/MS spectra were acquired for the range m/z 100-1800 at 25 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Minimum threshold for triggering MS/MS was set to 250 cps. Precursor ions were fragmented in the q2 collision cell using nitrogen as the collision gas. Collision energies were automatically defined as function of m/z and charge state. Selected ions for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 sec. For Q-Exactive HF: Precursor ion (MS) spectra were acquired in the range m/z 300 - 2000 (2+ to 5+ ion charge state) at a mass resolution setting of 60k at m/z 400 in profile mode, with an AGC target of 1e5 ions. The 20 most intense precursor ions were fragmented with HCD and dynamically excluded for 15sec. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a mass resolution setting of 30k at m/z 400 in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Prior data analysis, all wiff data files from Sciex TripleTOF® 6600 were converted to Mascot Generic File (mgf) with ProteoWizard MSConvert (version 3.0.19137) with peak picking filtering for the 150 most intense peaks. Mgf files and raw files from the Q-Exactive HF were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt human database (February 2019 release) using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) with 50 ppm precursor mass tolerance for mgf files and 10 ppm for raw files. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da for mgf files and 0.05 Da for raw files with a limit of 2 missed tryptic cleavages. S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while O-phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered using a Mascot ion score threshold of ≥ 18 and a FDR of ≤ 0.01 through Percolator. Phosphorylation localization probabilities were calculated with ptmRS and only probabilities ≥ 75% were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphopeptide enrichment is an essential step in large-scale, quantitative phosphoproteomics by mass spectrometry. Several phosphopeptide affinity enrichment techniques exist, such as immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) and metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC). We compared zirconium(IV) IMAC (Zr-IMAC) magnetic microparticles to more commonly used titanium(IV) IMAC (Ti-IMAC) and TiO<sub>2</sub> magnetic microparticles for phosphopeptide enrichment from simple and complex protein samples prior to phosphopeptide sequencing and characterization by mass spectrometry (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, LC-MS/MS). We optimized sample-loading conditions to increase phosphopeptide recovery for Zr-IMAC-, Ti-IMAC-, and TiO<sub>2</sub>-based workflows by 22, 24, and 35%, respectively. The optimized protocol resulted in improved performance of Zr-IMAC over Ti-IMAC and TiO<sub>2</sub> as well as high-performance liquid chromatography-based Fe(III)-IMAC with up to 23% more identified phosphopeptides. The different enrichment chemistries showed a high degree of overlap but also differences in phosphopeptide selectivity and complementarity. We conclude that Zr-IMAC improves phosphoproteome coverage and recommend that this complementary and scalable affinity enrichment method is more widely used in biological and biomedical studies of cell signaling and the search for biomarkers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018273.

### Keywords
Moac, Cell signalling, Magnetic particles, Imac, Functional proteomics, Affinity enrichment, Protein phosphorylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Job title:Professor Department:Institut for Biokemi og Molekylær Biologi Company:Syddansk Universitet Location: Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Ignacio Arribas

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N. Jensen
Job title:Professor Department:Institut for Biokemi og Molekylær Biologi Company:Syddansk Universitet Location: Odense, Denmark


