### Accession
PXD006390

### Title
EGF-dependent ubiquitinome, phosphorylation and interactome analysis in control and CYLD-deficient cells

### Description
Cylindromatosis tumor suppressor protein (CYLD) is deubiquitinase, best known as an essential negative regulator of the NFkB pathway. Previous studies have suggested an involvement of CYLD in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent signal transduction as well, as it was found enriched within the tyrosine-phosphorylated complexes in cells stimulated with the growth factor. EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling participates in central cellular processes and its tight regulation, partly through ubiquitination cascades, is decisive for a balanced cellular homeostasis. Here, using a combination of mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic approaches with biochemical and immunofluorescence strategies, we demonstrate the involvement of CYLD in the regulation of the ubiquitination events triggered by EGF. Our data show that CYLD regulates the magnitude of ubiquitination of several major effectors of the EGFR pathway by assisting the recruitment of the ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b to the activated EGFR complex. Notably, the deficiency of CYLD impairs the interaction of EGFR with Cbl-b, which leads to a reduced ubiquitination of the receptor followed by its decreased degradation. This represents a previously uncharacterized strategy exerted by this deubiquitinase and tumors pressor for the negative regulation of a tumorigenic signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Human cervix epithelial adenocarcinoma HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Lonza) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin and 1% L-Glutamine. Ovarian and laryngeal carcinoma cells (Skov3 and Hep2, respectively) were cultured using the same medium. For labeling experiments, cells were grown in light, medium or heavy DMEM media, containing either L-arginine (Arg0) and L-lysine (Lys0), L-arginine-13C6 14N4 (Arg6) and L-lysine-2H4 (Lys4) or L-arginine-13C6 15N4 (Arg10) and L-lysine-13C6 15N2 (Lys8), respectively, as previously described (27). For EGF stimulation, cells were grown to a confluency of 70%, starved without serum for 16 hours and stimulated with 150 ng/ml of EGF for the indicated times. When using inhibitors, those were added to the starving media 30 minutes prior the stimulation and present while treating with the growth factor. EGFR inhibitors (Iressa and CI1033) and Akt inhibitor MK2206 were purchased from Selleckchem, while MEK inhibitor U0126 was from Promega. Where indicated, 10g/ml cycloheximide (Sigma) was used to block the de novo protein synthesis. NanoLC Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data analysis Peptides were separated by reversed-phase in an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The samples were analyzed in either an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific). For the chromatographic separation, solvent A was 0.5% acetic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. The peptides were eluted from an analytical in-house packed column of ReproSil Pur C18-AQ, 3m resin (Dr Maisch GmbH), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometers were operated in positive ionization mode, in a top 12 data-dependent manner, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) and AGC target of 1e6 for the MS survey, scanning from 300 to 1750 m/z. For the MS/MS analysis, resolution was set to 35,000 (at m/z 400), AGC target to 1e5, minimum intensity to 4e4 and isolation window to 2.0 m/z. In order to minimize the repeated fragmentation of ions, an exclusion time of 45 seconds was programmed. The maximum injection time values for survey and MS/MS scans were 120ms and 124ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All PRM analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) using the same LC-MS/MS system described before with the following method modifications. m/z of proteotypic target peptides for EGFR, Cbl-b, CYLD and Filamin-A (FLNA) have been selected from previous top 12 data-dependent runs and listed in the instrument inclusion list. MS/MS spectra of target peptides were acquired in unscheduled PRM mode using a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) and an AGC target of 5e5 with a maximum injection time of 150-200ms [1-2]. Fragmentation was performed in HCD mode with normalized collision energy of 28. PRM data analysis was carried out on Skyline™ 3.6.0 software (MacCoss Lab Software, Lab Genome Sciences, UW) [3]. Spectral libraries were built using MaxQuant ms/ms search files. Resolving power and mass analyzer were set respectively to 60.000 and Orbitrap. Area under the curve values (AUC) relative to the 5-6 most intense product ions for each peptide were exported and plotted in a matrix which was used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cylindromatosis tumor suppressor protein (CYLD) is a deubiquitinase, best known as an essential negative regulator of the NFkB pathway. Previous studies have suggested an involvement of CYLD in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent signal transduction as well, as it was found enriched within the tyrosine-phosphorylated complexes in cells stimulated with the growth factor. EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling participates in central cellular processes and its tight regulation, partly through ubiquitination cascades, is decisive for a balanced cellular homeostasis. Here, using a combination of mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic approaches with biochemical and immunofluorescence strategies, we demonstrate the involvement of CYLD in the regulation of the ubiquitination events triggered by EGF. Our data show that CYLD regulates the magnitude of ubiquitination of several major effectors of the EGFR pathway by assisting the recruitment of the ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b to the activated EGFR complex. Notably, CYLD facilitates the interaction of EGFR with Cbl-b through its Tyr15 phosphorylation in response to EGF, which leads to fine-tuning of the receptor's ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. This represents a previously uncharacterized strategy exerted by this deubiquitinase and tumors suppressor for the negative regulation of a tumorigenic signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Hela, Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Prm, Cyld, Egfr

### Affiliations
Professor, PhD Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Southern Denmark University
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Michele Puglia

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Professor, PhD Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Southern Denmark University


