### Accession
PXD001202

### Title
Identification of cytoplasmic proteins interacting with unliganded estrogen receptor α and β- in human breast cancer cells

### Description
Estrogen Receptor subtypes (ERα and ERβ) are transcription factors sharing similar structure, however, they often perform opposite roles in breast cancer’s cell proliferation and tumor progression. Besides the well-characterized genomic actions of ERs upon ligand binding, rapid non-genomic cytoplasmic changes together with the recently discovered ligand-free action of ERs are emerging as key regulators of tumorigenesis. The identification of cytoplasmic interaction partners of unliganded ERα and ERβ may help characterize the molecular basis of the extra-nuclear mechanism of action of these receptors, revealing novel mechanisms to explain their role in breast cancer response or resistance to endocrine therapy. To this aim, in this study, cytoplasmic extracts from stably expressing TAP-ERα and -ERβ MCF-7 cell clones were subjected to interaction proteomics in the absence of estrogen stimulation, leading to the identification of 84 and 142 proteins associated with unliganded ERα and ERβ, respectively. Functional analyses of ER subtype-specific interactomes revealed significant differences in the molecular pathways associated to each receptor in the cytoplasm. This work reports the first identification of the unliganded ERα and ERβ cytoplasmic interactomes in breast cancer cells, providing novel experimental evidence on the non-genomic effects of ERs in the absence of hormonal stimulus.

### Sample Protocol
Human mammary carcinoma MCF-7 Tet-Off (Clontech-Takara, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France) cell lines were used to generate clones stably expressing either C-TAP-ERα, N-TAP-ERα, (indicated globally as TAP-ERα), C-TAP-ERβ or N-TAP-ERβ (indicated as TAP-ERb).TAP tag alone containing clone was used as control. TAP-purification, protein separation by SDS-PAGE and identification by LC-MS/MS was done as previously described.  references: Ambrosino, C., Tarallo, R., Bamundo, A., Cuomo, D., et al., Identification of a hormone-regulated dynamic nuclear actin network associated with estrogen receptor alpha in human breast cancer cell nuclei. Mol Cell Proteomics 2010, 9, 1352-1367  Tarallo, R., Bamundo, A., Nassa, G., Nola, E., et al., Identification of proteins associated with ligand-activated estrogen receptor alpha in human breast cancer cell nuclei by tandem affinity purification and nano LC-MS/MS. Proteomics 2011, 11, 172-179.  Nassa, G., Tarallo, R., Ambrosino, C., Bamundo, A., et al., A large set of estrogen receptor beta-interacting proteins identified by tandem affinity purification in hormone-responsive human breast cancer cell nuclei. Proteomics 2011, 11, 159-165.  Cirillo, F., Nassa, G., Tarallo, R., Stellato, C., et al., Molecular mechanisms of selective estrogen receptor modulator activity in human breast cancer cells: identification of novel nuclear cofactors of antiestrogen-ERalpha complexes by interaction proteomics. J Proteome Res 2013, 12, 421-431.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using Analyst QS 2.0 software. The LC-MS/MS data were searched against SwissProt 2010 (517802 sequences; 182492287 residues, (human, 20283 sequences) and SwissProt 2010x (516603 sequences; 181919312 residues, human 20278 sequences). The search criteria for Mascot searches were: trypsin digestion with one missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y) as variable modifications. For the LC-MS/MS spectra the maximum precursor ion mass tolerance was 50 ppm and MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance 0.2 Da, and peptide charge state of +1, +2 or +3 was used. All of the reported protein identifications were statistically significant (p<0.05). To eliminate the redundancy of proteins that appear in the database under different names and accession numbers, the single protein member with the highest protein score (top rank) was selected from multiprotein families to the identification results.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen receptor subtypes (ER&#x3b1; and ER&#x3b2;) are transcription factors sharing a similar structure but exerting opposite roles in breast cancer cells. Besides the well-characterized genomic actions of nuclear ERs upon ligand binding, specific actions of ligand-free ERs in the cytoplasm also affect cellular functions. The identification of cytoplasmic interaction partners of unliganded ER&#x3b1; and ER&#x3b2; may help characterize the molecular basis of the extra-nuclear mechanism of action of these receptors, revealing novel mechanisms to explain their role in breast cancer response or resistance to endocrine therapy. To this aim, cytoplasmic extracts from human breast cancer MCF-7 cells stably expressing tandem affinity purification-tagged ER&#x3b1; and ER&#x3b2; and maintained in estrogen-free medium were subject to affinity-purification and MS analysis, leading to the identification of 84 and 142 proteins associated with unliganded ER&#x3b1; and ER&#x3b2;, respectively. Functional analyses of ER subtype-specific interactomes revealed significant differences in the molecular pathways targeted by each receptor in the cytoplasm. This work, reporting the first identification of the unliganded ER&#x3b1; and ER&#x3b2; cytoplasmic interactomes in breast cancer cells, provides novel experimental evidence on the nongenomic effects of ERs in the absence of hormonal stimulus. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001202 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001202).

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Tap-tag, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki


