### Accession
PXD008630

### Title
T-cell protein half live -  Multiplexed Proteome Dynamics Profiling Reveals Mechanisms Controlling Protein Homeostasis

### Description
Determine half lives of proteins in T-cells using dynamic SILAC labeling

### Sample Protocol
T-cells cells harvested 3,7, 12, 24 and 48 h of SILAC media switch from light to heavy. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation plays important roles in biological processes and is tightly regulated. Further, targeted proteolysis is an emerging research tool and&#xa0;therapeutic strategy. However, proteome-wide technologies to investigate the causes and consequences of protein degradation in biological systems are lacking. We developed "multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling" (mPDP), a mass-spectrometry-based approach combining dynamic-SILAC labeling with isobaric mass tagging for multiplexed analysis of protein degradation and synthesis. In three proof-of-concept studies, we uncover different responses induced by the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 versus a JQ1 proteolysis targeting chimera; we&#xa0;elucidate distinct modes of action of estrogen receptor modulators; and we comprehensively classify HSP90 clients based on their requirement for HSP90 constitutively or during synthesis, demonstrating that constitutive HSP90 clients have lower thermal stability than non-clients, have higher affinity&#xa0;for the chaperone, vary between cell types, and change upon external stimuli. These findings highlight the potential of mPDP to identify dynamically controlled degradation mechanisms in cellular systems.

### Keywords
Dynamics silac, Turnover, Half live

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


