### Accession
PXD031559

### Title
Human follicular fluid hormone metabolism HPLC-MSMS

### Description
The concentrations of twenty kinds of hormones in the follicular fluid were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). An Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) instrument (Agilent, USA) was utilized. A PAL autosampler (CTC, Swiss) and a Gemini-NX-C18 column (2.0 mm×50 mm, 3 μm, Waters, USA) were used. The ion source was an API-4000 quadrupole electrostatic field orbit trap high-resolution mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The scanning mode was multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) (Agilent-1200 LC system coupled to an API400 mass spectrometer).

### Sample Protocol
The concentrations of twenty kinds of hormones in the follicular fluid were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). An Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) instrument (Agilent, USA) was utilized. A PAL autosampler (CTC, Swiss) and a Gemini-NX-C18 column (2.0 mm×50 mm, 3 μm, Waters, USA) were used. The ion source was an API-4000 quadrupole electrostatic field orbit trap high-resolution mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The scanning mode was multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) (Agilent-1200 LC system coupled to an API400 mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
The concentrations of twenty kinds of hormones in the follicular fluid were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). An Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) instrument (Agilent, USA) was utilized. A PAL autosampler (CTC, Swiss) and a Gemini-NX-C18 column (2.0 mm×50 mm, 3 μm, Waters, USA) were used. The ion source was an API-4000 quadrupole electrostatic field orbit trap high-resolution mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The scanning mode was multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) (Agilent-1200 LC system coupled to an API400 mass spectrometer).

### Publication Abstract
An increasing number of studies demonstrate that changes in neurotransmitters metabolic levels in follicular fluid are directly related to oocyte maturation, fertilization, the quality of embryo and pregnancy rates. However, the relationship between the intra-follicular neurotransmitters and the function of granulosa cells (GCs), and the outcome of in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-ET) is not clear. Human follicular fluid and cumulus GCs were harvested from large follicles obtained from patients undergoing IVF. Neurotransmitters and steroid hormones in follicular fluid were measured through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Based on the content of glutamine (Gln) in follicular fluid, the samples were divided into two groups: high Gln level group and low Gln level group. The expression of proliferation-, steroidogenesis- and antioxidant-related genes in GCs was detected by qRT-PCR. In vitro, KGN cells were used to further verify the effects of Gln and NE on GCs function. Primary and secondary outcomes were the number of mature and retrieved oocytes, and the ratio of high-quality embryos, respectively. Gln (46.75&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.74&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/mL) and norepinephrine (NE, 0.20&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.07&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/mL) were abundant neurotransmitters in follicular fluid, and exhibited a significantly positive correlation (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.5869, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.005). In high Gln level group, the expression of proliferation, steroidogenesis and antioxidant-related genes in GCs were higher than those in low Gln level group, and the contents of estriol and E2 in follicular fluid were more abundant. Moreover, the concentrations of Gln and NE in follicular fluid showed significantly positive correlation with IDH1 expression in GCs (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.3822, R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4009, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Importantly, a significantly positive correlation was observed between IDH1 expression in GCs and the ratio of higher-quality/cleaved embryos (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4480, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). In vitro studies further demonstrated that Gln and NE played synergistically function in improving GCs proliferation and E2 production by upregulating IDH1 expression. These data demonstrate that Gln and NE in follicular fluid might play significant positive roles in GCs function, and may be potential predictors for selecting optimal quality oocytes and evaluating the quality of embryonic development.

### Keywords
Human, Hplc-msms, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital
International Peace Maternity and Child Health hospital

### Submitter
lulu wang

### Lab Head
Dr lulu wang
International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital


