### Accession
PXD042397

### Title
human nucleus pulposus cell LC-MS/MS

### Description
To identify PPP1CA interactome in human nucleus pulposus cell

### Sample Protocol
After the cells were treated as indicated, they were washed twice with precooled PBS, lysed on ice by adding NP-40 for 30 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 25 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube, 10% was aspirated for use as input, and the remaining 90% of the supernatant was added to the primary antibody and Protein A/G beads and incubated at 4°C. Next, 1x SDS loading buffer was added to the resulting immunoprecipitate and denatured at 97°C for 5 min. According to the manufacture’s protocol, SDS-PAGE gel piece was decolorized, alkylated and enzymatically disintegrated.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were extracted, identified using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, USA) and analyzed using Proteome Discovery 1.4, Mascot server (v2.3, Matrix Science,

### Publication Abstract
Impaired transcription factor EB (TFEB) function and deficient autophagy activity have been shown to aggravate intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration (IDD), yet the underlying mechanisms remain less clear. Protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs) are critical for determining TFEB trafficking and transcriptional activity. Here, we demonstrate that TFEB activity is controlled by protein methylation in degenerated nucleus pulposus cells (NPCs), even though TFEB itself is incapable of undergoing methylation. Specifically, protein phosphatase 1 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP1CA), newly identified to dephosphorylate TFEB, contains a K141 mono-methylated site. In degenerated NPCs, increased K141-methylation of PPP1CA disrupts its interaction with TEFB and subsequently blocks TEFB dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation, which eventually leads to autophagy deficiency and NPC senescence. In addition, we found that the PPP1CA-mediated targeting of TFEB is facilitated by the protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 9B (PPP1R9B), which binds with PPP1CA and is also manipulated by K141 methylation. Further proteomic analysis revealed that the protein lysine methyltransferase suppressor of variegation 3-9 homologue 2 (SUV39H2) is responsible for the K141 mono-methylation of PPP1CA. Targeting SUV39H2 effectively mitigates NPC senescence and IDD progression, providing a potential therapeutic strategy for IDD intervention.

### Keywords
Human, Nucleus pulposus cell

### Affiliations
Wuhan union hospital
wuhan union hospital

### Submitter
Huaizhen Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Cao Yang
wuhan union hospital


