### Accession
PXD018785

### Title
Modelling Plasticity and Dysplasia of Pancreatic Ductal Organoids Derived from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells

### Description
Full protein measurements from in vitro differentiation of the human embryonic stem cell line HUES8 into pancreatic progenitors (PP) and pancreatic duct-like organoids (PDLOs). Protein intensities were quantified by mass spectrometry analysis from PPs at day 13 and from PDLOs at day 59. Please see related publication “Modelling Plasticity and Dysplasia of Pancreatic Ductal Organoids Derived from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells” for experimental details.

### Sample Protocol
Digest: Triplicates from each time series were lysed in urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 40 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor (cOmplete™, Roche) and 1x phosphatase inhibitor mixture). After lysing, the cells were centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g and 4 °C. The supernatant was diluted 1:10 and used to determine the protein concentration via Bradford protein assay (Pierce™ Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 ug protein of each sample was further digested. Therefore, samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 37 °C shaking at 700 rpm on a Thermoshaker and alkylated with 55 mM CAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. After diluting the samples <1.6 M urea with 40 mM Tris (pH 7.6) and 2 mM CaCl2, trypsin (Trypsin Sequencing Grade, Roche) was added 1:100 (enzyme:protein) and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C and 700 rpm. After the pre-incubation, trypsin was added again 1:100 (enzyme:protein) and incubated overnight at 37 °C and 700 rpm. Desalt:On the next day, samples were acidified with formic acid to pH 2-3 and further desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak columns (Waters Corp.). The columns were first wetted with 100 % ACN, followed by 0.1 % FA in 50 % ACN and further equilibrated with three washes of 0.1 % FA. The samples were slowly loaded onto the column and the flow-through was reloaded onto the column to increase peptide binding. After washing off unspecific binders with three times 0.1 % FA, peptides were eluted using 2x150 uL of 0.1 % FA in 50 % ACN. Samples were frozen at –80 °C and dried using a Speed-Vac. TMT-labeling:Before the samples were labeled with TMT10-plex, the peptide concentration was measured via Nanodrop™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT labeling was performed as previously described (Zecha et al, https://www.mcponline.org/content/18/7/1468). Briefly, 45 ug of peptides were reconstituted in 20 uL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 5 uL of 11.6 mM TMT 10-plex (Thermo Fisher) in 100 % anhydrous ACN was added to each sample. After incubating the samples for 1 h at 25 °C and 400 rpm, the reaction was stopped using 2 uL of 5 % hydroxylamine. All ten TMT labeled samples were pooled and the reaction vessels, where the labeling took place, were rinsed with 20 uL of 10 % FA in 10 % ACN for 5 minutes and 400 rpm, before this was also added to the pooled samples. The samples were frozen at –80 °C and dried using a Speed-Vac. Desalt:Pooled samples were further desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak columns (Waters Corp.). The columns were first wetted with 100 % ACN, followed by 0.1 % FA in 50 % ACN and further equilibrated with three washes of 0.1 % FA. The dried pooled samples were reconstituted in 1 mL of 0.1 % FA and loaded twice onto the column. After washing off unspecific binders with three times 0.1 % FA, peptides were eluted using 200 uL of 0.1 % FA in 50 % ACN. Samples were frozen at –80 °C and dried using a Speed-Vac. Fractionation: For high pH reversed phase fractionation, dried samples were reconstituted in MS-grad water with 10 % fractionation buffer A (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8)) and centrifuged for 5 min at 20.000 x g and 4 °C. The supernatant was then loaded on a C18 column (XBridge BEH130, 3.5 um, 2.1x150 mm, Waters Corp), which was connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher). After injecting 100 g peptides at a flow rate of 200 g/min, the system was equilibrated for 5 min with 85 % fractionation buffer B (MS-grade water), 10 % fractionation buffer A and 5 % fractionation buffer C (ACN). Peptides were eluted in a three-step linear gradient from 5 % to 7 % buffer C in 1 minute with a constant amount of 10 % buffer A. Then, a linear gradient from 7 % to 42 % buffer C in 44 minutes and from 42 % to 80 % buffer C in 6 minutes (with buffer A being constant at 10 %) was used. Starting from minute 3, 48 fractions (1 fraction/min) were collected in a 96 well plate and pooled to 24 fractions. For that, column 4 was pooled to column 1, column 5 was pooled to column 2 and column 6 was pooled to column 3. All fractions were frozen at -80 °C and dried using a Speed-Vac

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were searched with Maxquant v.1.5.7.4 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19029910) against the UniProtKB human reference list (downloaded 22.07.2013). For the search settings up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Reporter ion MS3 was set as quantification type and TMT10plex as isobaric labels. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Results were filtered by setting the protein and peptide false discovery rate to 1 % using a classical target-decoy approach. All the following data analysis was performed using the R programming language (version [6.1.7601]). From the Maxquant output, all reversed and “only identified by site” protein entries were filtered out and the log2 reporter ions intensities of the three replicates were further ComBat (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16632515) adjusted with the ‘sva’ package (version [3.30.1]) to correct for batch effects across the measured samples. For better comparison between the transcriptomic and proteomic expression values, the normalized CPM values and the batch effect corrected reporter ion intensities were normalized with the modified MComBat procedure (described in PMID: 29101300) based on the protein data and the correlation was further visualized by histogram plots (‘ggExtra’ package, version [0.8]). For the volcano plot, p-values were calculated with the ‘limma’ package (version [3.38.3]) and corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg. "Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing." Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological) 57.1 (1995): 289-300.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Organoids, Ductal organoids, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Krumm

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich Germany


