### Accession
PXD025376

### Title
Phosphoproteomics sample preparation impacts biological interpretation of signalling responses

### Description
Quantitative data-dependent acquisition phosphoproteomics (DDAP) has revolutionised cell signaling studies. However, the impact of the specific DDAP sample preparation method on the phosphoproteome quantified is unclear as each study quantifies only a fraction of the phosphoproteome. Here, we compared two distinct phosphoproteome datasets profiled either by a simple or a complex workflow. The complex workflow involved a strong-cation exchange chromatography-based phosphoproteomics (SCXPhos) and the simple workflow involved a modified single-run high-throughput EasyPhos-based phosphoproteomics (HighPhos). We used mouse embryonic stem cells as a biological system for the comparison and profiled phosphoproteomes at two different time points after exposure to two different doses of ionizing radiation (IR). Both methods achieved equal coverage of ~20,000 phosphosites in total, whereas combined profiling resulted in a dramatic increase in the depth of the phosphoproteome (>30,000 phosphosites). Over 96% of the identified IR-responsive phosphosites were method-specific. Despite such limited overlap, both methods uncovered a prominent role for ATM-mediated phosphorylation and reproducibly quantified a subset of shared IR-responsive phosphosites. The majority of IR-responsive phosphosites identified by SCXPhos concerned single phosphorylation events, whereas double- and multi-site phosphorylation events predominated after HighPhos. The coverage of the phosphoproteome increased to >82,000 phosphosites when multiple datasets were included suggesting that current global phosphoproteome studies are nowhere near representing the entire spectrum of phosphorylation events. Thus, our results demonstrate the power of the combination of different methodologies to obtain a better representative image of a broad view of phosphorylation signaling events.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed sample processing protocol for different phosphoproteomics experiments are described in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Detailed data processing protocol and bioinformatics methods for different phosphoproteomics experiments are described in the associated manuscripts and datasets with identifiers PXD025343 and PXD013620.

### Publication Abstract
The influence of phosphoproteomics sample preparation methods on the biological interpretation of signaling outcome is unclear. Here, we demonstrate a strong bias in phosphorylation signaling targets uncovered by comparing the phosphoproteomes generated by two commonly used methods-strong cation exchange chromatography-based phosphoproteomics (SCXPhos) and single-run high-throughput phosphoproteomics (HighPhos). Phosphoproteomes of embryonic stem cells exposed to ionizing radiation (IR) profiled by both methods achieved equivalent coverage (around 20,000 phosphosites), whereas a combined dataset significantly increased the depth (&gt;30,000 phosphosites). While both methods reproducibly quantified a subset of shared IR-responsive phosphosites that represent DNA damage and cell-cycle-related signaling events, most IR-responsive phosphoproteins (&gt;82%) and phosphosites (&gt;96%) were method-specific. Both methods uncovered unique insights into phospho-signaling mediated by single (SCXPhos) versus double/multi-site (HighPhos) phosphorylation events; particularly, each method identified a distinct set of previously unreported IR-responsive kinome/phosphatome (95% disparate) directly impacting the uncovered biology.

### Keywords
Scxphos, Sample preparation, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, High-throughput phosphoproteomics, Highphos, Comparative analysis, Tio2

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
DNA damage responses and cancer lab, Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Eithovenweg 20, 2333ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Bharath Sampadi

### Lab Head
Dr Harry Vrieling
DNA damage responses and cancer lab, Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Eithovenweg 20, 2333ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.


