### Accession
PXD019125

### Title
Black soldier fly as protein source for salmon

### Description
The present study was conducted to investigate the effect of graded levels of black soldier fly larvae (BSFL) (Hermetia illucens) meal and BSFL paste in extruded diets for Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). A total of 1260 Atlantic salmon with 34 g of mean initial weight were randomly distributed into 21 fiberglass tanks and fed (n=3) with seven extruded isolipidic and isonitrogenous diets for seven weeks. The experimental diets consisted of a positive control diet based on fishmeal, soy protein concentrate, corn gluten, faba bean and fish oil (Control_1); three diets with increased levels of full lipid  BSFL meal, substituting 6.25% (6.25_IM), 12.5% (12.5_IM) and 25% (25_IM) of the protein content of Control_1;  two diets with increased levels of full lipid BSFL paste, substituting 3.7% (3.7_IP) and 6.7% (6.7_IP); and  of protein from Control_1 and a negative a control with 0.84 % of formic acid (Control_2). We investigate the effect of diets on growth performance, mmune response and health.

### Sample Protocol
After seven weeks feeding, three fish per group (21 total) were randomly taken out, anesthetized (80 mg L-1 MS222) and weighed individually. The skin mucus was gently scraped using a cell scraper along the lateral line, collected into 2 ml cryotubes and immediately frozen for further protein extraction.

### Data Protocol
Twenty-one skin mucus samples, three samples per dietary groups were thawed on ice and homogenized using beads and ice-cold lysis buffer (Tris 20 mM, NaCl 100 mM, Triton X-100 0.05%, EDTA 5 mM, and protease inhibitor cocktail 1x). Then, the homogenate was centrifuged at 12000 x g for 25 min at 4 °C. The supernatant, containing soluble proteins, was then transferred to new tubes on ice. All protein samples were quantiﬁed by a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For proteomic analysis, 20 µg of total protein in PBS were pH adjusted to 8 by adding ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany). The samples were then digested with 10 µg trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-UHPLC system connected to a Q Exactive liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany). LC-MS/MS was run at the Proteomics Core Facility (PCF) at Oslo University. The acquired raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.4.1.2. and Perseus version 1.6.0.7 based on MS1 intensity quantification. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). The data were searched against the salmon proteome (82390 sequences, June 2019). Peptide identifications were filtered to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy strategy. The analysis was restricted to proteins reproducibly identified in all three replicates per diet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Skin mucus, Immune response, Salmon

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Department of Animal and Aquaculture Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Arboretveien 6, Ås, Norway.

### Submitter
Leidy Lagos

### Lab Head
Dr Margareth Øverland
Department of Animal and Aquaculture Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Arboretveien 6, Ås, Norway.


