### Accession
PXD024026

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia and proteomic biomarker trajectory inform prognostication in COVID-19 patients admitted to intensive care

### Description
Prognostic characteristics inform risk stratification in intensive care unit (ICU) patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We obtained blood samples (n = 474) from hospitalized COVID-19 patients (n = 123), non-COVID-19 ICU sepsis patients (n = 25) and healthy controls (n = 30). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA was detected in plasma or serum (RNAemia) of COVID-19 ICU patients when neutralizing antibody response was low. RNAemia was associated with higher 28-day ICU mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.84 [95% CI, 1.22–2.77] adjusted for age and sex). In longitudinal comparisons, COVID-19 ICU patients had a distinct proteomic trajectory associated with RNAemia and mortality. Among COVID-19-enriched proteins, galectin-3 binding protein (LGALS3BP) and proteins of the complement system were identified as interaction partners of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Finally, machine learning identified ‘Age, RNAemia’ and ‘Age, pentraxin-3 (PTX3)’ as the best binary signatures associated with 28-day ICU mortality.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the spike pull-down experiments were subject to in-solution tryptic digestion and C18 cleanup as described above. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. An UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoflow selector was coupled via an EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a C18 trap cartridge (Thermo Scientific, 160454) at a flow rate of 25 µL / min for 1 min, using 0.1% FA (aq). Peptides were eluted from the trap cartridge and separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray C18 column, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific, ES803A, at 45 °C) at a flow rate of 0.25 µL / min using the following gradient: 0–1 min, 1% B; 1–6 min, 1–6% B; 6−40 min, 6−18% B; 40–70 min, 18–35% B; 70–80 min, 35–45% B; 80–81 min, 45–99% B; 81–89.8 min, 99% B; 89.8–90 min, 99–1% B; 90–120 min, 1% B. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA (aq) and mobile phase B was 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (aq). Precursor MS1 spectra were acquired using Orbitrap detection (resolution 60000 at 200 m/z, scan range 350–1600). Data-dependent MS2 spectra of the most abundant precursor ions were obtained after higher-energy C-trap dissociation and Orbitrap detection (resolution 15000 at 200 m/z) with TopN mode (loop count 15) and dynamic exclusion (duration 40 s) enabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) was used to search raw SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein pull-down data files against a human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot version 2020 01, 20,365 protein entries) supplemented with SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (1 protein entry) using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin was used as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen as fixed and variable modifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Prognostic characteristics inform risk stratification in intensive care unit (ICU) patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We obtained blood samples (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;474) from hospitalized COVID-19 patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;123), non-COVID-19 ICU sepsis patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25) and healthy controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA was detected in plasma or serum (RNAemia) of COVID-19 ICU patients when neutralizing antibody response was low. RNAemia is associated with higher 28-day ICU mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.84 [95% CI, 1.22-2.77] adjusted for age and sex). RNAemia is comparable in performance to the best protein predictors. Mannose binding lectin 2 and pentraxin-3 (PTX3), two activators of the complement pathway of the innate immune system, are positively associated with mortality. Machine learning identified 'Age, RNAemia' and 'Age, PTX3' as the best binary signatures associated with 28-day ICU mortality. In longitudinal comparisons, COVID-19 ICU patients have a distinct proteomic trajectory associated with mortality, with recovery of many liver-derived proteins indicating survival. Finally, proteins of the complement system and galectin-3-binding protein (LGALS3BP) are identified as interaction partners of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. LGALS3BP overexpression inhibits spike-pseudoparticle uptake and spike-induced cell-cell fusion in vitro.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Biomarker, Pentraxin-3, Covid-19, Proteomics, Rnaemia

### Affiliations
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.


