### Accession
PXD030950

### Title
Analysis of human tau and age dependent changes in the synaptic and non-synaptic mitochondrial proteomes of the htau model of tauopathy

### Description
We investigated the effects of human tau on subcellular populations of the brain mitochondrial proteome in vivo using transgenic htau mice at ages preceding (5 months) and coinciding with (8 months) onset of tauopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Subpopulations (synaptic and non-synaptic) mitochondria were isolated from 3 biological replicates of each experimental group (wild-type or htau) at each age (5 or 8 months) by established discontinous Percoll gradient ultracentrifguation protocols. Resultant mitochondrial samples were lysed with 4% SDS/100 mM DTT/100 mM Tris pH 7.4 and quantified by protein assay. 35 mcg of each sample was processed for mass spectrometry using the FASP method, overnight tryptic digest, and cation exchange.  Eluted peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid, quantified by the Scopes method.  2 mcg of each peptide was injected and analyzed in triplicate by nano-LC-MS/MS in SWATH-ms mode on a 5600 TripleTOF (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
All fragment ion chromatograms were extracted and automatically integrated with PeakView software (Version 2.1, SCIEX, Framingham, MA). For peptide identification, our published reference spectral library was used (Stauch et al., 2014b, 2014a). This library was generated in ProteinPilot (Version 4.5, SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm and the default settings. All searches were performed against the UniProt Mus Musculus Proteome UP000000589 containing 17,077 reviewed proteins (SwissProt). Combined results yielded a library of 4,234 proteins identified with high confidence (greater than 99%) that passes the global false discovery rate (FDR) from fit analysis using a critical FDR of 1%. In accordance with previously published work (Stauch et al., 2014b, 2014a), we selected five peptides and five transitions option for quantitative analysis and performed targeted data extraction for each peptide. For each peptide, the fragment ion chromatograms were extracted using the SWATH isolation window set to a width of 10 min and 50 ppm accuracy (Stauch et al., 2014b, 2014a). To calibrate retention times, synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked-in to the samples in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Intensities were log2 transformed and quantile normalized across samples using the R language for statistical computing (R: The R Project for Statistical Computing; Bolstad et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Synaptic, Tau, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

### Submitter
Kelly Stauch

### Lab Head
Dr Kelly L. Stauch, Ph.D.
Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA


