### Accession
PXD015384

### Title
TNP1 and TNP2 mRNA binding proteins from mouse testes

### Description
We hypothesized that specific proteins associate with Tnp mRNAs to suppress or stimulate their translation. We took a proteomics approach and developed a method to isolate endogenous mRNA species and their associated proteins. We employed biotinylated DNA oligonucleotides and avidin resin to capture endogenous Tnp mRNAs and associated molecules from testis extract, and we specifically eluted the complexes with non-biotinylated oligonucleotides. We then used mass spectrometry to identify proteins that were associated with the Tnp1 and Tnp2 mRNAs but not Actin mRNAs. We hypothesize that the proteins that are specifically enriched by Tnp1 and Tnp2 mRNA pulldowns relative to Actin mRNA pulldown may function to regulate these transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
Olignucleotide-mediated ribonucleoprotein complex purification. Neutravidin resin (Pierce) was centrifuged briefly (500 g × 1 min) and washed three times with PBS (prepared with DEPC-treated water). DNA oligonucleotides for RNA isolation with 3′ biotin were generated by Eurofins Genomics. Two nmol of biotinylated oligonucleotide was incubated with the resin while rotating at room temperature for 30–60 min and washed once with PBS. Whole testis lysate was prepared from adult mice by homogenizing tissue in NP40 lysis buffer containing Halt™ protease and phosphatase inhibitor (ThermoFisher) and RNase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher). 5 mg of testis lysate was added to the biotinylated-oligonucleotide/resin mix and incubated while rotating at 4 °C for 1–2 h. After incubation, the volume was transferred into Micro Bio-Spin columns (BioRad) and centrifuged (500 g × 1 min). The column was washed three times with PBS. To elute target RNA, we added 3 nmol of competing non-biotinylated oligonucleotide, capped the column, and agitated at 60 °C for 10 min. Remaining protein was eluted by adding NuPage LDS loading buffer containing 10% v/v BME(Invitrogen) directly to the column, heating for 5–10 min at 95 °C, and then centrifuging (500 g × 1 min) to collect eluate. For protein analysis, the eluates were mixed with NuPage LDS loading buffer containing 10% v/v BME(Invitrogen), boiled and electrophoresed on 4–14% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen). Mass spectrometric analysis. Briefly, gel slices were excised and minced manually. Digests were then performed with a ProGest robotic digester (Genomic Solutions) where the gel pieces were destained by incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% v/v acetonitrile (2 × 15 min). The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, followed by drying under a nitrogen stream, and then incubated with 250 ng trypsin (Promega) for 8 h at 37 °C. The digests were collected and peptides were re-extracted three times. The extractions were pooled for each sample, lyophilized, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS was performed using an Agilent 1100 nanoLC system on-line with an Agilent XCT Ultra ion trap mass spectrometer with the chip cube interface. The peptide digest was loaded onto an Agilent C18 chip (75 μm × 43 mm) followed by a 15-min wash with 5% v/v acetonitrile/0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile as follows: 0–45 min, 5–50% v/v acetonitrile; 45–50 min, 50–95% v/v acetonitrile; 50–60 min, acetonitrile maintained at 95%. The mass spectrometer was used in the positive ion, standard enhanced mode and included settings of a mass range from 200 to 2200 m/z, an ionization potential of 2.1 kV, an ion charge control smart target (number of ions in the trap prior to scan out)of 100,000 or 200 ms of accumulation, and a 1.0-V fragmentation amplitude. MS/MS data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition format with the six most abundant ions from each MS scan further interrogated by MS/MS. The automated switching for MS/MS required a threshold of 5000 counts.

### Data Protocol
The Spectrum Mill software suite from Agilent was used to generate peaks lists from the data obtained from each NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using the data extractor feature. The data extractor settings included filtering for deconvoluted ions observed between 300 and 5000 Da and a retention time between 10 min and 60 min. MS scans with the same precursor mass (±1.5 m/z) and retention time within 30 s were merged. Moreover, of the remaining MS/MS spectra, only spectra that contained sequence tag information greater than two residues were submitted for database searching. The resulting extracted data were then searched against the SwissProt/UniProt database (release 2016_01) using the MS/MS search function in the Spectrum Mill software. Search settings included a trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 1.5 Da, a product ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, variable methionine oxidation, and a minimum matched spectral intensity of 60%.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogenesis is a differentiation process that requires dramatic changes to DNA architecture, a process governed in part by Transition Nuclear Proteins 1 and 2 (TNP1 and TNP2). Translation of Tnp1 and Tnp2 mRNAs is temporally disengaged from their transcription. We hypothesized that RNA regulatory proteins associate specifically with Tnp mRNAs to control the delayed timing of their translation. To identify potential regulatory proteins, we isolated endogenous mRNA/protein complexes from testis extract and identified by mass spectrometry proteins that associated with one or both Tnp transcripts. Five proteins showed strong association with Tnp transcripts but had low signal when Actin mRNA was isolated. We visualized the expression patterns in testis sections of the five proteins and found that each of the proteins was detected in germ cells at the appropriate stages to regulate Tnp RNA expression.

### Keywords
Spermatocytes, Mouse, Rna binding proteins

### Affiliations
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory; National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Jason Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Jason G. Williams
Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory; National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; National Institutes of Health


