### Accession
PXD002352

### Title
Human Luminal-like breast cancer xenograft in mouse

### Description
One of the greatest advances in therapy of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer has been the development of endocrine therapy. More than two thirds of primary breast tumors express estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) and their growth is mainly dependent on estrogen receptor activity. Several therapeutic approaches have thus been designed to inhibit ER activity in breast tissue. Tamoxifen, a selective ER modulator, is one of the main treatment options for premenopausal women with advanced ER positive breast cancer, and has also become well established as adjuvant therapy in the early breast cancer setting (Davies et al., 2011; Group, 1998; Jaiyesimi et al., 1995). In contrast to tamoxifen, which in other tissues such as bone and endometrium, can exert partial agonistic activity (Braithwaite et al., 2003; Fisher et al., 1994; Pietras, 2006), the selective ER downregulator, fulvestrant, is a potent ER antagonist. Binding of fulvestrant to ER inhibits receptor dimerization and nuclear uptake, prevents estrogen-response element binding and accelerates ER degradation (Dauvois et al., 1993; Dowsett et al., 2005; Fawell et al., 1990; Wakeling et al., 1991). Fulvestrant is approved for treatment of postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer who have relapsed or progressed on first-line endocrine therapy (Howell et al., 2002; Osborne et al., 2002; Robertson et al., 2003).  Estrogen deprivation by treatment with aromatase inhibitors (such as letrozole, anastrozole or exemestane) which block synthesis of estrogens is another effective therapy option in postmenopausal women (Bonneterre et al., 2000; Cuzick et al., 2010; Dowsett et al., 2010; Mouridsen et al., 2001; Nabholtz et al., 2000).  The large majority of patients with ER+ breast cancer experience an initial response to endocrine therapy, however, in many of these patients, the disease subsequently progresses and eventually anti-estrogen therapy ceases to have effect. Biomarkers predicting response to estrogen deprivation and new alternative treatments targeting the pathways supporting estrogen independent growth are therefore urgently needed (Patani and Martin, 2014; Patani et al., 2013). In order to understand how tumors respond to withdrawal of their main growth signal, a comparison of molecular features of tumor before and during endocrine therapy is necessary, and the fate of individual cancer cell sub-clones should be monitored. Since studies of cellular dynamics are very difficult to perform with clinical material, we made use of a patient derived, estrogen dependent, orthotopically growing luminal-like primary breast cancer xenograft model (PDX) (Bergamaschi et al., 2009; Huuse et al., 2012). This PDX model is a representative model for luminal breast cancers as the molecular characteristics, cellular heterogeneity and estrogen dependency of the primary tumor are retained over many passages. Functionally different subpopulations of cancer cells were previously defined by expression of the markers CD24 and SSEA-4 in this model (Skrbo et al., 2014), and it is therefore a suitable model for comparison of cellular and molecular effects of estrogen deprivation and ER-signaling inhibition. In this study, a quantitative MS-based proteomic analysis using SILAC and a label-free approach were performed, aiming to map changes in protein expression induced by endocrine therapy. Inhibition of ER-signaling seemed to induce CD24 and SSEA-4 expression on residual tumor cells. Proteomic analysis revealed overexpression of enzymes involved in TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid beta-oxidation following endocrine treatment when compared to untreated tumors. These results indicated possible reprogramming of cell metabolism and utilization of aerobic respiration, i.e. oxidative phosphorylation, in response to endocrine therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and SILAC labeling MDA-MB-231 (ATCC, LGC st., Boras, Sweden) were cultivated in 162cm2 flasks (Corning, NY, USA) at 37°C, 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Cells were grown in SILAC RPMI (PAA, Linz, Austria) lacking L-Arginine, L-Lysine and L-glutamine supplemented with 10% Dialyzed FBS (GIBCO Invitrogen/Life technologies, Stockholm, Sweden), 0.798 mM (13C6)-L-Lysine-2HCl and 0.099mM (13C6 15N4)-L-Arginine-HCl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Malmö, Sweden) and 2mM L-glutamine (Gibco Invitrogen). After achieving complete isotopic labeling (determined by a control HPLC-MS run), cells were detached using trypsin (Gibco Invitrogen), washed three times in ice cold sterile PBS and counted. Cell pellets where stored at -80°C until protein extraction.  Protein extraction and sample pooling  Cell pellets were thawed on ice, re-suspended in 2X Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad lab., Hercules, CA, USA) at ca. 5x104 cells/µl and incubated for 10 minutes at 95°C followed by 30 minutes on ice. After 5 minutes centrifugation at max speed in a bench-top centrifuge, supernatants were collected. For each sample, a volume corresponding to ca. 8x104 cells from the xenografts was pooled with the SILAC-labeled MDA-MB-231 at 1:1 ratio and diluted with an equal volume of Milli-Q water.   SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion  Triplicate samples were re-suspended in an SDS-containing buffer (final concentration 4-7,5%) and were heated at 98°C for 5 minutes before determining the protein concentration using the BCA kit (Sigma Diagnostics, Stockholm, Sweden). Protein samples were mixed with sample buffer (0.05 M Tris-Cl, 0.05 M SDS, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.1% DTT) and heated again at 98°C for 5 minutes before separation on a 12.5% Criterion Precast SDS-PAGE gel (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 25°C. 10 µg of protein was loaded per sample. Gels were washed in Milli-Q water, stained 1h with GelCode (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), washed overnight in Milli-Q water and each lane was manually sliced into 5 fractions. Gel slices were destained by washing 3 times in 25mM AMBIC, 50% ACN and dried in a Speedvac. Samples were then reduced (10mM DTT, 50mM AMBIC, 1 hour at 56°C) and alkylated (55mM IAA, 50mM AMBIC, 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark), washed 3 times with 50mM AMBIC and dehydrated with ACN before being dried in a Speedvac. The slices were rehydrated with 12.5 µg/ml sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50mM AMBIC and the digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted in 75% ACN, 1% FA. Eluted peptides were dried in a Speedvac and re-suspended in 10 µl 0.1% FA and immediately analyzed by LC-MS. Peptides were separated using an Eksigent nano-LC 2D™ system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) consisting of a solvent degasser, a nanoflow pump, and a cooled autosampler. 5 µl of sample were washed on pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap 100-C18 5μm 5x0.3mm, Thermo Scientific) for 12 minutes with constant flow of 12 µl/min solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and then separated on a 150mm x 75µm column home-packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3µm (Dr. Maisch Gmbh, Ammerbuck-Entringen, Germany). Peptides elution was carried out using a multistep segmented gradient of solvent B (0,1% FA in ACN) at a constant flow of 300 nl/min: 3 – 10% over 10 minutes then 10-45% over 65 minutes, 45-90% over 15 minutes, followed by a washing step of 90% solvent B for 15. The HPLC system was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300 –2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap in centroid mode, with a resolution of 60000. The spray voltage was set to 2kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was 180°C. The seven most intense ions from the survey scan performed by the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation in the LTQ (normalized collision energy 35, parent mass selection window 0.5Da, 30ms activation time and minimum signal threshold for MS/MS scans set to 500 counts). All unassigned charge states and singly charged ions were rejected for fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion list was limited to a maximum of 500 masses with a maximum retention time of 2 minutes and a relative mass window of 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis Label free data analysis was carried out in two steps. Initially raw data ﬁles were imported in proﬁle mode into Progenesis LC-MS version 3.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) and aligned automatically with inspection showing that manual adjustment was not necessary. All peptide features with MS/MS data were selected for the quantitation and identiﬁcation. Searches were done against the human section of SwissProt 2011-08-17 with separate isoform entries and concatenated with a reverse sequence database of equal size, totaling 71,324 entries, using Mascot version 2.3.01. The mass tolerance was set to 1.2 Da for parent ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions and one missed protease cleavage was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable with an FDR of 1%. The raw data files were re-analyzed using MaxQuant software utilizing the LFQ normalization option (Cox et al., 2014). Searches were carried out using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant using a locally saved copy of SwissProt human database (release 2014_11) with the FDR set at 1% both for peptide and protein identification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable. For SILAC MS/MS runs, raw data files from the mass spectrometer were submitted to MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 (http://maxquant.org) for protein identification and quantification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable. The built-in Andromeda search engine was set to browse a locally stored copy of SwissProt human database (version 130929) with the FDR set at 1% both for peptide and protein identification. Subsequent data handling was performed in Perseus (version 1.3.04) and Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenograft, Luminal, Cell line comparison, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Professor of protein technology, Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Department of Immunotechnology

### Submitter
Ufuk Kirik

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Professor of protein technology, Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


