### Accession
PXD022057

### Title
Elucidation of BMI1, RYBP and H2AK119ub interactomes in Glioblastoma

### Description
Identification of BMI1, RYBP and H2AK119UB interactome in Glioblastoma (GBM) to elucidate BMI1 roles independent of the PRC1-complex in GBM.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitation ChIP was performed as previously described [104], with modifications as follows. Cells were fixed with an initial cross-linking step of 45 min with 2 mM Di(N-succinimidyl) glutarate (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. 80424) in 1 X PBS (Sigma) at room temperature, followed by a 1 X PBS (Sigma) wash and a second fixation step of 12 min with 1% formaldehyde (Sigma) in 1 X PBS. After quenching with glycine, washes and lysis as described in [104] , chromatin was sonicated using a Bioruptor Pico from Diagenode, on a 30 s on/off cycle for 20 cycles. Immunoprecipitation was performed using 200 μg of chromatin and 14 μg of antibodies BMI1 (39993, Actif Motif), RYBP (AB3637, Millipore) or H2AK119ub (Millipore 05-678). It is very important to note as a modification, we did not use proteinase K removal step at any point or elute chromatin-protein complexes from protein G (Sigma) beads. We substituted these steps for 100mM AMBIC (Sigma) washes of 30 minutes twice  to prepare chromatin pull-downs for MS as described previously [105]. Final chromatin-bound beads were resuspended in 40 μl of 100 mM AMBIC buffer for MS analysis. Protein immunoprecipitation  Immunoprecipitation was performed using 200 μg of protein and using Pierce MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit, protein A/G (90409, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer instructions in SDS-free conditions. Protein extracts were pulled down using 10 µg BMI1 antibody (39993, Actif Motif) or 10µg RYBP antibody (AB3637, Millipore). Elution of proteins were sent to MS analysis diluted in 40 μl of 100 mM AMBIC buffer (Sigma). Mass spectrometry Two independent biological replicates of two different GBM cell lines were sent for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteomic experiments were performed in two technical replicates per biological condition using mass spectrometry as reported[106]. For ChIP samples, ChIP protein complex beads were digested into peptides using trypsin. In the case of IP samples, proteins were eluted from beads prior digestion with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18+carbon top tips (Glygen corparation, TT2MC18.96) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid. After drying in a speed-vac to remove ACN, dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by Nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol:  MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and searched against the SwissProt database restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis. We calculated the fold-change of MS2 spectra intensity of BMI1-bound proteins comparing LN-428iCRBMI1 and U-87MGaCRBMI1 over their matching empty backbones LN-428iCRempty and U87-MGaCRempty respectively. Protein contaminants from MS list were removed using CRAPome software (Crapome.org).

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive intrinsic brain tumour in adults. Epigenetic mechanisms controlling normal brain development are often dysregulated in GBM. Among these, BMI1, a structural component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), which promotes the H2AK119ub catalytic activity of Ring1B, is upregulated in GBM and its tumorigenic role has been shown <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Here, we have used protein and chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis to elucidate the protein composition of PRC1 in GBM and transcriptional silencing of defining interactors in primary patient-derived GIC lines to assess their functional impact on GBM biology. We identify novel regulatory functions in mRNA splicing and cholesterol transport which could represent novel targetable mechanisms in GBM.

### Keywords
Rybp, Gbm, H2ak119ub, Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Lc-ms/ms, Bmi1, Chipms, Ipms

### Affiliations
Prof Of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 |
Centre for Haemato Oncology

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R Cutillas
Prof Of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 |


