### Accession
PXD027089

### Title
Copper depletion modulates OXPHOS in SOX2/OCT4+ cancer cells to impair triple negative breast cancer metastasis.

### Description
Copper serves as a co-factor for a host of metalloenzymes that contribute to malignant progression. The orally bioavailable copper chelating agent tetrathiomolybdate (TM) has been associated with a significant survival benefit in high-risk triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Despite these promising data, the mechanisms by which copper depletion impacts metastasis are poorly understood and this remains a major barrier to advancing TM to a randomized phase II trial. Here, using two independent TNBC models, we report a discrete subpopulation of highly metastatic SOX2/OCT4+ cells within primary tumors that exhibit elevated intracellular copper levels and marked sensitivity to TM. Global proteomic and metabolomic profiling identified TM-mediated inactivation of Complex IV as the primary metabolic defect in the SOX2/OCT4+ cell population. We identified the AMPK/mTORC1 energy sensor as an important downstream pathway and show that AMPK inhibition rescues TM-mediated loss of invasion. Furthermore, loss of the mitochondria-specific copper chaperone, COX17, restricted copper deficiency to mitochondria and phenocopied TM-mediated alterations. These findings identify a novel copper-metabolism-metastasis axis with potential to enrich patient populations in next-generation therapeutic trials.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were treated with or without TM for 48 hours. After treatment cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS twice and quantitative protein abundance profiling was performed using 16plex TMT chemical labeling and MS3, multi-notched LC-MS analysis on at least 3-5 replicates for each sample using Orbitrap Fusion73. Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS (4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid), pH 8.5 with protease (complete mini EDTA-free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (cocktail 2 and 3, Sigma).  Samples were then sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor) for 3 cycles (1 min ON/1 min OFF).  BCA assay was used to determine the protein concentrations.  Aliquots of 100 µg were taken for each sample (based on BCA assay) and reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride), alkylated with 10 mM IAA (iodoacetamide), and quenched with 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol).  Samples were diluted to 100 µL with lysis buffer and precipitated by chloroform-methanol74.  Pellets were resuspended in 50 µL 200 mM EPPS buffer, digested with Lys-C protease at a 1:50 protease-to-protein ratio for 5 hours at 37°C, then overnight with trypsin (1:50) at 37°C.     Anhydrous acetonitrile was added at a final volume of 30%. TMTPro (16-plex) reagents were added to peptides at a 2.8:1 (TMT reagent-to-peptide ratio) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature.  A label check was performed to determine mixing ratios, labelling efficiency, and number of missed cleavages by pooling 1 µg from each sample, desalting, then analyzing by mass spectrometry.  Samples were mixed 1:1 across all channels, dried to remove acetonitrile, then desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) Sep-Pak (Waters), and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Dried samples were then immediately fractionated by high pH. Fractions (flow-through and washes) were vacuum centrifuged and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS.     Samples were reconstituted in 1 mL of 2% ACN/25 mM ABC.  Peptides were fractionated into 48 fractions. An Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Fraction Collector using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 um 4.6 x 250 mm) was operated at 1 mL/min.  Buffer A consisted of 100% water, buffer B consisted of 100% acetonitrile, and buffer C consisted of 25 mM ABC.  The fractionation gradient operated as follows: 1% B to 5% B in 1 min, 5% B to 35% B in 61 min, 35% B to 60% B in 5 min, 60% B to 70% B in 3 min, 70% B to 1% B in 10min, with 10% C the entire gradient to maintain pH.  The 48 fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions (i.e. fractions 1, 13, 25, 37 were pooled, followed by fractions 2, 14, 26, 38, etc.) so that every 12th fraction was used to pool.  Pooled fractions were vacuum-centrifuged then reconstituted in 1% ACN/0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS.   Fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAQUITY UPLC (Waters) with a 50 cm (inner diameter 75 µm) EASY-Spray Column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å) heated to 60°C coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 1 to 35% acetonitrile (0.1% FA) in water (0.1% FA) over 4 hours and analyzed by SPS-MS3.  MS1 scans were acquired over a range of m/z 375-1500, 120K resolution, AGC target of 4x105, and maximum IT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on MS1 scans of charge 2-7 using an isolation of 0.7 m/z, collision induced dissociation with activation of 35%, turbo scan and max IT of 50 ms.  MS3 scans were acquired using specific precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches, m/z range 100-1000, 50K resolution AGC target of 1e5. Differentially expressed proteins (log2 fold change>1 or <-1 and p<0.05) were identified.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the all fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mus musculus/ Homo sapiens UniProt protein database downloaded on 2019/12/13 (92,249 entries). Methionine oxidation was set as   variable modification, while cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT16plex (K) and TMT16plex   (N-term) were specified as fixed modifications. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was set as threshold for identification. Gene ontology analysis was performed on significantly downregulated proteins using mouse genome for ML1 cells. The count refers to gene/protein count.

### Publication Abstract
Copper serves as a co-factor for a host of metalloenzymes that contribute to malignant progression. The orally bioavailable copper chelating agent tetrathiomolybdate (TM) has been associated with a significant survival benefit in high-risk triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Despite these promising data, the mechanisms by which copper depletion impacts metastasis are poorly understood and this remains a major barrier to advancing TM to a randomized phase II trial. Here, using two independent TNBC models, we report a discrete subpopulation of highly metastatic SOX2/OCT4+&#x2009;cells within primary tumors that exhibit elevated intracellular copper levels and a marked sensitivity to TM. Global proteomic and metabolomic profiling identifies TM-mediated inactivation of Complex IV as the primary metabolic defect in the SOX2/OCT4+&#x2009;cell population. We also identify AMPK/mTORC1 energy sensor as an important downstream pathway and show that AMPK inhibition rescues TM-mediated loss of invasion. Furthermore, loss of the mitochondria-specific copper chaperone, COX17, restricts copper deficiency to mitochondria and phenocopies TM-mediated alterations. These findings identify a copper-metabolism-metastasis axis with potential to enrich patient populations in next-generation therapeutic trials.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Ampk, Oxphos, Metastasis, Tetrathiomolybdate, Metabolism, Copper, Sox2/oct4+ cells, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
MSKCC
professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Cell and Dev Biology Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Zhuoning Li

### Lab Head
Dr Vivek Mittal
professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Cell and Dev Biology Weill Cornell Medicine


