### Accession
PXD017159

### Title
Dynamics in protein translation sustaining T cell preparedness

### Description
In response to pathogenic threats, naïve T cells rapidly transition from a quiescent to activated state, yet the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Using a pulsed SILAC approach, we investigated the dynamics of mRNA translation kinetics and protein turnover in human naïve and activated T cells. Our datasets uncovered that transcription factors maintaining T cell quiescence had constitutively high turnover, which facilitated their depletion upon activation. Furthermore, naïve T cells maintained a surprisingly large number of idling ribosomes as well as 242 repressed mRNA species and a reservoir of glycolytic enzymes. These components were rapidly engaged following stimulation, promoting an immediate translational and glycolytic switch to ramp up the T cell activation program. Our data elucidate new insights into how T cells maintain a prepared state to mount a rapid immune response, and provide a resource of protein turnover, absolute translation kinetics and protein synthesis rates in T cells (www.immunomics.ch).

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were washed with PBS, lysed in 8M urea, 10 mM HEPES (pH 8), 10 mM DTT and then sonicated at 4°C for 15 min (level 5, Bioruptor, Diagenode). Alkylation was performed in the dark for 30 min by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). A two-step proteolytic digestion was performed. First, samples were digested at room temperature (RT) with LysC (1:50, w/w) for 3 hours. Then, they were diluted 1:5 with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (pH 8) and digested with trypsin (1:50, w/w) at RT overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified and loaded on C18 StageTips49. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN), dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Savant, Concentrator plus, SC 110 A), and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 0.5% acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.54) was used to analyze MS raw files51. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine52. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across different replicates within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis. Copy numbers were estimated based on the protein mass of cells53. We set the protein mass of a naive T cell to 25 pg and of an activated T cell to 75 pg.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cell preparedness, T cell activation, T cells

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vincenzo Vela 6 - CH-6500 Bellinzona

### Submitter
Matteo Pecoraro

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Geiger
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland


