### Accession
PXD003129

### Title
Protein markers of Bursaphelenchus xylophilus Steiner & Buhrer, 1934 (Nickle, 1970) populations using quantitative proteomics and character compatibility

### Description
The Pine Wood Nematode (PWN) Bursaphelenchus xylophilus is a severe forest pathogen in countries where it has been introduced and is considered a worldwide quarantine organism. In this study, protein markers for differentiating populations of this nematode were identified by studying differences among four selected Iberian and one American population. These populations were compared by quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ), which considers the level of protein expression. From a total of 2862 proteins identified using the public database from the B. xylophilus genome project, 216 were unambiguous and significantly differentially expressed in the studied populations. Comparisons of their  pairwise ratio were statistically treated and supported in order to convert them into discrete character states, suggesting that 141 proteins were not informative as population specific markers. Application of the Character Compatibility methodology on the remaining 75 proteins (belonging to families with different biological functions) excludes 27 which are incompatible among them. Considering only the compatible proteins, the method selects a subset of 34 specific unique protein markers which allowed the compared classification of the Iberian isolates. This approach makes it easier search for diagnostic tools and phylogenetic inference within species and populations of a pathogen exhibiting a high level of genetic diversity.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion of pooled samples, peptide labelling with iTRAQ reagent and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Generated MGF files were independently searched against the Bursaphelenchus xylophilus database containing 18074 protein coding genes and their corresponding reversed entries using the Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, iTRAQ4plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p<0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% False Discovery Rates (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins having at least two quantitated peptides were considered in the quantitation. A 5% quantitation FDR threshold was estimated to consider the significant differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The Pine Wood Nematode (PWN) Bursaphelenchus xylophilus is a severe forest pathogen in countries where it has been introduced and is considered a worldwide quarantine organism. In this study, protein markers for differentiating populations of this nematode were identified by studying differences among four selected Iberian and one American population. These populations were compared by quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ). From a total of 2860 proteins identified using the public database from the B. xylophilus genome project, 216 were unambiguous and significantly differentially regulated in the studied populations. Comparisons of their pairwise ratio were statistically treated and supported in order to convert them into discrete character states, suggesting that 141 proteins were not informative as population specific markers. Application of the Character Compatibility methodology on the remaining 75 proteins (belonging to families with different biological functions) excludes 27 which are incompatible among them. Considering only the compatible proteins, the method selects a subset of 30 specific unique protein markers which allowed the compared classification of the Iberian isolates. This approach makes it easier search for diagnostic tools and phylogenetic inference within species and populations of a pathogen exhibiting a high level of genetic diversity.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Proteins population biomarkers, Character compatibility, Itraq, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales (MNCN-CSIC)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Alfonso Navas
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales (MNCN-CSIC)


