### Accession
PXD040496

### Title
Deubiquitinase USP9X loss sensitizes renal cancer cells to mTOR inhibition

### Description
mTOR is a central regulator of mammalian metabolism and physiology. Aberrant hyperactivation of this pathway promotes tumor growth and metastasis and drives tumor resistance to chemotherapy and cancer drugs, making mTOR an attractive cancer therapeutic target. mTOR inhibitors have been approved to treat cancer, however, the basis for drug sensitivity remains poorly understood. Here, whole exome sequencing of three chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC) patients with exceptional mTOR inhibitor sensitivity, uncovered USP9X deubiquitinase as the only mutated gene shared by the tumors. The clonal characteristics of the mutations, revealed by studying multiple patients’ primary and metastatic samples along the years, together with the low USP9X mutation rate in unselected chRCC series, reinforced a causal link between USP9X and mTOR inhibitor sensitivity. Rapamycin treatment of USP9X depleted HeLa and renal cancer 786-O cells and the pharmacological inhibition of USP9X, confirmed a crucial role of this protein in the patients’ sensitivity to mTOR inhibition. As no direct effect of USP9X in mTORC1 was detected, we performed ubiquitylome analyses that identified p62 as a direct USP9X target. Increased p62 ubiquitination and an augmented rapamycin effect upon bortezomib treatment, together with p62 and LC3 immunofluorescence assays, suggested that dysregulated autophagy in USP9X depleted cells can synergize with mTOR inhibitors. In summary, here we show that USP9X constitutes a potential novel marker of sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors in chRCC patients and represents a clinically exploitable strategy that could increase sensitivity to these drugs

### Sample Protocol
For K-ε-GG profiling and proteome analysis, cellular pellets were lysed in 5% SDC, 100 mM TrisHCl buffer pH 7.5, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (HALT, Pierce) and Benzonase (Merck). Proteins were reduced and alkylated 1 h at room temperature with 15 mM TCEP and 35 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma). Lysates were then digested with Lys-C (Wako, enzyme/ protein ratio 1:200) followed by trypsin (Trypzean, Sigma; enzyme/ protein ratio 1:50). Digests were quenched with TFA, peptides desalted and lyophilized. For enrichment of K-ε-GG peptides, the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology, 5562) was used. Eluted peptides were desalted using StageTips and analyzed by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/TrEMBL, 20,303 sequences, march 2018) supplemented with commonly found laboratory contaminant protein sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines, protein N-term and addition of glycine-glycine to lysine (K-GG) as variable modifications. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). For label free quantification match between runs option was enabled. Afterwards, the “GlyGly (K)Sites.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (v1.10) 17 using the intensity values for further statistical analysis. A global normalization of log2-transformed intensities across samples was performed using the median. Missing values were imputed using the algorithms imp4p (for partially observed values) and Lapala (for values missing on an entire condition). Differential analysis was done using the empirical bayes statistics Limma. The FDR was estimated using Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a central regulator of mammalian metabolism and physiology. Aberrant hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway promotes tumor growth and metastasis, and can also promote tumor resistance to chemotherapy and cancer drugs; this makes mTOR an attractive cancer therapeutic target. mTOR inhibitors have been approved to treat cancer; however, the mechanisms underlying drug sensitivity remain poorly understood. Here, whole exome sequencing of three chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC) patients with exceptional mTOR inhibitor sensitivity revealed that all three patients shared somatic mutations in the deubiquitinase gene USP9X. The clonal characteristics of the mutations, which were amassed by studying multiple patients' primary and metastatic samples from various years, together with the low USP9X mutation rate in unselected chRCC series, reinforced a causal link between USP9X and mTOR inhibitor sensitivity. Rapamycin treatment of USP9X-depleted HeLa and renal cancer 786-O cells, along with the pharmacological inhibition of USP9X, confirmed that this protein plays a role in patients' sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors. USP9X was not found to exert a direct effect on mTORC1, but subsequent ubiquitylome analyses identified p62 as a direct USP9X target. Increased p62 ubiquitination and the augmented rapamycin effect upon bortezomib treatment, together with the results of p62 and LC3 immunofluorescence assays, suggested that dysregulated autophagy in USP9X-depleted cells can have a synergistic effect with mTOR inhibitors. In summary, we show that USP9X constitutes a potential novel marker of sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors in chRCC patients, and represents a clinical strategy for increasing the sensitivity to these drugs.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitinase, Usp9x, Renal cancer, Mtor

### Affiliations
Proteomics & MS Specialist Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Fernández Almagro 3. E28029 MADRID, SPAIN.  Phone  +34 912246900 ext 3112
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Garcia
Proteomics & MS Specialist Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Fernández Almagro 3. E28029 MADRID, SPAIN.  Phone  +34 912246900 ext 3112


