### Accession
PXD019073

### Title
A novel essential RNA-binding protein complex in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
ZC3H5 is an essential cytoplasmic trypanosome protein with a single Cx7Cx5Cx3H zinc finger domain. We here show that ZC3H5 forms a complex with three other proteins, encoded by genes Tb927.11.4900, Tb927.8.1500 and Tb927.7.3040. ZC3H5 interacts directly with Tb927.11.4900, which in turn interacts with Tb927.7.3040. Tb927.11.4900 has a circularly permuted GTPase domain, which is required for the Tb927.7.3040 interaction. RNA immunoprecipitation revealed that ZC3H5 is preferentially associated with poorly translated, low-stability mRNAs, the 5'-untranslated regions and coding regions of which were enriched in the motif (U/A)UAG(U/A). Tethering of ZC3H5, or other complex components, to a reporter repressed its expression. However, depletion of ZC3H5 in vivo did not increase the abundance of ZC3H5-bound mRNAs; instead, counter-intuitively, there were very minor decreases in a few targets. This was accompanied by marked increases in the abundance of very stable mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins. Depletion also resulted in an increase in monosomes at the expense of large polysomes, and appearance of a "halfmer" disomes containing two 80S subunits and one 40S subunit. We speculate that the ZC3H5 complex is implicated in quality control during the translation of sub-optimal open reading frames, and that its assembly is regulated by GTP hydrolysis and GTP-GDP exchange.

### Sample Protocol
To purify TAP-ZC3H5 for mass spectrometry, the protein was subjected to two steps of affinity purification. Briefly, the cleared lysate was incubated with IgG sepharose beads, washed, and then bound proteins were released using TEV protease. The resulting preparation was then allowed to adhere to a calmodulin affinity column, and proteins were eluted with EGTA. Co-purifying proteins from three independent experiments were analysed by LC/MS by the ZMBH Mass Spectrometry facility. Cell lines expressing TAP-ERBP1 served as control (Pride ID: PXD016106).  To purify V5-tagged versions for mass spectrometry, the proteins were subjected to immunoprecipitation. Briefly, the cleared lysates were incubated with anti V5-coupled magnetic beads, washed, and then bound proteins were released using V5 peptide. Eluted proteins were precipitated with TCA and loaded on SDS-PAGE. Co-purifying proteins from three independent experiments were analysed by LC/MS by the ZMBH Mass Spectrometry facility. Whole cell extract from bloodstream form served as control.

### Data Protocol
For data analyses, the MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.3.30) and Proteome Discoverer 2.2 was used for peak list picking, protein identification and validation. Protein identification was based on the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database, release 9.0 from TriTrypDB. For validation, a minimum of seven amino acids for peptide length and two peptides per protein were required. In addition, a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 was applied at both peptide and protein levels. Peptides shared between orthologues were assigned to the same protein group. Statistical analysis of the results was performed using the Perseus toolbox (version 1.6.2.1). Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities. Missing values were imputed using the Perseus default settings of imputation (mean down shift = 0.3, standard deviation down shift = 1.8). A two sample t-test was performed comparing the natural logarithm of the intensities from the experiments and the control groups. To confirm the specificities of the purifications, data from TAP-GFP or V5-GFP purifications were used as controls for bloodstream- and procyclic-form purifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> and related kinetoplastids, gene expression regulation occurs mostly posttranscriptionally. Consequently, RNA-binding proteins play a critical role in the regulation of mRNA and protein abundance. Yet, the roles of many RNA-binding proteins are not understood. Our previous research identified the RNA-binding protein ZC3H5 as possibly involved in gene repression, but its role in controlling gene expression was unknown. We here show that ZC3H5 is an essential cytoplasmic RNA-binding protein. RNAi targeting ZC3H5 causes accumulation of precytokinetic cells followed by rapid cell death. Affinity purification and pairwise yeast two-hybrid analysis suggest that ZC3H5 forms a complex with three other proteins, encoded by genes Tb927.11.4900, Tb927.8.1500, and Tb927.7.3040. RNA immunoprecipitation revealed that ZC3H5 is preferentially associated with poorly translated, low-stability mRNAs, the 5'-untranslated regions and coding regions of which are enriched in the motif (U/A)UAG(U/A). As previously found in high-throughput analyses, artificial tethering of ZC3H5 to a reporter mRNA or other complex components repressed reporter expression. However, depletion of ZC3H5 <i>in vivo</i> caused only very minor decreases in a few targets, marked increases in the abundances of very stable mRNAs, an increase in monosomes at the expense of large polysomes, and appearance of "halfmer" disomes containing two 80S subunits and one 40S subunit. We speculate that the ZC3H5 complex might be implicated in quality control during the translation of suboptimal open reading frames.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rna immunoprecipitation, Protein complex, Rna-binding, Trypanosoma, Zc3h5

### Affiliations
University Heidelberg, Centre for molecular biology, mass spectrometry and proteomics core facility
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
University Heidelberg, Centre for molecular biology, mass spectrometry and proteomics core facility


