### Accession
PXD012449

### Title
Francisella noatunensis subsp orientalis FNO12 pseudogene validation

### Description
Due to the detection of mRNA expression for several protein CDS annotated as pseudogenes in the results of the microarray experiment, a shotgun proteomic approach was applied to verify actual protein translation for each pseudogene in the genome of FNO12.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, a volume of 50 mL of a culture cell was prepared, then immediately centrifuged at 16,100 × g for 20 min at 4ºC and washed three times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5. Then, the pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (42% (w/v) urea, 15% thiourea, 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 12.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and 1.5% dithiothreitol) containing 1% of a protease inhibitor mix (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, USA).

### Data Protocol
Using the database management tool of the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS), the sequence of each CDS together with all pseudogene open read frames (ORF) regions (i.e., ORF ≥ 10 amino acids in pseudogene region in all six frames) of the FNO12 isolate genome sequence were reversed during the database queries and appended to the original database to assess the false positivity rate during identification. Then, protein identification was performed using PLGS. The correlation between technical replicates was calculated using R Software, using the Pearson method. Pseudogenes with at least one ORF identified in the proteomics assay were considered as “putative translated”.

### Publication Abstract
One of the major challenges in Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus L.) farming is the occurrence of bacterial infections, and the Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis (FNO) is an important pathogen that has emerged in last decades. Francisellosis outbreaks have been reported in the literature as occurring seasonally when water temperature is below 24&#x202f;&#xb0;C. The aim of this study was to quantify the median lethal doses (LD<sub>50</sub>) of FNO in experimental challenges at 28&#x202f;&#xb0;C and 22&#x202f;&#xb0;C, and to investigate the impact of temperature changes in whole genome expression using microarray technology. The LD<sub>50</sub> for Nile tilapia at 28&#x202f;&#xb0;C was &#x223c;10<sup>5.7</sup>, whereas at 22&#x202f;&#xb0;C, the LD<sub>50</sub> was &#x223c;10<sup>2.2</sup>, showing that the decrease in temperature enhanced disease outcome. Out of 1917 genes screened, a total of 31 and 19 genes were down- and up-regulated at 22&#x202f;&#xb0;C, respectively. These genes were grouped by orthology into functional categories of: amino acid, inorganic ion, and carbohydrate transport and metabolism; transcription; and posttranslational modification, protein turnover, and chaperones. Expression of genes related to metabolism, oxidative stress, and thermal shock were regulated by temperature changes, reflecting an ability of FNO to adapt to the environment. Expression of virulence genes usually required for the Francisella genus was not changed between tested temperatures, including that of genes located on the Francisella Pathogenicity Island.

### Keywords
Pseudogene, Hdmse, Fno

### Affiliations
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases


