### Accession
PXD035762

### Title
MitoStores: Chaperone-controlled protein granules store mitochondrial precursors in the cytosol  - Data Set 2: Hsp104 AP-MS

### Description
Hundreds of mitochondrial precursor proteins are synthesized in the cytosol and imported into mitochondria in a post-translational reaction. The early stages in mitochondrial protein targeting are poorly understood. Here we show that in baker’s yeast, the cytosol has the capacity to transiently store matrix-destined precursors in dedicated deposits which we named MitoStores. MitoStores are strongly induced when the import into mitochondria is competitively inhibited by clogging the mitochondrial import sites, but also found under physiological conditions when cells grow on non-fermentable carbon sources. MitoStores contain a specific subset of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins, in particular those with N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequences. The cytosolic heat shock proteins Hsp42 and Hsp104 control MitoStore formation, thereby suppressing the toxic potential of accumulating mitochondrial precursor proteins. Thus, the cytosolic protein quality system plays an active role during early stages in mitochondrial protein targeting by the coordinated localized sequestration of mitochondrial precursor proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For IP mass spectrometry, cells were incubated in lactate medium containing the galactose to induce the expression of the clogger. After 6 h 10 OD600 cells were harvested by centrifugation (5,000 g for 5 min), washed with prechilled water, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cell lysates were prepared in 200 µl ice-cold lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF, 1x cOmplete™  Tablets mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), PhosSTOP phosphate inhibitor (Roche)) using a FastPrep-24 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Heidelberg, Germany) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads). Samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 min and transferred to precooled microtubes to get rid of cell debris. 300 µl dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, cOmplete™ Tablets mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), 1 mM PMSF) was added. Diluted cell lysates were used for an IP with GFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads from Chromotek. The GFP-Trap beads were equilibrated by washing 25 µl of beads slurry with 500 µl ice-cold dilution buffer and subsequently centrifuged for 2 min at 2,500 g. The washing step was repeated two more times. GFP-tagged proteins (Hsp104 or DHFR respectively) were bound to GFP-Trap beads for 1h at 4°C tumbling end-over-end. Samples were centrifuged (2 min at 2,500 g) and supernatant was discarded by using a magnetic rack. Beads were washed 3x with 800 µl ice-cold wash buffer I (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 0.05% Nonidet P-40) and afterwards 2x with 500 µl ice-cold wash buffer II (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% (v/v) glycerol). Samples for Western Blotting were eluted in 1x Laemmli and boiled for 5 min at 90°C. For elution and trypsin digestion of mass spectrometry samples, 50 µl elution buffer I was added (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/µl trypsin) and incubated for 1h at RT. Then, 1 µl trypsin (15 ng/µl) was added and incubated for 10 min at RT. Samples were centrifuged (2,500 g, 2 min) and supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. 50 µl elution buffer II (2M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5mM CAA) was added. Samples were incubated ON in the dark at RT. pH of samples was adjusted to pH <2 with Tri-flouracetic acid. Desalting/reversed-Phase cleanup with 3xC18 stage tips. Samples were dried down in speed-vac and resolubilized in 9 µl buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in MS grad water) and 1 µl buffer A* (0.1 % formic acid, 0.1 % TFA in MS grad water). The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Sridharan, Kurzawa et al., 2019). Briefly, peptides were separated using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a Nanospray-Flex ion source. The analytical column (50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter (NewObjective) packed in-house with C18 resin ReproSilPur 120, 1.9 µm diameter Dr. Maisch) was operated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. For TMT labeled samples, a 3 h gradient was used to elute peptides (Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analyzed in positive ion mode applying with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 250°C. MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1.400 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 120.000 [maximum fill time of 80 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 15 peaks with charge 2–8 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 30 s dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 32). Precursors were isolated with a 0.7 m/z window and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 60,000 (maximum fill time of 100 ms, AGC target of 1e5 ions, fixed first mass 100 m/z). For label-free IP-MS samples, shorter gradients (90 minutes) were used to elute peptides (Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). MS spectra with a mass range of 300–1.650 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 60.000 [maximum fill time of 20 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 15 peaks with charge 2–8 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 30 s dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 28). Precursors were isolated with a 1.4 m/z window and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 15,000 (maximum fill time of 80 ms, AGC target of 2e4 ions).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was done using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) {Cox, 2008 #6855;Cox, 2011 #6895;Tyanova, 2016 #7545} and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database obtained from Uniprot. 10plex TMT was chosen in Reporter ion MS2 quantification, up to 2 tryptic miss-cleavages were allowed, protein N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were specified as variable modifications and Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The “Requantify” and “Second Peptides” options were deactivated. False discovery rate was set at 1% for peptides, proteins and sites, minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids. The output files of MaxQuant were processed using the R programming language. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Moreover, only proteins that were identified in at least two out of three MS runs were kept. A total of 2920 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw signal sums were cleaned for batch effects using limma {Ritchie, 2015 #7479} and further normalized using variance stabilization normalization {Huber, 2002 #7480}. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package for the indicated comparison of strains. A reference list of yeast mitochondrial proteins was obtained from {Morgenstern, 2017 #7275}. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using Fisher’s exact test. A Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used to account for multiple testing, where this was performed {Benjamini, 1995 #7424}.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria play a key role in cellular energy metabolism. Transitions between glycolytic and respiratory conditions induce considerable adaptations of the cellular proteome. These metabolism-dependent changes are particularly pronounced for the protein composition of mitochondria. Here, we show that the yeast cytosolic ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 plays a crucial role in the remodeling process when cells transition from respiratory to fermentative conditions. Ubc8 is a conserved and well-studied component of the catabolite control system that is known to regulate the stability of gluconeogenic enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that Ubc8 also promotes the assembly of the translocase of the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOM) and increases the levels of its cytosol-exposed receptor subunit Tom22. Ubc8 deficiency results in compromised protein import into mitochondria and reduced steady-state levels of mitochondrial proteins. Our observations show that Ubc8, which is controlled by the prevailing metabolic conditions, promotes the switch from glucose synthesis to glucose usage in the cytosol and induces the biogenesis of the mitochondrial TOM machinery to improve mitochondrial protein import during phases of metabolic transition.

### Keywords
Mitostores, Hsp104, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular genetics, TU Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular genetics, TU Kaiserslautern


