### Accession
PXD038893

### Title
Hypoxia induces hypersecretory phenotype, impaired ciliary function and altered CFTR activity in air-liquid interface cultures of cystic fibrosis primary nasal epithelial cells. (ALI cell)

### Description
Atmospheric oxygen tension is increasingly recognized to be hyperoxic for the maintenance of in vitro cell cultures. Oxygen has broad implications on energy metabolism, cellular growth and many regulatory functions. Primary airway epithelial cells (AECs) differentiated at air-liquid interface (ALI) are the gold standard for preclinical assessment of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulatory (CFTR) modulator efficacy in CF. The fidelity of CF AECs cultured at atmospheric oxygen tension rather than at reduced oxygen tension which more closely reflect the in vivo environment has not been studied to date. This study examined the impact of ambient (21%) and low (2%) oxygen tension on the expansion and differentiation of nasal epithelial cells (hNECs) derived from 11 participants (8 with CF and 3 non-CF). hNECs expanded under normoxic and chronic hypoxic conditions demonstrated epithelial cobblestone morphology and similar proliferation rate. hNECs differentiated at hypoxia demonstrated poorer differentiation capacity (significantly thinner epithelium and lower TEER) and a shift from ciliated to secretory epithelial phenotype. Hypoxic differentiated hNECs had significantly shorter cilia length, slower beating frequency but had improved cilia coordination. CFTR functional response is altered in hypoxic differentiated hNECs. This study highlights the need to reconsider the oxygen tension used in CF primary cell cultures so as to preserve the characteristics and functional response of the cell models as we progress towards personalised medicine in CF.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates of conditionally reprogrammed cultures and air-liquid interface cultures were extracted by homogenising cells in 100µl of RIPA buffer (Life Technologies 89900) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11836153001). Samples were sonicated for 15 cycles of 30 sec on/30 sec off at 4°C using the Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode B01060010). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Samples were reduced (5 mM DTT, 37°C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM IA, RT, 30 min) and incubated with trypsin at 37°C for 18 h, at a 1:20 ratio (w/w). Samples were desalted with two SDB-RPS disk (Empore, Sigma Cat # 66886-U) packed in the 200 µl pipette tip. Eluted peptides from each clean-up were evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac and then reconstituted in 10 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 0.05% (v/v) heptafluorobutyric acid in water. Proteolytic peptide samples were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands), and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A 90 min gradient was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw peak lists were analysed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3) with the Andromeda algorithm. Search parameters were: ±4.5 ppm tolerance for precursor ions; ±0.5 Da for peptide fragments; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications; and enzyme specificity as trypsin with two missed cleavages possible. Peaks were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (August 2022 release). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Localized and chronic hypoxia of airway mucosa is a common feature of progressive respiratory diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CF). However, the impact of prolonged hypoxia on airway stem cell function and differentiated epithelium is not well elucidated. Acute hypoxia alters the transcription and translation of many genes, including the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CFTR-targeted therapies (modulators) have not been investigated in vitro under chronic hypoxic conditions found in CF airways in vivo. Nasal epithelial cells (hNECs) derived from eight CF and three non-CF participants were expanded and differentiated at the air-liquid interface (26-30 days) at ambient and 2% oxygen tension (hypoxia). Morphology, global proteomics (LC-MS/MS) and function (barrier integrity, cilia motility and ion transport) of basal stem cells and differentiated cultures were assessed. hNECs expanded at chronic hypoxia, demonstrating epithelial cobblestone morphology and a similar proliferation rate to hNECs expanded at normoxia. Hypoxia-inducible proteins and pathways in stem cells and differentiated cultures were identified. Despite the stem cells' plasticity and adaptation to chronic hypoxia, the differentiated epithelium was significantly thinner with reduced barrier integrity. Stem cell lineage commitment shifted to a more secretory epithelial phenotype. Motile cilia abundance, length, beat frequency and coordination were significantly negatively modulated. Chronic hypoxia reduces the activity of epithelial sodium and CFTR ion channels. CFTR modulator drug response was diminished. Our findings shed light on the molecular pathophysiology of hypoxia and its implications in CF. Targeting hypoxia can be a strategy to augment mucosal function and may provide a means to enhance the efficacy of CFTR modulators.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Cystic fibrosis

### Affiliations
UNSW Sydney
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney

### Submitter
Abhishek Vijayan

### Lab Head
Dr Shafagh Waters
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney


