### Accession
PXD016629

### Title
Nebulette reinforces podocyte structural integrity by linking actin and vimentin filaments

### Description
One of the key aspects of the specialized podocyte morphology is the segregation and organization of distinct cytoskeletal filaments into different subcellular components, for which the exact mechanisms remain poorly understood. By screening the time-dependent proteomic changes within the rat puromycin aminonucleoside-induced nephropathy model, we identify the actin-binding protein nebulette as a unique component of the podocyte cytoskeleton that correlates strongly with glomerular function.

### Sample Protocol
Male Sprague Dawley rats (6-8 weeks old) were treated with puromycin amino nucleoside (PAN, 100 mg/kg, Sigma Aldrich; Cat #P7130) through single tail-vein injection. Weights and urine samples were collected before the rats were sacrificed. For the former, kidneys were harvested after perfusion with cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and glomeruli were isolated by sieving through 75/150/200 steel meshes and processed, as previously described. Briefly, samples were lysed with sonication in 8 M urea with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 1% octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After clearing the supernatant by high-speed centrifugation for 15 minutes, lysates were transferred to new 1.5 mL tubes and reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine. After blocking free thiols with methanethiosulfonate, proteins were digested with Lys-C for four hours and with trypsin overnight, both at 37ºC. Peptides were then labeled with iTRAQ tags (AB Sciex) per manufacturer’s instructions and dried overnight. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were mixed together and then fractionated via strong cation exchange chromatography and desalted with C18 spin columns. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an UltiMate 3000 nano LC system (Dionex) and LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against rat SwissProt proteome using Mascot and SEQUEST search engines via the Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Scientific). A false peptide discovery rate of 1% with a minimum of two peptides per protein was used as the identification threshold. Normalized protein-level iTRAQ ratios were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
F-actin, Nephropathy, Podocytes, Nebulette

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Nephrology and Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Tong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Evren U. Azeloglu
Department of Medicine, Nephrology and Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


