### Accession
PXD032328

### Title
TMEM260  is a protein-specific O-mannosyltransferase

### Description
Mutations in the TMEM260 gene cause structural heart defects and renal anomalies syndrome (SHDRA), but the function of the encoded protein remains unknown. We report that TMEM260 is an ER-located protein O-mannosyltransferase that selectively glycosylates defined extracellular immunoglobulin, plexin, transcription factor (IPT) domains of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor (cMET), macrophage-stimulating protein receptor (RON), and plexin receptors. We demonstrate that disease-causing TMEM260 mutations impair O-mannosylation of IPT domains and that TMEM260 knock out in cells results in receptor maturation defects and abnormal growth of 3D cell models. Thus, our study identifies a new, receptor-specific O-mannosylation pathway that serves critical functions during e.g. epithelial morphogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
PNGase F treated and stable isotope labelled tryptic peptides were diluted to 1.5-2 mL with ConA running buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM MnCl2) and loaded on a 3-meter column packed in-house with ConA-agarose beads (Vector Laboratories). Chromatography was operated at 100 µL /min. Non-glycosylated peptides were collected in the flow-through fraction and the column was washed with running buffer until UV signal was below 5 mAU. O-Man glycopeptides were eluted with 0.5M methyl-α-D-mannopyranoside in running buffer. Elution fractions were desalted by in-house packed Stage tips (Empore disk-C18, 3M) before mass spectrometry. Desalted ConA elution fractions were individually injected using a EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Fusion Tribrid or Fusion Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The EASY-nLC 1000 was operated using a single analytical column setup (PicoFrit Emitters, 75-μm inner diameter; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (1.9-μm particle size; Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated across 120 min at 200 nL/min; gradient elution was achieved by solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) which was set for 2–20% B for 95 min followed by 20–80% B for 10 min and finally 80% B for 15 min. Precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ETciD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors (z = 2–6) in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10,000–50,000 ions was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (HCD and ETciD).  For bottom-up analyses of in-gel digested samples from immunoprecipitation experiments, a 90 min nanoLC-MS/MS method (200 nL/min) was used. Gradient elution was achieved by solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) which was set for 2–25% B for 65 min followed by 25–80% B for 10 min and finally 80% B for 15 min. Precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ETciD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors (z = 2–6) in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10,000–50,000 ions was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (HCD and ETciD).

### Data Protocol
Data analyses was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data files (.raw) were processed using the Sequest HT or MS Amanda nodes and searched against the canonical human proteome downloaded (January 2013) from the UniProtKB database (http://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm (Sequest HT) or 5 ppm (MS Amanda) and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Up to 2 missed trypsin (full- and semi-specific) cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine: 57.02146 Da), dimethyl (light: 28.0313 Da, medium: 32.0564 Da), diethyl (light: 56.0626 Da, heavy: 60.07602 Da) and TMT (229.1629 Da) modifications of peptide N-termini and lysines set as a fixed modifications. Oxidation (methionine: 15.9949 Da) was set as variable modification. In addition, Hex (162.0528 Da) was set as variable modification for serine and threonine residues. Peptide confidence levels were calculated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node and results were filtered for high-confidence (p < 0.01) identifications only. All O-mannosylated peptide spectral matches were inspected manually to validate the accuracy of the identifications. Open search was performed via the Fragpipe (v17.1) user interface with MS fragger (v3.4) installed. The “glyco-O-open-hybrid” method was used; 162.0528 Da and 324.1056 Da masses were included in the Mass Offsets and Y ion masses lists (MS Fragger).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-mannosylation, Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Tmem260

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Adnan Halim
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


