### Accession
PXD020431

### Title
Mapping sites of O-fucose modification on mouse NOTCH2

### Description
The O-fucose modification sites on mouse NOTCH2 were determined by mass spectral glycoproteomic site mapping. The Extracellular Domain of mouse NOTCH2 was produced in HEK293T cells in the presence or absence of the three Fringe enzymes:  Lunatic fringe, Manic fringe, or Radical fringe. The protein was purified from the medium, reduced and alkylated, digested with trypsin, chymotrypsin or V8 protease, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-LC mass spectrometry. The majority of the sites were identified using an Agilent model 6340 Ion Trap mass spectrometer. A few sites were identified using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Purified NOTCH2 proteins (EGF1–36 or EGF fragments) were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (cleaves C-terminal to lysines or arginines, Sigma-Aldrich), chymotrypsin (cleaves C-terminal to tryptophan, phenylanine, tyrosine, leucine, or isoleucine, Sigma-Aldrich), or trypsin and V8 protease (cleaves C-terminal to aspartic and glutamic acid) as described previously (Kakuda and Haltiwanger (2014) Methods Mol Biol 1187, 209-221). The resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Agilent nano-HPLC-CHIP system coupled to a model 6340 Ion Trap mass spectrometer using a Zorbax 300SB-C18 chip with a 40 nl enrichment column and a 43 mm X 75 μm separation column as described previously (Kakuda and Haltiwanger (2014) Methods Mol Biol 1187, 209-221).  RAW files for the Agilent are .yep.  Data for some sites were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system for peptide separation using a C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) attached to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Separation of peptides was carried out using a 30 min binary gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The resulting spectra were acquired in the positive polarity/ion mode over a range of 350-2000 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target value of 1x106. The top 10 most abundant precursor ions in each full MS scan were isolated and subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation-tandem mass spectrometry (HCD-MS/MS) and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 27%, an automatic gain control target value of 2x105 with an isolation window of 3 m/z at a fragment resolution of 17,500 and dynamic exclusion enabled. Raw files for the Q-Exactive are .raw.

### Data Protocol
For the data generated on the Agilent model 6340, O-Fucosylated peptides were identified by neutral loss searches as, and semi-quantitative EICs of selected ions were generated to compare relative amounts of O-fucosylated and unfucosylated forms of each peptide (see (Kakuda and Haltiwanger (2014) Methods Mol Biol 1187, 209-221) for details). The most abundant ion for each glycoform of a peptide from an EGF repeat containing an O-fucose consensus sequence was chosen for generation of EICs, and the search window was +/- 0.1 dalton. Raw data for the EICs was smoothed using a Gauss algorithm.   For the Q-Exactive data, raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher) and were searched against a mouse NOTCH2 database (Accession No. O35516 v1 (April 10, 2019)). Byonic software v.2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) was used as a module inside Proteome Discoverer for identifying peptides with glycan modifications. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl on cysteines; variable modifications were oxidation on methionine, several on serine and threonine (dHex, dHexHexNAc, dHexHexNAcHex, dHexHexNAcHexNeu5Ac), and several on serine (Hex, HexPent, HexPentPent). Five missed cleavages were permitted. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. Protein and peptide false discovery rates were set to a threshold of 1% and calculated in Byonic software v.2.10.5 (Protein Metrics).  Extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) for all peptides were generated using Xcalibur Qual Browser 4.0.27.19 (Thermo Fisher).  Due to the lability of the fucose-peptide bond in HCD experiments, neither the neutral loss method nor Byonic is able to correctly assign the O-fucosylated Ser/Thr residue in a peptide. All assignments are based on the well-documented consensus sequence for O-fucosylation EGF repeats:  C2-X-X-X-X-(S/T)-C3 (Holdener and Haltiwanger (2019) Curr Opin Struct Biol 56, 78-86). Note that all of the peptides identified by both the neutral loss method or Byonic with an O-fucose modification contained this consensus sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Notch signaling is a cellular pathway regulating cell-fate determination and adult tissue homeostasis. Little is known about how canonical Notch ligands or Fringe enzymes differentially affect NOTCH1 and NOTCH2. Using cell-based Notch signaling and ligand-binding assays, we evaluated differences in NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 responses to Delta-like (DLL) and Jagged (JAG) family members and the extent to which Fringe enzymes modulate their activity. In the absence of Fringes, DLL4-NOTCH1 activation was more than twice that of DLL4-NOTCH2, whereas all other ligands activated NOTCH2 similarly or slightly more than NOTCH1. However, NOTCH2 showed less sensitivity to the Fringes. Lunatic fringe (LFNG) enhanced NOTCH2 activation by DLL1 and -4, and Manic fringe (MFNG) inhibited NOTCH2 activation by JAG1 and -2. Mass spectral analysis showed that <i>O-</i>fucose occurred at high stoichiometry at most consensus sequences of NOTCH2 and that the Fringe enzymes modified more <i>O</i>-fucose sites of NOTCH2 compared with NOTCH1. Mutagenesis studies showed that LFNG modification of <i>O-</i>fucose on EGF8 and -12 of NOTCH2 was responsible for enhancement of DLL1-NOTCH2 activation, similar to previous reports for NOTCH1. In contrast to NOTCH1, a single <i>O</i>-fucose site mutant that substantially blocked the ability of MFNG to inhibit NOTCH2 activation by JAG1 could not be identified. Interestingly, elimination of the <i>O-</i>fucose site on EGF12 allowed LFNG to inhibit JAG1-NOTCH2 activation, and <i>O-</i>fucosylation on EGF9 was important for trafficking of both NOTCH1 and NOTCH2. Together, these studies provide new insights into the differential regulation of NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 by Notch ligands and Fringe enzymes.

### Keywords
Fringe, Notch2, Egf repeats, O-fucose

### Affiliations
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center
University of Georgia
Complex Carbohydrate Reserach Center Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Georgia Athens, GA  30621  USA

### Submitter
Robert Haltiwanger

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S. Haltiwanger
Complex Carbohydrate Reserach Center Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Georgia Athens, GA  30621  USA


