### Accession
PXD045453

### Title
Structure of Staphylococcus aureus ClpP bound to the covalent active site inhibitor Cystargolide A

### Description
The caseinolytic protease is a highly conserved serine protease, seminal in prokaryotic and eukaryotic protein homeostasis and regulatory proteolysis, and a promising antibacterial and anticancer drug target. Here, we describe the cystargolides as potent and the first natural β-lactone inhibitors of the proteolytic core ClpP. Based on the discovery of two clpP genes next to the cystargolide biosynthetic genes in Kitasatospora cystarginea, we explored ClpP as a potential cystargolide target. We show covalent inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus ClpP by cystargolide A and B by different biochemical methods in vitro. Synthesis of semi-synthetic derivatives with improved cell permeability allowed us to confirm ClpP as a specific target within intact S. aureus cells and to demonstrate anti-virulence activity. In Streptomycetes griseus growth inhibition occurs. Crystal structures show cystargolide A covalently bound to all 14 active sites of S. aureus ClpP. Although synthetic β-lactones are known as the pioneering group of ClpP inhibitors, their co-crystallisation has not been successful, so far. The cystargolides now reveal the molecular mechanism of ClpP inhibition by β-lactone inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus NCTC 8325 cells were harvested and washed three times with PBS, resuspended in 1 mL PBS and transferred to 2 ml glass-bead lysis tubes (Precellys® Lysing Kit, soil-grinding SK38). Cells were lysed mechanically using a Precellys® 24 Homogenizer (6 × 15 sec shaking at 5400 rpm) with cooling breaks on ice between cycles. The soluble protein fraction was isolated by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. 750 µL of the lysate of each sample (protein concentration 0.8 mg/mL) were subjected to CuAAC (copper catalyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition) by adding 4.5 µL azide-PEG3-biotin (10 mM in DMSO, Jena Biosciences), 15 µL TCEP (15 mg/mL in ddH2O), 45 µL TBTA ligand (1.67 mM in t-BuOH/DMSO, 80/20) and 15 µL CuSO4 (50mM in ddH2O). After incubation for 1h at room temperature under exclusion of light, proteins were precipitated by addition of 4 mL ice-cold acetone and stored overnight at -20 °C. Precipitated proteins were sedimented by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) and washed twice with 1 mL ice-cold MeOH, using sonication to resuspend the pellets between washes.  Protein pellets were solubilized in 0.5 ml PBS containing 0.4% (w/v) SDS and transferred to Lo-bind® Eppendorf tubes containing 50 μl of avidin-agarose bead slurry (Sigma Aldrich) pre-equilibrated with 0.4% SDS (w/v) in PBS (3 × 1 ml, 400 x g, 5 min, room temperature), and rotated for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were then washed with 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS (3 × 1 ml), 6 M urea (2 × 1 ml) and finally PBS (3 × 1 ml). Beads were resuspended in 200 μl X-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5). Upon reduction with 5 mM TCEP (2 μl of 500 mM stock in ddH2O) for 1 h at 37°C, proteins were alkylated using 10 mM IAA (4 μl of 500 mM stock in ddH2O) for 30 min at 25°C and samples were quenched with 10 mM DTT (4 μl of 500 mM stock in ddH2O) for 30 min at 25°C. Enzymatic digestion using LysC (1 μl of 0.5 μg/μl, Wako, MS-grade) was first carried out for 2 h at 25°C, upon which samples were diluted with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (600 μl of 50 mM stock in ddH2O) and digested with trypsin (1.5 μl of 0.5 μg/μl in 50 mM acetic acid, Promega, sequencing grade) for a further 16 h at 37°C. Samples were acidified to 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and desalted using SepPak® C18 cartridges (50 mg, Waters) with a vacuum manifold. The cartridges were first washed with ACN (2 × 1 ml) and equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (3 × 1 ml) prior to loading the samples. After washing with 0.1% (v/v) TFA (3 × 1 ml) and 0.5% (v/v) FA (1 × 0.5 ml), peptides were eluted in 80% (v/v) ACN containing 0.5% FA (3 × 0.25 ml) and vacuum-dried using a speedvac centrifuge. Samples were prepared for MS-analysis by dissolving in 25 μl of 1% (v/v) FA and filtering through 0.22 μm PVDF filters (Millipore). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 μm ID × 2 cm trap column and Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 (75 μm ID × 50 cm) separation column in an EASY-spray setting. Samples were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 300 nL/min, gradient 5 to 22% buffer B in 112 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, then to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min). Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP10 data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 140000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300−1500 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states of >1 and intensities greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were collected to an AGC target of 1e5 for a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragments were generated using higher- energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) with Andromeda as search engine with following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme. All other parameters were used according to the default settings. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC 8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 23.03.2018). For label-free quantification the corresponding parameter was set to “LFQ”. “I = L”, “requantify” and “match between runs” (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least two unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The caseinolytic protease is a highly conserved serine protease, crucial to prokaryotic and eukaryotic protein homeostasis, and a promising antibacterial and anticancer drug target. Herein, we describe the potent cystargolides as the first natural &#x3b2;-lactone inhibitors of the proteolytic core ClpP. Based on the discovery of two clpP genes next to the cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster in Kitasatospora cystarginea, we explored ClpP as a potential cystargolide target. We show the inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus ClpP by cystargolide A and B by different biochemical methods in vitro. Synthesis of semisynthetic derivatives and probes with improved cell penetration allowed us to confirm ClpP as a specific target in S. aureus cells and to demonstrate the anti-virulence activity of this natural product class. Crystal structures show cystargolide A covalently bound to all 14 active sites of ClpP from S. aureus, Aquifex aeolicus, and Photorhabdus laumondii, and reveal the molecular mechanism of ClpP inhibition by &#x3b2;-lactones, the predominant class of ClpP inhibitors.

### Keywords
Antibacterials, Chemmical proteomics, Proteases

### Affiliations
Institute for Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena
Prof. Dr. H. Brötz-Oesterhelt Department of Microbial Bioactive Compounds, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine Cluster of Excellence Controlling Microbes to Fight Infections University of Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Markus Lakemeyer

### Lab Head
Dr Heike Brötz-Oesterhelt
Prof. Dr. H. Brötz-Oesterhelt Department of Microbial Bioactive Compounds, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine Cluster of Excellence Controlling Microbes to Fight Infections University of Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


