### Accession
PXD040291

### Title
A novel HERC4-dependent glue degrader targeting STING

### Description
Stimulator of interferon genes (STING) is a central component of the pathway sensing the presence of cytosolic nucleic acids, having a key role in type I interferon innate immune response. Localized at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), STING becomes activated by cGAMP, which is generated by the intracellular DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS). Due to its critical role in physiological function and its’ involvement in a variety of diseases, STING has been a notable focus for drug discovery. Recent advances in drug discovery allow the targeting of proteins previously considered “un-druggable” by novel mechanism of actions. Molecular glue degraders are defined as the compounds leading targeted protein degradation (TPD) by creating novel ligase-substrate interactions. Here, we identified AK59 as a novel molecular glue degrader for STING. A genome-wide, CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screen showed that the compound-mediated degradation of STING by AK59 is compromised by the loss of HECT and RLD domain containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 4 (HERC4), ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme 5 (UBA5) and ubiquitin like modifier activating enzyme 6 (UBA6). While UBA5 and UBA6 could be the auxiliary factors for AK59 activity, our results indicate that HERC4 is the main E3 ligase for the observed degradation mechanism. Validation by individual CRISPR knockouts, co-immunoprecipitations, as well as proximity mediated reporter assays suggested that AK59 functions as a glue degrader by forming a novel interaction between STING and HERC4. Furthermore, our data reveals that AK59 was effective on the most common pathological STING mutations that cause STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI), suggesting a potential clinical application of this mechanism. Thus, these findings not only reveal a novel mechanism for compound-induced degradation of STING but also utilize HERC4 as potential E3 ligase that for TPD, enabling novel therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
THP1-Cas9 cells (2 x106 per well in a 6-well plate) were seeded, and treated, on the same day either with 0.1% (final) DMSO, 10 µM AK59 or 10 µM QK50 (0.1% DMSO final) for 16 hours. Cells were collected and washed with 1x DPBS (Gibco) after compound incubation. Before proteomics analysis of the samples the conditions were checked using western blot to confirm targeting effects on STING.  TMT-labeled peptides were generated with the iST-NHS kit (PreOmics) and TMT16plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of labeled peptides were pooled and separated on a high pH fractionation system with a water-acetonitrile gradient containing 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. Alternating rows of the resulting 72 fractions were pooled into 24 samples, dried and resuspended in water containing 0.1% formic acid. The LC-MS analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over 180 min with a water-acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% formic acid on a 25 cm long Aurora Series UHPLC column (Ion Opticks) with 75 µm inner diameter. MS1 spectra were acquired at 120k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS2 spectra were acquired after CID activation in the ion trap and MS3 spectra were acquired after HCD activation with a synchronous precursor selection approach using 8 notches and 50k resolution in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, spectra were searched with Sequest HT against the Homo sapiens UniProt protein database and common contaminants (Sep 2019, 21494 entries). The database search criteria included: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, maximum three missed cleavage sites, dynamic modification of 15.995 Da for methionines, static modifications of 113.084 Da for cysteines and 304.207 Da for peptide N-termini and lysines. The Percolator algorithm was applied to the Sequest HT results. The peptide false discovery rate was set to 1% and the protein false discovery rate was set to around 5%. TMT reporter ions of the MS3 spectra were integrated with a 20 ppm tolerance and the reporter ion intensities were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Herc4', 'Glue degrader', 'Targeted protein degradation', 'Sting', 'Tpd']

### Affiliations
['Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland', 'NIBR']

### Submitter
['Andreas Hofmann']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland', 'email': 'andreas.hofmann@novartis.com', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Andreas Hofmann', 'id': '2525106'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['Childhood acute monocytic leukemia']
characteristics[cell type]: ['Childhood acute monocytic leukemia cell line']
comment[label]: ['TMT126' 'TMT127N' 'TMT127C' 'TMT128N' 'TMT128C' 'TMT129N' 'TMT129C'
 'TMT130N' 'TMT130C' 'TMT131N' 'TMT131C' 'TMT132N' 'TMT132C' 'TMT133N'
 'TMT133C' 'TMT134N']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=TMTpro;PP=Any N-term,K;AC=UNIMOD:2016;MT=fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=variable']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Alkylation;TA=C;MM=113.084;MT=fixed']

