### Accession
PXD019427

### Title
Comparative Thyroglobulin Interactome Profiling

### Description
Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a secreted iodoglycoprotein serving as the precursor for T3 and T4 hormones. Many characterized Tg gene mutations produce secretion-defective variants resulting in congenital hypothyroidism (CH). Tg processing and secretion is controlled by extensive interactions with chaperones, trafficking, and degradation proteins comprising the secretory proteostasis network. While dependencies on individual pro-teostasis network components are known, the integration of proteostasis pathways mediating Tg protein quality control and the molecular basis of mutant Tg misprocessing remain poorly understood. We employ a multiplexed quantitative affinity purification–mass spectrometry approach to define the Tg proteostasis interactome and changes between WT and several CH-variants. Mutant Tg processing is associated with common imbalances in proteostasis engagement including increased chaperoning, oxidative folding, and routing towards ER-associated degradation components, yet variants are inefficiently degraded. Furthermore, we reveal mutation-specific changes in engagement with N-glycosylation components, suggesting distinct requirements of one Tg variant on dual engagement of both oligosaccharyltransferase complex isoforms for degradation. Modulating dysregulated proteostasis components and pathways may serve as a therapeutic strategy to restore Tg secretion and thyroid hormone biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were transiently transfected with respective Tg expression plasmids using a calcium phosphate method. A fully confluent 10cm plate was used per condition. Cells were harvested by washing with PBS and incubating with 1mM EDTA in PBS on ice. A cell scraper was then used to dislodge cells. For immunoprecipitations, cells were harvested, washed once with PBS, and then treated with 0.5mM Dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP) in PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature. Crosslinking was quenched by addition of 100mM Tris, pH 7.5 for 15 minutes. Lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer and protein concentration was normalized. Cell lysates were then precleared on 4B sepharose beads (Sigma) at 4°C for 1 hour while rocking. Precleared lysates were then immunoprecipitated with M2 anti-flag agarose resin (Sigma) or G1 Anti-DYKDDDDK affinity resin (Genscript) overnight at 4°C while rocking. Resin was then washed four times with RIPA buffer. Proteins were twice in 75uL elution buffer (2% SDS, 1mM EDTA, in PBS) by heating at 95°C for 5 minutes. Eluted samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform, washed three times with methanol, and air dried. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 3uL 1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters) followed by the addition of 10uL of 50mM HEPES pH 8.0, and 32.5uL of water. Samples were reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetimide (Sigma) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. 0.5ug of Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega or Pierce) was then added and incubated for 16-18 hours at 37°C while shaking at 700rpm. Peptide samples were reacted with TMT sixplex reagents (Thermo Fisher) in 40% v/v acetonitrile and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Reactions were quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.4% w/v final concentration) and incubated for one hour at room temperature. TMT labeled samples for a given experiment were then pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid (Sigma, v/v). Samples were concentrated using a speedvac and resuspended in buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v). Cleaved Rapigest SF surfactant was removed by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 21,100 x g.

### Data Protocol
To identify true interactors from non-specific background TMT intensities first underwent a log2 transformation, and were then median normalized. TMT ratios were then calculated between respective Tg AP and control TMT channels. The mean of log2 interaction differences was then calculated across the multiple LC-MS batches. Significance of interaction differences was then calculated using a paired, parametric, two tailed t-test and multiple testing correction via FDR estimation (Storey & Tibshirani, 2003). A previously described method was then used to delineate true interactors from non-specific background (Keilhauer et al, 2015). In short, the function y= c ⁄ (x- x_0 ) was used to delineate true interactors from non-specific background, where c = curvature and x_0 = minimum fold change, set as one standard deviation of the of the Tg-containing TMT channel used for comparison. The c parameter was optimized to separate true interactors from false positives. Tg interactors were identified for WT and mutant Tg individually. A cumulative list of identified interactors was then used for WT vs mutant Tg comparisons. To compare WT vs mutant Tg interactors TMT intensities were normalized to total Tg intensity for each given TMT channel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Ap-ms, Proteostasis, Thyroglobulin, Protein folding, Interactomics, Congenital hypothyroidism, Protein quality control

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences Vanderbilt Unversity
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Madison Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Assistant Professor Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences Vanderbilt Unversity


