### Accession
PXD000822

### Title
Ram seminal plasma -  Ram seminal plasma proteome and its impact on liquid preservation of spermatozoa

### Description
Seminal plasma proteome of ram and impact on semen liquid preservation.

### Sample Protocol
The seminal plasmas from  rams were pooled in 3 groups (5 rams per group) and migrated separately on SDS PAGE on a 8-16 % gradient polyacrylamide gel. Gels were stained with Coomassie and the whole lanes were cut in several bands. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using LTQ velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the mammalia section of a locally maintained copy of nr NCBI (1426555 sequences, download 05/14/2013). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Seminal plasma, Ram

### Affiliations
INRA-Nouzilly-PRC
Equipe « Interactions Cellulaires et Fertilité » Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements UMR INRA 85-Cnrs 7247-Université de Tours IFCE Centre INRA Val de Loire 37380 NOUZILLY France

### Submitter
G HARICHAUX

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Druart
Equipe « Interactions Cellulaires et Fertilité » Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements UMR INRA 85-Cnrs 7247-Université de Tours IFCE Centre INRA Val de Loire 37380 NOUZILLY France


