### Accession
PXD018859

### Title
Selection of the length of fatty acyl chain and of the acylation site by the acyltransferase governs activation of RTX toxins

### Description
Numerous proteins synthesized in cells ranging from bacteria to humans have to be posttranslationally acylated to become biologically active. Bacterial Repeats in ToXin (RTX) cytolysins form a prominent group of proteins that are synthesized as inactive protoxins and undergo a posttranslational acylation on ε-amino groups of two internal conserved lysine residues by co-expressed toxin-activating acyltransferases. We investigated how the chemical nature, position and number of bound acyl chains govern the activities of Bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA), Escherichia coli α-hemolysin (HlyA) and Kingella kingae cytotoxin (RtxA). The three protoxins were acylated in the same E. coli cell background by either of the CyaC, HlyC and RtxC acyltransferases. The results revealed that the acyltransferase itself selects from the acyl-ACP pool of the producing bacterium the type of the acyl chain of adapted length to be covalently linked to the protoxin. The acyltransferase also selects whether both or only one of two conserved lysine residues of the protoxin will be posttranslationally acylated. Functional assays then revealed that RtxA has to be modified by 14-carbon fatty acyl chains to be biologically active, while HlyA remains active also when modified by 16-carbon acyl chains and CyaA is activated exclusively by 16-carbon acyl chains. These results suggest a structural adaptation of the toxin molecules to the length of the acyl chains used for modification of their crucial acylated lysine residue in the second, more conserved acylation site

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.2) to reach 4 M concentration of urea and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, modified sequencing grade) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 for 6 h at 30 °C. The 2nd portion of trypsin was added to a final ratio of trypsin:protein of 1:25 and the reaction was carried out for another 6 h at 30 °C. When the reaction was complete, the concentration of the resulting peptides was adjusted by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.1 mg/ml and 5 µl of the sample were injected into the LC-MS system. The LC separation was performed using a desalting column (ZORBAX C18 SB-300, 0.1 × 2 mm) at a flow rate of 40 µl/min (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) of 0.1% FA and a separation column (ZORBAX C18 SB300, 0.2 × 150 mm) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min (Agilent 1200, Santa Clara, CA) of water/acetonitrile (MeCN) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) gradient: 0-1 min 0.2% formic acid (FA), 5% MeCN; 5 min 0.2% FA, 10% MeCN; 35 min 0.2% FA, 50% MeCN; 40 min 0.2% FA, 95% MeCN; 40–45 min 0.2% FA, 95% MeCN. A capillary column was directly connected to a mass analyzer. The MS analysis was performed on a commercial solariX XR FTMS instrument equipped with a 15 T superconducting magnet and a Dual II ESI/MALDI ion source (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Mass spectra of the samples were obtained in the positive ion mode within an m/z range of 150-2000. The accumulation time was set at 0.2 s, LC acquisition was 45 min with 5 min delay and one spectrum consisted of accumulation of four experiments. The instrument was operating in survey LC-MS mode and calibrated online using Agilent tuning mix, which results in mass accuracy below 2 ppm

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by the SNAP v2.0 algorithm of the DataAnalysis 4.4 software package (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) generating list of monoisotopic masses from deconvoluted spectra. The parameters were set as follows: export m/z range of 150-2000, maximum charge state of 8, S/N threshold of 0.75 and absolute intensity threshold 5x105. The extracted experimental data were searched against the FASTA of single corresponding toxin molecule (CyaA: UniProtKB- P0DKX7, HlyA: UniProtKB - P08715, RtxA: UniprotKB – A0A1X7QNC7 ) using the home-built Linx software (http://peterslab.org/MSTools/). The Linx algorithm was set for fully tryptic restriction with maximum of 3 missed cleavages and variable modification for methionine oxidation along with lysine acylation ranging from C12 to C18 including monosaturated and hydroxylated variants. The mass error threshold was set to ± 2 ppm and all assigned peptides used for quantification were verified manually. The acylation status of lysine residues was determined by comparison of relative intensity ratio between acylated peptide ions and its unmodified counterparts. Only lysine residues modified at specific positions (CyaA: 860,983; HlyA: 564,690; RtxA: 558,689) according to the sequence of the full-length proteins were investigated. All assigned peptide sequences including post-translational modifications along with corresponding FASTA formats used within search algorithm are listed in supplementary table

### Publication Abstract
In a wide range of organisms, from bacteria to humans, numerous proteins have to be posttranslationally acylated to become biologically active. Bacterial <u>r</u>epeats in <u>t</u>o<u>x</u>in (RTX) cytolysins form a prominent group of proteins that are synthesized as inactive protoxins and undergo posttranslational acylation on &#x3b5;-amino groups of two internal conserved lysine residues by co-expressed toxin-activating acyltransferases. Here, we investigated how the chemical nature, position, and number of bound acyl chains govern the activities of <i>Bordetella pertussis</i> adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA), <i>Escherichia coli</i> &#x3b1;-hemolysin (HlyA), and <i>Kingella kingae</i> cytotoxin (RtxA). We found that the three protoxins are acylated in the same <i>E. coli</i> cell background by each of the CyaC, HlyC, and RtxC acyltransferases. We also noted that the acyltransferase selects from the bacterial pool of acyl-acyl carrier proteins (ACPs) an acyl chain of a specific length for covalent linkage to the protoxin. The acyltransferase also selects whether both or only one of two conserved lysine residues of the protoxin will be posttranslationally acylated. Functional assays revealed that RtxA has to be modified by 14-carbon fatty acyl chains to be biologically active, that HlyA remains active also when modified by 16-carbon acyl chains, and that CyaA is activated exclusively by 16-carbon acyl chains. These results suggest that the RTX toxin molecules are structurally adapted to the length of the acyl chains used for modification of their acylated lysine residue in the second, more conserved acylation site.

### Keywords
Rtx toxin, Cytotoxicity, Acyltransferase, Fatty acyl, Acylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
David Jurnečka

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Sebo, PhD.
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.


