### Accession
PXD024301

### Title
Molecular basis of F-actin regulation and sarcomere assembly via myotilin

### Description
Sarcomeres, the basic contractile units of striated muscle cells, contain arrays of thin (actin) and thick (myosin) filaments that slide past each other during contraction. The Ig-like domain containing protein myotilin provides structural integrity to Z-discs—the boundaries between adjacent sarcomeres. Myotilin binds to Z-disc components, including F-actin and α-actinin-2, but the molecular mechanism of binding and implications of these interactions on Z-disc integrity are still elusive. To illuminate them we used a combination of small angle X-ray scattering, cross-linking mass spectrometry, biochemical and molecular biophysics approaches. We discovered that myotilin displays conformational ensembles in solution. We generated a structural model of the F-actin:myotilin complex that revealed how myotilin interacts with and stabilizes F-actin via its Ig-like domains and flanking regions. Mutant myotilin designed with impaired F-actin binding showed increased dynamics in cells. Structural analyses and competition assays uncovered that myotilin displaces tropomyosin from F-actin. Our findings suggest a novel role of myotilin as a co-organizer of Z-disc assembly and advance our mechanistic understanding of myotilin's structural role in Zdiscs.

### Sample Protocol
For cross-linking experiments with F-actin, actin was let to polymerize in PBS for 30 min at room temperature before adding 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholiniumchloride (DMTMM, Merck) cross-linker. After incubation of F-actin with DMTMM for 5 min at room temperature Ig1Ig2250‑ 444, or Ig1Ig2185‑ 454, or Ig1Ig2185‑ 498 in PBS was added at concentrations from 0 to 12 µM and proteins were cross-linked for additional 40 min at room temperature. While for cross-linking of Ig1Ig2250‑ 444, increasing concentrations of 0 to 6 mM DMTMM were used, fixed concentration of DMTMM (2 mM) was used to cross-link Ig1Ig2185‑ 454 and Ig1Ig2185‑ 498 with F-actin. Following separation of cross-linking samples by SDS-PAGE and staining of proteins with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250, protein bands were excised, subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin and analyzed by HPLC–ESI–MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.  Samples were washed and pre-concentrated on a 5 mm × 0.3 mm PepMap™ C18 μ-precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a 50 cm × 75 μm C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC column; 2 μm particle size; 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a temperature of 40°C using a 30-min linear gradient ranging from 3 to 39% solvent B [86% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid] and a subsequent increase to 95% B within 5 min. MS1 scans were recorded from m/z 375-1,700 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an automatic gain control of 3×106 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. MS2 scans for up to 12 of the most intense multiple charged precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 5,800 with a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. For fragmentation, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used at an AGC of 1×105 ions, maximum fill time of 120 ms and normalized collision energy of 28. For each sample, a second LC/MS analysis was performed in which only precursor ions of charge state 3+ or higher were selected for MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
For identification of cross-linked peptides, the software pLink was used, version 1.22 for Ig1Ig2250-444 and Ig1Ig2185-454, and version 2.0 for Ig1Ig2185-498. For the former, MS raw data files were first converted to the Mascot generic format (mgf) using msConvert from ProteoWizard, release 3.0.9740. Searches were performed against the forward and reversed amino acid sequences of the recombinant proteins. Cross-linked peptide matches were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%, and a minimum E-value of 5 × 10−2 rejecting adjacent tryptic peptides of the same protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Sarcomeric z-disc; f-actin binding; myotilin; α-actinin-2; integrative structural model of f-actin:myotilin; competitive tropomyosin binding; z-disc-assembly regulation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


