### Accession
PXD025884

### Title
De novo sequencing of antibody light chain proteoforms from patients with multiple myeloma

### Description
In multiple myeloma diseases, monoclonal immunoglobulin light chains (LCs) are abundantly produced, with as a consequence in some cases the formation of deposits affecting various organs, such as kidney, while in other cases to remain soluble up to concentrations of several g.L-1 in plasma. The exact factors crucial for the solubility of light chains are poorly understood, but it can be hypothesized that their amino acid sequence plays an important role. Determining the precise sequences of patient-derived light chains is therefore highly desirable. We establish here a novel de novo sequencing workflow for patient-derived LCs, based on the combination of bottom-up and top-down proteomics without database search. PEAKS is used for the de novo sequencing of peptides that are further assembled into full length LC sequences using ALPS. Top-down proteomics provides the molecular masses of proteoforms and allows the exact determination of the amino acid sequence including all post translational modifications. This pipeline is then used for the complete de novo sequencing of LCs extracted from the urine of 10 patients with multiple myeloma. We show that for the bottom-up part, digestions with trypsin and Nepenthes digestive fluid are sufficient to produce overlapping peptides able to generate the best sequence candidates. Top-down proteomics is absolutely required to achieve 100% final sequence coverage and characterize clinical samples containing several LCs . Our work highlights an unexpected range of modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Light chain sample preparation Light chains were extracted from urine samples as described in Sternke-Hoffmann et al. Samples are listed in Table S1, including their correspondence with the patients/samples described in Sternke-Hoffmann et al. Enzymatic digestions Each LC sample was digested with the following enzymes: trypsin, Lys-C, chymotrypsin, pepsin and Nepenthes ﬂuid. All experimental conditions are in SI. Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge. Peptide were eluted using 50% ACN, 0.1% FA. Purified peptides were lyophilized and kept at -80°C. LC-MS analysis of peptide digests For de novo sequencing, LC digests were analyzed in LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using standard conditions (see SI), except for the number of µscans that was set to 4 to obtain high quality MS/MS data. For isoleucine/leucine discrimination, trypsin and chymotrypsin LC digests were mixed (1:1 ratio) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Ions corresponding to peptides containing one or more leucine or isoleucine were added to an inclusion list to be fragmented by EThcD (MS2) or HCD (MS4) as previously described.

### Data Protocol
De novo peptide sequencing and concatenation  PEAKS Studio X was used for peptide de novo sequencing. The data were refined using precursor mass correction only and the chimera scan option activated. De novo searches were performed with 2 ppm error for precursor mass, 0.01 Da for the fragment ions with fixed carbamidomethylation (Cys) and variable oxidation (Met) as PTMs. Enzyme rules were specified for each sample, with no rules for the Nepenthes digestive fluid and pepsin digestions. De novo sequencing results were exported and sequences, local confidence and area were used in ALPS to concatenate the overlapping peptides. Although other values were tested, kmer from 7 to 9 were finally used to generate putative LC sequences. The theoretical masses of these sequences were compared to those obtained from the intact mass measurement of LCs to ensure correct concatenation and select the appropriate sequences. Bottom-up proteomics data analysis The raw files obtained for the tryptic digests of each LC sample were searched with MaxQuant (parameters described in SI). Draw Map from MSTools – Web applications was used for visualization of protein sequence coverage. For disulfide bridge localization, data obtained from non-reduced non-alkylated tryptic digests were searched against the corresponding LC sequences with MassSpec Studio43 using the CRIMP workflow. A loss of 2 hydrogens (-2.0156 Da) was used as a virtual cross-linker mass modification. The search parameters are provided in supporting information (SI). The most intense cross-linked peptides identified were used to assign disulfide bridges. LC-MS analysis of intact light chains (TDP) Intact LCs were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with or without reduction/alkylation. Both MS and targeted MS/MS experiments were undertaken. To maximize sequence coverage, twelve differents fragmentation conditions were used. All details are in SI. TDP data analysis Intact protein mass spectra were deconvoluted using Protein Deconvolution v3.0 software (Thermo-Scientific) either with the XtractTM algorithm for isotopically resolved mass spectra or with the ReSpectTM algorithm for unresolved mass spectra. MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted in FreeStyle 1.6 with the XtractTM algorithm. For XtractTM, the following parameters were used: signal to noise ratio (S/N) of 3, fit factor of 44% and remainder threshold of 25%. For the Respect algorithm, a noise rejection threshold of 95% and 20 ppm mass tolerance were used. Fragment ions produced by HCD (b, y), ETD (c,z,), EThcD (b, y, c, z) or UVPD (a, a+1, b, c, x, x+1, y, y − 1, z) were identified using Prosight Lite v1.4 with a mass tolerance of ±5 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
In multiple myeloma diseases, monoclonal immunoglobulin light chains (LCs) are abundantly produced, with, as a consequence in some cases, the formation of deposits affecting various organs, such as the kidney, while in other cases remaining soluble up to concentrations of several g&#xb7;L<sup>-1</sup> in plasma. The exact factors crucial for the solubility of LCs are poorly understood, but it can be hypothesized that their amino acid sequence plays an important role. Determining the precise sequences of patient-derived LCs is therefore highly desirable. We establish here a novel <i>de novo</i> sequencing workflow for patient-derived LCs, based on the combination of bottom-up and top-down proteomics without database search. PEAKS is used for the <i>de novo</i> sequencing of peptides that are further assembled into full length LC sequences using ALPS. Top-down proteomics provides the molecular masses of proteoforms and allows the exact determination of the amino acid sequence including all posttranslational modifications. This pipeline is then used for the complete <i>de novo</i> sequencing of LCs extracted from the urine of 10 patients with multiple myeloma. We show that for the bottom-up part, digestions with trypsin and <i>Nepenthes</i> digestive fluid are sufficient to produce overlapping peptides able to generate the best sequence candidates. Top-down proteomics is absolutely required to achieve 100% final sequence coverage and characterize clinical samples containing several LCs. Our work highlights an unexpected range of modifications.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Antibody, Light chain disease, Top-down proteomics, Bottom-up proteomics, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
CNRS, Pasteur
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000,  Institut Pasteur, CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux,  75015 Paris,  France

### Submitter
Martial Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000,  Institut Pasteur, CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux,  75015 Paris,  France


