### Accession
PXD007880

### Title
Large-scale Identification and Time-course Quantification of Ubiquitylomes in De-etiolating Maize Seedling Leaf

### Description
Ubiquitylation is a widely known post-translational modification that regulates myriad biochemical and physiological events in organism. The ubiquitin system is crucial for the development and fitness of higher plants. The process of de-etiolation, during which green plants initiate photomorphogenesis and establish autotrophy, is a dramatic and complicated procedure under the tight regulation of massive ubiquitylation/de-ubiquitylation events. Here we present site-specifically quantified proteomic data of the ubiquitylomes in seedlings’ first leaves of a globally important crop and C4 model plant, Zea Mays, in etiolated state and early de-etiolating states (exposed to light for one, six and twelve hours, respectively), achieved through an immunoprecipitation-based high-resolution mass spectroscopic (MS) method. In our composite data of multiple ubiquitylomes, 1926 unique ubiquitylation sites corresponding to 1041 proteins were identified and quantified, based on which five potential ubiquitylation motifs, KA, AXK, KXG,AK and TK were found. The time-course fold change of the ubiquitylation levels of 214 sites corresponding to 172 proteins were detected to be highly correlated in two technical replicates of MS experiments; evident fold changes (>1.5 fold) of the ubiquitylation levels of 78 sites during the 12 hours’ de-etiolation process were detected. A majority of the ubiquitylated sites we identified corresponded to substrates involving protein and DNA metabolism, such as ribosome and histone; meanwhile, multiple ubiquitylation sites in proteins reflecting plant’s major physiological changes during de-etiolation, including hormone synthesis/signaling, key C4 photosynthetic enymes, light signaling proteins were identified. This proteomic study on the ubiquitylome of de-etiolating maize seedling leaf is the first attempt ever of studying the ubiquitylome of C4 plant.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Three sets of Maize samples (0h, 1h, 6h, 12h, ~5mg each) were reconstituted with addition of 300 ul water and pH was adjusted to >7.5 with 1M Tris HCl pH8.1.  Disulfide bond was reduced by addition of 20 mM DTT and incubated at 60C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, 40 mM iodoacetamide was added and the samples were kept in the dark for 1 hour to block free cysteine. The samples were dialyzed against 2 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 2 hours and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 2 hours twice. Trypsin was added to the samples at 1:50 (w:w,  trypsin:sample) and incubated at 37C overnight. The digested peptides were further filtered with Amicon ultra centrifugal filters (10kD MWKO, Merck Millipore, MA), dried under vacuum.  The immunoaffinity purification (IAP) The ubiquitinylated peptides from each sample were enriched using PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ɛ-GG) antibody (Cell Signaling technology, MA,) individually following manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were desalted on Empore 3M C18 (2215) StageTip1 and digested again with 0.1ug trypsin at 37C for 2 hours prior to nanoLC-MS/MS. Nano LC-MS/MS nanoLC-MS/MS was carried out primarily using a Dionex RSLC system interfaced with Velos LTQ Orbitrap ETD (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto a self-packed 100µm x 2cm trap packed with Magic C18AQ, 5µm 200 A (Michrom Bioresources Inc, Aubum, CA) and washed with Buffer A (0.2% formic acid) for 5 min at a flow rate of 10ul/min. The trap was brought in-line with a homemade analytical column (Magic C18AQ, 3µm 200 A, 75 µm x 50cm) and peptides fractionated at 300 nL/min with a multi-stepped gradient (4 to 15% Buffer B (0.16% formic acid 80% acetonitrile) in 25 min and 15-25%B in 65 min and 25-50%B in 55 min). Mass spectrometry data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition procedure with a cyclic series of a full scan acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 followed by MS/MS scans (38% of relative collision energy in the HCD cell) of 10 most intense ions with a repeat count of one and the dynamic exclusion duration of 30 sec and scanned out in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15000 with low mass set at 110amu.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a database using uniprot maize protein database (UP000007305; 99,317 sequences). For K-Ub peptides, Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages. First, the search range was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions, and the main search range was set to 4.5 ppm and 0.02 D for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and GlyGly on Lys, deamidation on Asn or Gln, and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification method was label-free quantification, false discovery rate was adjusted to less than 1%, while the minimum score for modified peptides was set to greater than 40.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin system is crucial for the development and fitness of higher plants. De-etiolation, during which green plants initiate photomorphogenesis and establish autotrophy, is a dramatic and complicated process that is tightly regulated by a massive number of ubiquitylation/de-ubiquitylation events. Here we present site-specific quantitative proteomic data for the ubiquitylomes of de-etiolating seedling leaves of Zea mays L. (exposed to light for 1, 6, or 12&#x202f;h) achieved through immunoprecipitation-based high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). Through the integrated analysis of multiple ubiquitylomes, we identified and quantified 1926 unique ubiquitylation sites corresponding to 1053 proteins. We analyzed these sites and found five potential ubiquitylation motifs, KA, AXK, KXG, AK, and TK. Time-course studies revealed that the ubiquitylation levels of 214 sites corresponding to 173 proteins were highly correlated across two replicate MS experiments, and significant alterations in the ubiquitylation levels of 78 sites (fold change &gt;1.5) were detected after de-etiolation for 12&#x202f;h. The majority of the ubiquitylated sites we identified corresponded to substrates involved in protein and DNA metabolism, such as ribosomes and histones. Meanwhile, multiple ubiquitylation sites were detected in proteins whose functions reflect the major physiological changes that occur during plant de-etiolation, such as hormone synthesis/signaling proteins, key C4 photosynthetic enzymes, and light signaling proteins. This study on the ubiquitylome of the maize seedling leaf is the first attempt ever to study the ubiquitylome of a C4 plant and provides the proteomic basis for elucidating the role of ubiquitylation during plant de-etiolation.

### Keywords
De-etiolation, Ribosome, Ubiquitylation, Maize seedling leaf, C4 photosynthetic enzymes

### Affiliations
Professor  Institute of Botany, CAS  Add: No.20 Nanxincun, Xiangshan, Beijing 100093, China Email: wangbc@ibcas.ac.cn  Tel.： 86-10-62836884
ProteinWorld

### Submitter
Tiancong Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Baichen Wang
Professor  Institute of Botany, CAS  Add: No.20 Nanxincun, Xiangshan, Beijing 100093, China Email: wangbc@ibcas.ac.cn  Tel.： 86-10-62836884


