### Accession
PXD035104

### Title
Unusual composition of the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex from the widespread marine protist group diplonemids

### Description
In eukaryotes, pyruvate, a key metabolite produced by glycolysis, is converted by a mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH) to acetyl-coenzyme A, which is fed into the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Two additional enzyme complexes catalyze similar oxidative decarboxylation reactions albeit using different substrates, the branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) and the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH). In diplonemids, one of the most abundant and diverse groups of oceanic protists, comparative transcriptome analyses indicated that their PDH complex is compositionally unique, with the conventional E1 subunit replaced by an aceE protein of prokaryotic origin. Here we demonstrate in the model diplonemid Paradiplonema papillatum that the pyruvate dehydrogenase activity is comparable to that in other euglenozoan protists. By protein mass spectrometry we revealed that the aceE protein is twice as abundant as the E1 subunits of OGDH and enriched in the mitochondrion to the same level as the BCKDH E1 subunits, corroborating the functional relevance of the proposed aceE subunit of the PDH complex. Importantly, the acquisition of the archaeal aceE by the diplonemid ancestor led not only to the complete loss of the eukaryotic-type E1 of the PDH complex, but also its dedicated E2 and E3 subunits, still present in other euglenozoans. Hence, to reconstitute the diplonemid PDH, the aceE protein needs to partner with E2 and E3 subunits of BCKDH and/or OGDH. The diplonemid example illustrates that the acquisition and successful integration of a foreign E1p can profoundly reorganize the entire PDH complex.

### Sample Protocol
Paradiplonema papillatum cells (ATCC 50162) were cultivated axenically without shaking at ~20 °C in ocean salt medium containing 33 g/l Instant Ocean Sea Salt (Instant Ocean) supplemented with 1% (v/v) horse serum (Wisent) and 0.04% (w/v) yeast extract (BioBasic). Cells were grown until late exponential phase, harvested by centrifugation (2,000 g, 4 °C, 5 min), resuspended in a buffer containing 1.2 M sorbitol, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA pH8.0, and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche), and then lysed in a nitrogen cavitation chamber (Parr Instrument Company) under 30-bar nitrogen pressure. The cell lysate was ultracentrifuged on a two-step sucrose gradient (36% and 60%; 134,000 g, 4 °C, 60 min). The top fraction (above 36% sucrose) corresponded to the cytosol, while the fraction enriched in mitochondria was collected from the 36/60% sucrose interface. Aliquots of 50 μg of purified mitochondria, cytosol, and cells were lysed with 6 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (both Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, four biological replicates of each sample were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Peptides were purified on custom-made microtips with LiChroprep RP-18 25–40-μm particles (Merck-Millipore). Next, their concentration was measured by Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5-μm particle size; Dionex) and separated with an EASY-Spray C18 analytical column (75 μm × 500 mm, 5-μm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). The gradient of 2.4–34.4% acetonitrile was applied for 2 hours at a flow rate 250 nl/min. Spectra were collected by Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent Top15 mode. Precursors were measured in the mass range 300–1700 m/z with a resolution 120,000, fragmented by the HCD mechanism with normalized collision energy 25 and acquired at a resolution 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were processed by MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 having Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a custom protein sequence database of Paradiplonema papillatum (43,871 sequences) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 20  ppm, and 4.5  ppm in the main search upon recalibration, fragment tolerance was 20 ppm, and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The experimental design included matching between runs for biological replicates. Peptides were required to be at least seven amino acids long, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins, and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. The label-free quantification of proteins relied on LFQ intensities (essentially the sum of peptide intensities normalized for median peptide ratios between samples). The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus v1.6.15.0. Output proteinGroup table from MaxQuant was filtered and LFQ intensities log2 transformed. Proteins with less than one missing value in at least one experimental group were retained and data imputed, assuming the normal distribution. The principal component analysis confirmed excellent analytical reproducibility and ANOVA corrected by permutation test was used with a Q ≤ 0.001. Pairwise differences were assessed by Tukey’s test with P ≤ 0.001. Hierarchical clustering was performed on Z-score-normalized averages of LFQ intensities. To quantitatively compare dehydrogenase complexes components relative to each other, LFQ intensities were then normalized to the number of theoretically detectable peptides, i.e., as in the iBAQ approach (raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides). The number of trypsin peptides for each dehydrogenase complex protein was determined using the MS-Digest tool from the ProteinProspector v6.3.1 tool suite (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msdigest). We used the following parameters: trypsin digest; no missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl at Cys residues as fixed modification; Met oxidation as a variable modification; minimal length of 7 amino acids; and peptide mass range from 900 to 5,000 Da; the selected mass range covered >95% of all identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, pyruvate, a key metabolite produced by glycolysis, is converted by a tripartite mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex to acetyl-coenzyme A, which is fed into the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Two additional enzyme complexes with analogous composition catalyze similar oxidative decarboxylation reactions albeit using different substrates, the branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex and the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) complex. Comparative transcriptome analyses of diplonemids, one of the most abundant and diverse groups of oceanic protists, indicate that the conventional E1, E2, and E3 subunits of the PDH complex are lacking. E1 was apparently replaced in the euglenozoan ancestor of diplonemids by an AceE protein of archaeal type, a substitution that we also document in dinoflagellates. Here, we demonstrate that the mitochondrion of the model diplonemid Paradiplonema papillatum displays pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase activities. Protein mass spectrometry of mitochondria reveal that the AceE protein is as abundant as the E1 subunit of BCKDH. This corroborates the view that the AceE subunit is a functional component of the PDH complex. We hypothesize that by acquiring AceE, the diplonemid ancestor not only lost the eukaryotic-type E1, but also the E2 and E3 subunits of the PDH complex, which are present in other euglenozoans. We posit that the PDH activity in diplonemids seems to be carried out by a complex, in which the AceE protein partners with the E2 and E3 subunits from BCKDH and/or OGDH.

### Keywords
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, Paradiplonema papillatum, Branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase

### Affiliations
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Baráth
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: diplonema papillatum
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: ltq orbitrap elite

