### Accession
PXD032958

### Title
Functional genomics of glioblastoma: from epigenetics to proteomic investigation of tumor-initiating cell secretome

### Description
The main objectives of the project are as follows: 1) Deciphering the TIC specific secretome signature. The secretome collected from four different TICs and their corresponding differentiated cell cultures will be subjected to label-free quantitative proteomic analysis to identify a TIC specific secretome signature. 2) Validation and functional characterization of selected molecules from TIC specific secretome signature. Selected molecules based on the level of regulation and literature information will be validated at the level of transcript and protein. The importance of a set of validated proteins will be studied both in vitro using neurosphere cultures and angiogenesis assays, and in vivo using an intracranial glioma model in nude mice 3) Characterizing of GBM specific serum proteome signature. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we will compare the serum proteome of tumor bearing mice (xenotransplantated with TICs), early after tumor establisment and after the tumor has reached its maximum size.We will also explore by targeted quantitative proteomics whether the level of “specific” TIC-secreted proteins is increased in the serum of TIC initiated GBM bearing mice and verify, using the same strategy, proteins found to be differentially expressed in serum in both mice groups. These studies will reveal whether TIC-secreted proteins (and/or other GBM-derived proteins) can be retrieved in serum and thus be considered as candidate biomarkers of GBM.

### Sample Protocol
GSC cell lines growing as neurospheres were grown in complete Neural Stem Cell medium containing Glutamine, Heparin, N2, B27, EGF and FGF for 6 days. They were thoroughly washed using PBS and re-plated without disrupting them in Neural Stem Cell medium devoid of supplements and growth factors. Thirty-six hours after plating in incomplete medium, the conditioned medium was collected, spun at 1,500 rpm for 15 min, filtered using 0.45 micron syringe filters and stored at -80°C. The DGCs were grown in complete DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, then washed with PBS and CM was collected after 36 hrs in incomplete medium and similarly stored. The conditioned media were concentrated using Centricons (3 kDa cut off; Merck) from 8 ml to 100 μl, followed by precipitation of proteins with trichloroacetic acid (TCA 10% for 30 min at 4°C). Equal amounts of proteins from each condition were run on gradient (4-20 %) SDS gels and stained with Colloidal Coomassie blue. The gels were then destained and each lane cut into 5 equal pieces. Proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (Gold Promega, 1 μg per band, overnight at 30°C,). Peptides were loaded onto a 15 cm reversed phase column (75 mm inner diameter, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive+ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS analyses were performed in a data-dependent mode. Eluted peptides were electro-sprayed online at a voltage of 1.5 kV into the Q-Exactive+ mass spectrometer. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (MS1, 375–1,500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000, followed by 12 data-dependent tandem-mass (MS2) spectra was repeated continuously throughout the nano-LC separation. Parameters used for MS2 spectra were: resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 1e5, a normalized collision energy of 28 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using the MaxQuant using standard parameters with match between runs. MS/MS spectra were matched against the UniProt Reference proteomes of Human (v2018_01) and 250 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries (MaxQuant contaminant database). Statistical analysis were done using Perseus on LFQ data.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) alone can initiate and maintain tumors, but the function of non-cancer stem cells (non-CSCs) that form the tumor bulk remains poorly understood. Proteomic analysis showed a higher abundance of the extracellular matrix small leucine-rich proteoglycan fibromodulin (FMOD) in the conditioned medium of differentiated glioma cells (DGCs), the equivalent of glioma non-CSCs, compared to that of glioma stem-like cells (GSCs). DGCs silenced for FMOD fail to cooperate with co-implanted GSCs to promote tumor growth. FMOD downregulation neither affects GSC growth and differentiation nor DGC growth and reprogramming in vitro. DGC-secreted FMOD promotes angiogenesis by activating integrin-dependent Notch signaling in endothelial cells. Furthermore, conditional silencing of <i>FMOD</i> in newly generated DGCs in vivo inhibits the growth of GSC-initiated tumors due to poorly developed vasculature and increases mouse survival. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that DGC-secreted FMOD promotes glioma tumor angiogenesis and growth through paracrine signaling in endothelial cells and identifies a DGC-produced protein as a potential therapeutic target in glioma.

### Keywords
Tumor-initiating cells, Proteomics, Secretome, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kumaravel Somasundaram
Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


