### Accession
PXD009728

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum oocyst sporozoites

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum oocyst sporozoites

### Sample Protocol
P. falciparum (NF54 strain) cultures were maintained in vitro through infections of O+ erythrocytes grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 50µm hypoxanthine and 10% A+ human serum in a gas mixture consisting of 5% CO2, 5% O2, and 90% N2. Gametocyte cultures were initiated at 5% hematocrit and 0.8-1% parasitaemia and were maintained for up to 17 days with daily media changes. Adult female An. stephensi mosquitoes were allowed to feed through Parafilm for up to 20 minutes upon gametocyte cultures. Oocyst sporozoites were isolated by micro-dissection and purified first over an Accudenz cushion. Purified salivary gland sporozoites were pelleted and lysed by addition of 2xSample Buffer and heating at 70°C for 5 minutes, then electrophoresed through a 4-20 % w/v SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Gels were stained with Imperial Stain , de-stained in H2O, and cut into 26 equal-sized fractions. Gel pieces were then de-stained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) and dehydrated with ACN. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ABC and cysteines were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC. Gel pieces were washed with ABC in 50 % ACN, dehydrated with ACN, and rehydrated with 6.25 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC. After digesting overnight at 37 °C, the supernatant was recovered and peptides were extracted by incubating the gel pieces with 2 % ACN/1 % formic acid (FA), then ACN. The extractions were combined with the digest supernatant, evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in liquid chromatography (LC) loading buffer consisting of 2 % ACN/0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). LC was performed using an Agilent 1100 nano pump with electronically controlled split flow at 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated on a column with an integrated fritted tip (360 µm outer diameter (O.D.), 75 µm inner diameter (I.D.), 15 µm I.D. tip; New Objective) packed in-house with a 20 cm bed of C18 (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur C18 AQ, 120 Å, 3 µm). Prior to each run, sample was loaded onto a trap column consisting of a fritted capillary (360 µm O.D., 150 µm I.D.) packed with a 1 cm bed of the same stationary phase and washed with loading buffer. The trap was then placed in-line with the separation column for the separation gradient. The LC mobile phases consisted of buffer A (0.1 % FA in water) and buffer B (0.1 % FA in ACN). The separation gradient was 5 % B to 35 % B over 60 min. Tandem MS was performed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific LTQ Velos Pro-Orbitrap Elite (P. falciparum). Data-dependent acquisition was employed to select the top 20 precursors for collision-induced dissociation (CID) and analysis in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion and precursor charge state selection were employed. Fractions were analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer output files were converted to mzML format using msConvert version 3.0.6002 (PMID:18606607) and searched with Comet version 2015.02 rev.0 (PMID:23148064). The precursor mass tolerance was ±20 ppm, and fragment ions bins were set to a tolerance of 1.0005 m/z and a monoisotopic mass offset of 0.4 m/z. Semi-tryptic peptides and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The search parameters included a static modification of +57.021464 Da at Cys for formation of S-carboxamidomethyl Cys by iodoacetamide and potential modifications of +15.994915 Da at Met for oxidation, -17.026549 Da at peptide N terminal Gln for deamidation from formation of pyroGlu, -18.010565 Da at peptide N terminal Glu for loss of water from formation of pyroGlu, -17.026549 Da at peptide N-terminal Cys for deamidation from formation of cyclized N-terminal S-carboxamidomethyl Cys, and +42.010565 for acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein, either at N-terminal Met or the N-terminal residue after cleavage of N-terminal Met. The spectra were searched against a database comprising P. falciparum 3D7 (PMID:12368864) (PlasmoDB v.30, www.plasmodb.org (PMID:18957442)) appended with Anopheles stephensi Indian AsteI2.3 (PMID:25244985) (VectorBase, www.vectorbase.org (PMID:25510499)), and a modified version of the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (v.2012.01.01, The Global Proteome Machine, www.thegpm.org/cRAP) with the Sigma Universal Standard Proteins removed and the LC calibration standard peptide [Glu-1] fibrinopeptide B appended. Decoy proteins with the residues between tryptic residues randomly shuffled were generated using a tool included in the TPP and interleaved among the real entries. The MS/MS data were analyzed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (PMID:25631240) version 5.0.0 Typhoon. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were assigned scores in PeptideProphet (PMID:124035970), peptide-level scores were assigned in iProphet (PMID:23720762), and Protein identifications were inferred with ProteinProphet (PMID:14632076). In the case that multiple proteins were inferred at equal confidence by a set of peptides, the inference was counted as a single identification and all relevant protein IDs were listed. Only proteins with ProteinProphet probabilities corresponding to a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0 % (as determined from the ProteinProphet mixture models) were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium sporozoites are transmitted from infected mosquitoes to mammals, and must navigate the host skin and vasculature to infect the liver. This journey requires distinct proteomes. Here, we report the dynamic transcriptomes and proteomes of both oocyst sporozoites and salivary gland sporozoites in both rodent-infectious Plasmodium yoelii parasites and human-infectious Plasmodium falciparum parasites. The data robustly define mRNAs and proteins that are upregulated in oocyst sporozoites (UOS) or upregulated in infectious sporozoites (UIS) within the salivary glands, including many that are essential for sporozoite functions in the vector and host. Moreover, we find that malaria parasites use two overlapping, extensive, and independent programs of translational repression across sporozoite maturation to temporally regulate protein expression. Together with gene-specific validation experiments, these data indicate that two waves of translational repression are implemented and relieved at different times during sporozoite maturation, migration and infection, thus promoting their successful development and vector-to-host transition.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Oocyst sporozoite

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Kristian Swearingen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


