### Accession
PXD018632

### Title
Comparative gender peptidomics of Bothrops atrox venoms: new peptides and evidences of increased disintegrins levels in the venoms of females

### Description
Background: Bothrops atrox is known to be the pitviper responsible for most snakebites and human fatalities in the Amazon region. It can be found in a wide geographical area including the northern South America, the east of Andes and the Amazon basin. Possibly due to its wide distribution range and generalist feeding, intraspecific venom variation was reported by previous proteomics studies. Sex-based and ontogenetic variations on venom compositions of Bothrops snakes were also subject of proteomic and peptidomic analysis. However, the venom peptidome of B. atrox remains unknown. Methods: we conducted a mass spectrometry-based analysis of the venom peptides of individual male and female specimens combining bottom-up and top-down approaches.  Results: We identified in B. atrox a total of 105 native peptides in the mass range of 0.4 to 13.9 kDa. Quantitative analysis showed that Phospholipase A2 and Bradykinin Potentiating Peptides were the most abundant peptide families in both genders, but the disintegrins levels were significantly increased in the venoms of females. Known peptides processed at non-canonical sites and new peptides were also revealed in this work. Conclusion: The venom peptidomes of male and female specimens of B. atrox were analyzed by mass spectrometry-based approaches in this work. The study points to differences in the disintegrin levels in the venoms of females that may result in distinct pathophysiology in envenomation. Further research is needed to explore its biological implications.

### Sample Protocol
Venom Extraction And Fractionation Venom samples were extracted from four female and four male specimens of B. atrox. The animals were previously anesthetized with carbon dioxide. Venoms were individually extracted into beakers kept in ice bath and immediately mixed with the proteinase inhibitors EDTA and PMSF to final concentrations of 5 mM and 2 mM, respectively. The venom solutions were centrifuged at 16,000 g and 4 °C for 5 minutes to remove debris, lyophilized and stored at -20 °C for further fractionation. Protein quantification was performed by the BCA protein assay according to the manufacturer protocol. Venom peptidomic fractions were obtained from 50 µg aliquots of crude venoms subjected to solid-phase extraction with C18 stage tips and eluted with 40% ACN. Stage tips were assembled with InertSep RP-C18 resin (GL Sciences) and SDB-XC membrane (Empore, 3M) inside P200 pipette tips. The eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf) and the dried venom eluates were stored at -20 °C until MS analysis or digestion prior to analysis.   Enzyme Digestion Pools of venoms (males and females distinctly) containing 50 µg of crude venom each were separately digested with three different enzymes. Venoms were dissolved in specific buffer solutions for each enzyme and digested as previously described. Briefly, for trypsin and Asp-N, samples were dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and in 50 mM sodium phosphate for digestion with Glu-C. Additionally, two other pools of each gender containing 100 µg of crude venom were digested only with trypsin. The enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 was used for all digestions. Samples were incubated with 0.2% RapiGest surfactant (Waters) at 80 °C for 15 min, followed by centrifugation at 2000 g for 3 min. All samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Incubations with the enzymes were conducted for 30 minutes at 37 °C. TFA at final concentration of 0.5% was added to the samples to stop the digestions and to cleave the RapiGest surfactant. Samples were cleaned in stage tips, as described in the fractionation section, before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass Spectrometry Acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis of native and digested toxins were performed on a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) chromatographic system. Samples were injected into a trap column (nanoAquity C18 trap column Symmetry 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) and transferred by an elution gradient to an analytical column (nanoAcquity C18 BEH 75 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 mm, Waters). Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to generate a 7-35% B elution gradient run over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 275 nl/min. Data were acquired in the data-independent acquisition modes MSE and UDMSE with ion mobility separation, in the m/z range of 50-2000 and operating in resolution mode. Peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) switching from low (4 eV) to high (ramped from 19 to 45 eV) collision energy, for accurate measurement of both precursor and fragment ions. Scan times were set to 1.25 s. The ESI source was operated in the positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, block temperature of 100 °C and cone voltage of 40 V. Glu-fibrinopeptide B (Peptide 2.0) was infused through the nanoLockSpray source and sampled for 1 s every 60 s for external calibration. Native venom peptides and digested samples were analyzed in technical duplicates, totalizing 46 LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Analysis of Native Peptides Raw data of native peptides were processed and analyzed in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics). Relative quantification and retention time alignment were based on peptide ion data of a reference run automatically selected. Only native peptide ions with normalized abundance above 200 counts and detected in at least 2 biological replicates of male or female groups were considered for further analysis.  Entries with differences in monoisotopic mass and retention time below 30 ppm and 2 min, respectively, were regarded as redundant and only the entry with higher average abundance was considered.  Peptide Identification MS/MS spectra peak lists were generated in the software ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 (Waters) as .mzML files. Spectra were processed by the Apex3D module using low energy threshold of 750 counts and high energy threshold of 50 counts. The peak lists of native peptide samples were submitted to searches using MASCOT 2.2.04 (Matrix Science) and PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) against the Uniprot database (date of fasta file: June 21, 2018) restricted to Bothrops atrox with 202 entries. The search parameters set in PEAKS Studio were: no enzyme specificity, pyroglutamic acid from N-terminal Gln or Glu and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, mass tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.025 Da for fragments ions and FDR of 1% at the peptide level. De novo (ALC ≥50%), post-translational modifications (PEAKS PTM) and homology (SPIDER module) searches were also performed in PEAKS Studio. The same database and variable modifications were set on MASCOT engine. Peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 0.1 Da and ion identifications were considered for expectation values lower than 0.05 (p<0.05). The expectation cut-off value of 0.05 was applied in the MASCOT ion score to avoid peptide identifications out of the 95% confidence interval to be selected. The MS/MS spectra of digested samples were submitted to database search in PEAKS Studio using the same B. atrox database and mass tolerances. Enzyme specificity was defined for each sample and up to one non-specific and three missed cleavages were allowed per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification and Met oxidation, N-terminus acetylation and Asn/Gln deamidation were set as variable modifications.   Native Peptidome Analysis Identified peptides from digested samples on PEAKS Studio were manually reviewed and N and C-terminals from native peptides were determined by consensus of non-specific cleavages and overlapping peptides. To validate the native sequences of heavy peptides (>5 kDa), identified by overlapping cleaved peptides in PEAKS Studio, the experimental mass of each ion was compared to its theoretical mass calculated in ProteinProspector v 5.22.1 (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). For peptides <10 kDa, the monoisotopic masses were used in the comparisons. The sequences were validated if the relative mass difference in ppm was equal or less than 30 and a minimum of 4 fragments matching b+ or y+ ion series were found. For peptides ≥ 8 kDa, the average masses were used in the comparisons and the sequences was validated if the relative mass difference in ppm was equal or less than 200 ppm.  Peptide Alignment Primary structures of selected peptides were analyzed by homology searches using protein BLAST (https://www.uniprot.org/blast/) and aligned in TCoffee or in PEAKS Studio 7.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Disintegrins, Venom, Bothrops atrox, Peptidomics, Sexual dimorphism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Departamento de Bioquímica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 04023-901, Brazil; Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 05503-900, Brazil

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Departamento de Bioquímica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 04023-901, Brazil; Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 05503-900, Brazil


