### Accession
PXD005765

### Title
HLA-E Presents Glycopeptides from the Mtb Protein MPT32 to Human CD8 T Cells

### Description
Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the bacterium that causes Tuberculosis, remains a global health concern. Both classically and non-classically restricted cytotoxic CD8+ T cells are important to the control of Mtb infection. We and others have demonstrated that the non-classical MHC I molecule HLA-E can present pathogen-derived peptides to CD8+ T cells. In this manuscript, we identified the antigen recognized by an HLA-E-restricted CD8+ T cell clone isolated from an Mtb latently infected individual as a peptide from the Mtb protein, MPT32. Recognition by the CD8+ T cell clone required N-terminal O-linked mannosylation of MPT32 by a mannosyltransferase encoded by the Rv1002c gene. This is the first description of a post-translationally modified Mtb-derived protein antigen presented in the context of an HLA-E specific CD8+ T cell immune response. The identification of an immune response that targets a unique mycobacterial modification is novel and has practical impact in the development of vaccines and diagnostics.

### Sample Protocol
A proteomics approach was utilized to identify antigenic proteins and peptides in the identification of a pathogen specific HLA-E antigen. Proteins were purified from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, digested with proteases (trypsin and pronase). Peptides were fractionated via reverse phase HPLC and tested for biological activity. Fractions that elicited a positive response (gamma-interferon elispot) were characterized by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were searched using the Mascot database search engine (Matrix Science) or SEQUEST via the Sorcerer data analyis platform (SageN Research). Skyline (University of Washington)was also used to interogate LC-MS data for MS1 peak area data. Post processing of tandem MS files was performed in Scaffold (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the bacterium that causes tuberculosis, remains a global health concern. Both classically and non-classically restricted cytotoxic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are important to the control of Mtb infection. We and others have demonstrated that the non-classical MHC I molecule HLA-E can present pathogen-derived peptides to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. In this manuscript, we identified the antigen recognized by an HLA-E-restricted CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell clone isolated from an Mtb latently infected individual as a peptide from the Mtb protein, MPT32. Recognition by the CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell clone required N-terminal O-linked mannosylation of MPT32 by a mannosyltransferase encoded by the Rv1002c gene. This is the first description of a post-translationally modified Mtb-derived protein antigen presented in the context of an HLA-E specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell immune response. The identification of an immune response that targets a unique mycobacterial modification is novel and may have practical impact in the development of vaccines and diagnostics.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Cd8 t cells, Hla-e

### Affiliations
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Lisa Wolfe

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Marie Dobos
Colorado State University


