### Accession
PXD013285

### Title
human nk cell line LC-MSMS -  Recurrent GNAQ mutation encoding T96S in natural killer/T cell lymphoma

### Description
To identify protein binding partners of wild-type or Gαq T96S mutants using immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The eluted proteins were digested according to the SISPROT protocol, as described in a previous study(Bian Y, et al. Ultra-deep tyrosine phosphoproteomics enabled by a phosphotyrosine superbinder. Nature chemical biology 12, 959-966 (2016).). The desalted peptides were lyophilized under vacuum and kept at –20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.The desalted sample was dissolved in solvent A and analyzed via reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) using a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled to a NanoSpray III ion source and a nanoLC Eksigent 415 system (SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada). Nano-scale reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) was performed with a trap-and-elution configuration using a Nano cHiPLC Trap column (200 μm × 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) and a nano-scale analytical column (75 μm × 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å). Solvents A and B were 2% and 98% acetonitrile in water supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The sample was loaded in the trap column at a ﬂow rate of 3 μl/min for 7 min using 100% solvent A. For each sample, a stepwise gradient of 60 min (0–0.5 min, 95–92% A; 0.5–38 min, 92–75% A; 38–44 min, 75–65% A; 44–45 min, 65–20% A; 45–51 min, 20% A; 51–52 min, 20–95% A; 52–60 min, 95% A) or 90 min (0–0.5 min, 95–93% A; 0.5–55 min, 93–75% A; 55–70 min, 75–65% A; 70–75 min, 65–50% A; 75–76 min, 50–20% A; 76–81 min, 20% A; 81–82 min, 20–95% A; 82–90 min, 95% A) was separately performed using a ﬂow rate of 300 μl/min. The following parameters were used with the mass spectrometer: MS survey scan range, 350–1,500 m/z; MS survey, 0.25 s; MS/MS scan range, 100–1,500 m/z. The precursor ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and the collision energy spread (CES) was set to 10. Up to 30 precursor ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS experiments with an accumulation time of 0.07 s per MS/MS scan and a total cycle time of 2.4 s. The selection criteria for precursor ions included an intensity greater than 200 cps and a charge state ranging from +2 to +5. The precursor ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and the CES was set to 5. The following parameters were used: dynamic excluded time, 18 s; ignore peaks within 6 Da; exclude after occurrences, 1; mass tolerance, 50 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The original .wiff files were converted to .mgf files using PeakView software (SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada), and the resulting files were subjected to database searches using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). The following parameters were used for database search: trypsin, KR/P; max cleavage sites, 2; fixed modification, carboxamidomethylation (C); variable modification, oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ), acetyl (N-term); mass tolerance, 0.05 Da for the precursor ion and 0.1 Da for the fragment ion. The searches were conducted in a UniProt Swiss-Prot database (downloaded in May 2017, with 20201 reviewed and canonical protein sequence entries) containing whole Homo sapiens proteins and the same number of reversed protein sequences. Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) express (v3.6.1) was the statistical tool utilized to calculate the probability of protein–protein interaction from background, nonspecific interactions.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer/T cell lymphoma (NKTCL) is a rare and aggressive malignancy with a higher prevalence in Asia and South America. However, the molecular genetic mechanisms underlying NKTCL remain unclear. Here, we identify somatic mutations of GNAQ (encoding the T96S alteration of G&#x3b1;q protein) in 8.7% (11/127) of NKTCL patients, through whole-exome/targeted deep sequencing. Using conditional knockout mice (Ncr1-Cre-Gnaq<sup>fl/fl</sup>), we demonstrate that G&#x3b1;q deficiency leads to enhanced NK cell survival. We also find that G&#x3b1;q suppresses tumor growth of NKTCL via inhibition of the AKT and MAPK signaling pathways. Moreover, the G&#x3b1;q T96S mutant may act in a dominant negative manner to promote tumor growth in NKTCL. Clinically, patients with GNAQ T96S mutations have inferior survival. Taken together, we identify recurrent somatic GNAQ T96S mutations that may contribute to the pathogenesis of NKTCL. Our work thus has implications for refining our understanding of the genetic mechanisms of NKTCL and for the development of therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Nk cell line

### Affiliations
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
zm Li

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaoming Li
Zhengzhou University


