### Accession
PXD007140

### Title
Identification of new protein-coding genes with a potential role in the virulence of the plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria

### Description
Bacteria of the genus Xanthomonas are economically important plant pathogens. Pathogenicity of Xanthomonas spp. depends on the type III-secretion system and additional virulence determinants. The number of sequenced Xanthomonas genomes increases rapidly, however, accurate annotation of these genomes is difficult, because it relies on gene prediction programs. In this study, we used a mass-spectrometry (MS)-based approach to identify the proteome of Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Xcv) also known as X. euvesicatoria, a well-studied member of plant-pathogenic Xanthomonadaceae.  Results Using different culture conditions, MS-datasets were searched against a six-frame-translated genome database of Xcv. In total, we identified 2,593 proteins covering 55% of the Xcv genome, including 764 hitherto hypothetical proteins. Our proteogenomic approach identified 30 new protein-coding genes and allowed correction of the N-termini of 50 protein-coding genes. For five novel and two N-terminally corrected genes the corresponding proteins were confirmed by immunoblot. Furthermore, our data indicate that two putative type VI-secretion systems encoded in Xcv play no role in bacterial virulence which was experimentally confirmed.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cracked in TE-buffer using three times French press. Cell debris and undissolved material were removed by centrifugation (15 min, 16,000 × g, 4°C). Protein concentrations were measured using the Bradford assay. 100 μg protein were precipitated over night with ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were dissolved in 40 μl Laemmli-buffer, and 20 µl were subjected to 1-D-SDS PAGE (12% separation gel, 4% stacking gel). The gel was fixed overnight in 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid, and stained with colloidal Coomassie (20% Ethanol; 1.6% phosphoric acid; 8% ammonium sulfate; 0.08% Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250).  Lanes of the protein gel were cut into 10 slices of equal size and proteins were digested in gel by trypsin. The eluted peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS-analysis on a Proxeon nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. In-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 μm, o.d. 360 μm, length 150 mm; packed with 1.7 µm Aeris XB-C18 reversed-phase material (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) were loaded, then desalted with 10 μl buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a maximum pressure of 750 bar. For LC-MS/MS-analysis, peptides were eluted using a nonlinear 80 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Spectra were recorded in an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a resolution of R = 30.000 with lockmass correction activated. After acquisition of the Full-MS-spectra, up to 20 dependent scans (MS/MS) were performed according to precursor intensity by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID) in the linear ion trap.  A second data set was generated using MS/MS-data obtained from a comparative proteome experiment. The tryptic digests obtained from the 1-D-SDS PAGE gel pieces were subjected to reversed phase column chromatography (Waters BEH 1.7 µm, 100 µm i. d. x 100 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) operated on a nanoACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a trapping column (Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC column, Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with 99% buffer A (0.1% acetic acid). Subsequently, the peptides were eluted and separated using a non-linear 80-min gradient from 5 to 60% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS and MS/MS-data were obtained using the LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (r = 30,000) with the lockmass option enabled, MS/MS-data were recorded for the five most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not taken into account for MS/MS-analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis first approach: Data were analyzed by Sorcerer Sequest against a six-frame translated database of the whole Xcv genome (protein database containing 175.698 (21.627 ≤ 6 aa) entries). The following search parameters were used: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 1 Da; b- and y-ion series; a maximum of two modifications per peptide was allowed. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a false discovery rate (FDR) of maximal 0.4%, requiring a minimum of at least two unique peptides for protein identification and quantification. Data analysis second approach: Data were analyzed by Sorcerer Sequest against the 6-frame database. The following search parameters were used: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 1 Da; b- and y-ion series; a maximum of two modifications per peptide was allowed. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a false discovery rate below 1%, requiring a minimum of at least two unique peptides for protein identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T6ss, T4ss, Genome re-annotation, T3ss, Ortho proteogenimic, Proteogenome, Translational start sites, Xanthomonas

### Affiliations
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 4205920 fax:        +49 3834 4205902
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 4205920 fax:        +49 3834 4205902


