### Accession
PXD003308

### Title
Half decimal place rule

### Description
Many MS2 spectra in bottom-up proteomics experiments remain unassigned. To improve proteome coverage, we applied the half decimal place rule (HDPR) to remove non-peptidic molecules. The HDPR considers the ratio of the first digit after the decimal point to the full molecular mass and results in a relatively small permitted mass window for most peptides. Although the HDPR has been described previously, it has never been integrated into an acquisition strategy using high resolution mass spectrometers. The HDPR was applied to three technical replicates of an in-solution tryptic digest of HeLa cells which were analysed by LC-MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were in soultion digested, reduced and alcylated and trypsin digested. The digests were cleaned up on reverse phase SPEs and subjected to mass spectrometry. The mass spectrometer was operated in an ordinary DDA mode. In a second round, an exclusion list of unwantet precursors was used to prove the concept of the HDPR.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed to generate peak list in Mascot generic format (*.mgf) using ProteoWizard release version 3.0.331. Database searches were performed using Mascot in-house version 2.4.0 to search the SwissProt database (Human, 11.08.2015, 20203 proteins) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, at maximum one missed cleavage site, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and oxidation of methionines, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability. Furthermore the data were processed with an in house script to calculate eliminate precursors which did not match the HDPR. These spectrum files were searched again and compared against the origninal set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mass defect, Dda, Lc-msms, Hdpr

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Christian Koehler

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway


