### Accession
PXD012742

### Title
Differential responses to stress of two Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strains

### Description
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae pathogenic strains, like 7448, are the causative agents of porcine enzootic pneumonia. Non-pathogenic strains, like M. hyopneumoniae J, does not cause disease, although shares the entire repertoire of known virulence-related genes with M. hyopneumoniae 7448. In this context, the differential expression of ortholog genes is likely responsible, at least in part, for differences in pathogenicity or virulence level between these strains. Moreover, in the porcine lung, M. hyopneumoniae faces a hostile environment, with both oxidative and heat stresses. The performed comparative proteomics analyses provided evidence of differential stress responses between a pathogenic and a non-pathogenic M. hyopneumoniae strain, involving tens of proteins, including some known virulence factors. The results suggest that stress conditions trigger the expression of potential virulence factors in the pathogenic M. hyopneumoniae 7448, but not in the non-pathogenic M. hyopneumoniae J.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing 100 μg of the protein extracts were precipitated with TCA 20%-acetone, incubated for 16 h at 4°C, and further centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min. Protein pellets were dried and then solubilized with 8 M urea. Next, proteins were reduced with 2 μg of DTT (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) at 37°C for 1 h, and alkylated with 10 μg of iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) in the dark, at room temperature. Protein samples were diluted to a final 1 M urea concentration, and further digested with 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, WI, USA). Resulting peptides were desalted in HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation, MA, USA), and eluted with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Peptides were then lyophilized using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, Germany), prior to mass spectometry analyses. Each peptide sample was reconstituted using 0.1% formic acid in water, loaded onto a nanoAcquity HPLC system (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). A two-step LC was performed, using first a trap column PepMap 100 C18 LC column (300 µm x 5 mm) (Thermo Fischer Scientific, IL, USA), at a flow rate of 5 µl/min, and then an Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm x 15 cm) analytical column (Thermo Fischer Scientific, IL, USA). For the gradient elution, the mobile phase solvents consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A), and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Burdick and Jackson, MI, USA) (solvent B). The gradient flow was set at 0.3 µl/min. The elution profile consisted of a hold at 5% solvent B for 5 min, followed by a ramp up to 35% solvent B over 25 min; a ramp up to 95% solvent B in 5 min; and a hold at 95% for 5 min, prior to a return to 5% solvent B in 5 min, and re-equilibration at 5% solvent B for 20 min. After LC, the peptides were introduced into an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion-trap-orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, IL, USA) for high resolution and MS/MS analysis. A 2.0 kV voltage was applied to the nano-LC column. The mass spectrometer was programmed to perform data-dependent acquisition by scanning the mass-to-charge (m/z) range from 400 to 1600, at a nominal resolution setting of 60,000 for parent ion acquisition. For the MS/MS analyses, the mass spectrometer was programmed to select the top 15 most intense ions with two or more charges. Each biological replicate was independently analyzed by LC-MS/MS two times (technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) data were processed using the Mascot Software (Matrix Science, UK). Raw MS data files were processed using Mascot Distiller. The database search was performed against M. hyopneumoniae 7448 and J local databases containing the deduced amino acid sequences (with 695 and 672 amino acid sequences, respectively) from the genomes annotation available at NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). The search parameters included a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, peptide ion tolerance of 10 ppm, and three missed cleavages of trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas the oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and N-terminal ends of proteins, phosphorylation of tyrosine and phosphorylation of serine/threonine were specified as variable modifications. These modifications were chosen due to the high content of adenine and thymine in mycoplasmas genome, which correlates with high probabilities of lysine acetylation and serine phosphorylation. Scaffold version 4.8.1 (Proteome Software Inc., OR, USA) was used to validate the peptide and protein identifications. The Scaffold bundled version of X!Tandem was used to increase protein identification confidence. The peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at > 99.0% probability as assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. The protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at > 95% probability as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm; were based on at least 2 identified peptides; and were detected in at least two out of three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae is a respiratory pathogen, causing porcine enzootic pneumonia. To survive in the porcine respiratory tract, M. hyopneumoniae must cope with both oxidative and heat stress imposed by the host. To get insights into M. hyopneumoniae stress responses and pathogenicity mechanisms, the protein profiles of two M. hyopneumoniae strains, pathogenic 7448 strain and non-pathogenic strain J, were surveyed under oxidative (OS) or heat (HS) stress. M. hyopneumoniae strains were submitted to OS (0.5% hydrogen peroxide) or HS (temperature shifts to 42&#x202f;&#xb0;C) conditions and protein profiling was carried out by LC-MS/MS and label-free quantitative analyses. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012742. Qualitative and quantitative differences involving 40-60&#x202f;M. hyopneumoniae proteins were observed for both strains when comparing bacteria exposed to OS or HS to non-treated controls. However, no differences in abundance were found in proteins classically related to stress responses, as peroxidases and chaperones, suggesting that these proteins would be constitutively present in both strains in the tested conditions. Interestingly, under stress conditions, more virulence-related proteins were detected in M. hyopneumoniae 7448 differentially represented proteins than in M. hyopneumoniae J, suggesting that stress may trigger a differential response of the corresponding genes, shared by both strains.

### Keywords
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae; oxidative stress; heat stress; lc-ms/ms; virulence

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Laboratório de Genômica Estrutural e Funcional, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

### Submitter
Henrique Ferreira

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique Bunselmeyer Ferreira
Laboratório de Genômica Estrutural e Funcional, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.


