### Accession
PXD034963

### Title
Biomarkers for diagnosing the retained placenta in cows-does the analysis of serum proteome keep the secret?

### Description
Retained placenta (RP), a quite common disorder in dairy cows, shows a high negative impact on their health status and milk production. Therefore, the biomarkers indicating the risk for RP could yield benefits in dairy management. The study aimed to investigate the serum proteome as the source of the biomarkers for diagnosing the RP. Using the high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we compared the composition of serum proteome between 9 cows with the RP and 6 with the physiologic puerperium (PP). Among 651 identified proteins, seven had higher, and three showed lower abundance in RP than in the PP group. The differently abundant proteins participated in 15 pathways: six related to hemostasis, three involved in the lipoprotein metabolism, and the remaining ones associated with redox homeostasis, post-translational modification, scavenging, etc. Validation of the proteomic results, using ELISA and spectrophotometric assays, showed that the two identified proteins, haptoglobin, and lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, could represent reliable RP biomarkers. Our results confirmed that the analysis of serum proteome shed "the light" on the counterparty piece(s) of the RP pathogenesis "puzzle" and could be an efficient "tool" in mining for RP biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
The study included 15 cows, 9 with RP and 6 with PP. All cows were of the Simmental breed, except one, being crossbreed with Holstein Friesian breed. The age of cows ranged between 3 and 5 years. All cows had spontaneous calving. Non-specific clinical signs (agitation, inappetence, tachycardia, tachypnoea, etc.) appeared in cows with RP soon after the delivery. The findings of the gynecological examination 12−24 hours after the calving provided the diagnosis of RP. Following the diagnosing RP, we collected the blood samples from v. coccygea. After clotting and centrifugation at 1500g,  4 0C, for 15 minutes, we separated the serum into the 1.5 mL aliquots in the Eppendorf tubes,   and stored it at −80 °C until the analysis. For the preparation of the serum samples we followed the procedure published by Horvatić et al. (2019). First, we measured total protein concentration, using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), and diluted 35 μg of proteins to 50 μL with 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL,USA). The next step included proteinsʼ reduction with 2.5 μL of 200mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 60 min at 55 °C, alkylation with 2.5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) for 30 min at 20−25 0C protected from the light, and the overnight precipitation at ‒20 °C by adding 300 μL of acetone. After centrifugation at 8000×g, 4 °C for 15 minutes, and dissolving the protein pellets in 50 μL of 0.1 M TEAB, we added 1 μL of 1 mg/mL trypsin solution (, Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and the overnight digestion at 37 °C followed  . In parallel, we prepared the internal standard, a mixture of an equivalent quantity of protein from all samples, which was necessary as a reference during the quantitative analysis. For labeling, we mixed the individual samples or internal standard with the specific Tandem Mass Tag reagent (TMT sixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Following the incubation at room temperature and terminating the labeling reaction with 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), we randomly combined the internal standard and five samples.  For the  high resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of the TMT-labelled peptides, we followed the protocol from the previous studies (Kuleš et al., 2021). The Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano instrument (Dionex, Germany) was used for the chromatographic separation.  After being dissolved in the loading solution (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid), and desalted on the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm; 12 min; flow rate of 15 μL/min), the peptides were separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) by combining two mobile phases: the mobile phase A, 0.1% formic acid in the water, and the mobile phase B, 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The separation protocol started with a linear gradient of 5–55% mobile phase B over 120 min, then continued with 55% to 95% for 1 min, held at 95% for 2 min, and returned at 5% B during 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. When separated, the peptides were ionized with a nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA), and analyzed on Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters for the mass spectrometry analysis were as follows: the positive ion mode using data-dependent analysis Top8 method; full scan MS spectra covering the m/z range from 350.0 to 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000; injection time: 120 ms; AGC target: 1×106; isolation window: ± 2.0 Da; dynamic exclusion: 30 s; HCD fragmentation at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500; AGC target: 2×105; criteria for the precursor ions exclusion from fragmentation: the unassigned charge state, or charge states of +1 and more than +7.

### Data Protocol
To perform qualitative and quantitative analysis from the obtained spectra, we applied the SEQUEST algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3., ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched for the data search against the UniProt Bos taurus FASTA files (downloaded on December 1st, 2021, 120,378 sequences) according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites; precursor tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass compliance ± 0.02 Da; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was computed according to the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. The criteria for protein identification were the presence of at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR. To quantify the proteins, we correlated the relative intensities of the extracted reporter ions and the fragmented peptides, whereby the internal standard allowed for the comparison of the results between the 6-plexes. To analyze the difference in the relative abundance of proteins between the PP and RP groups, we used the R software (v4.1.2), following the instructions given in detail by Kuleš et al. (2021). The official gene symbols replaced the UniProtKB identifiers via the UniProtKB ID mapping tool (https://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/), what allowed the Gene Ontology (GO) classification, using the Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationship (PANTHER) tool (http://www.pantherdb.org/) with the subset of GO terms (GO Slim database). The next step was the pathway enrichment analysis with the REACTOME tool (https://reactome.org/), using the human genome as the background. The criterion to denote a pathway as significant was the FDR corrected P-value less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, Retained placenta, Proteomics, Cows, Serum

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Laboratory of Proteomics, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


