### Accession
PXD003972

### Title
Dynamic of the Grb2 interactome in primary cells by DIA-MS

### Description
We applied AP-SWATH to quantify Grb2 interaction dynamics in primary T cells with a high level of reproducibility and accuracy. We concluded that AP-SWATH is a robust approach to quantify signaling dynamics in primary cells and could be further expanded to additional hub proteins using a range of cell and tissues types.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of post-nuclear lysates were incubated with prewashed Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA GmbH) for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotary wheel. Beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml of lysis buffer in the absence of detergent and of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were eluted from the Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. For removal of D-biotin, samples were precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid (100%) to 25% (v/v) and incubation on ice for 1 h. Protein were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 ºC. Protein pellets were then washed 3 times with 200 µL ice-cold acetone with 5-min interspersed centrifugation. Washed protein pellets were dried by vacuum centrifugation at 45 ºC for 5 min and then resuspended in 25 µL 6 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3.  Samples were diluted to 0.5 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 before cysteines reduction (5 mM TCEP, 30 min at 37 ºC) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at 37 ºC in the dark). Protein was digested overnight at 37 ºC by addition of 1 µg trypsin (2.5 uL Promega, sequence-grade, V5113). Trifluoroacetic acid (50%) was added to 1 % (v/v) to stop the reaction, and peptides were purified using C18 microspin columns (3 – 30 ug, Nest Group) and resuspended in 15 µL Buffer A (acetonitrile 2%, formic acid 0.1 %) containing iRT peptides for retention-time alignment (Biognosys). 4 µL of resuspended peptides was injected serially in SWATH and shotgun acquisition modes.

### Data Protocol
The iPortal workflow was used for data analyses. The OpenSWATH analysis workflow (OpenSWATHWorkflow) (http://www.openswath.org) was implemented in the iPortal workflow. The parameters were selected analogously to the ones described before: min_rsq: 0.95, min_coverage: 0.6, min_upper_edge_dist: 1, mz_extraction_window: 0.05, rt_extraction_window: 600, extra_rt_extraction_window: 100. pyprophet (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyprophet) was run on the OpenSwathWorkflow output adjusted to contain the previously described scores (xx_swath_prelim_score, bseries_score, elution_model_fit_score, intensity_score, isotope_correlation_score, isotope_overlap_score, library_corr, library_rmsd, log_sn_score, massdev_score, massdev_score_weighted, norm_rt_score, xcorr_coelution, xcorr_coelution_weighted, xcorr_shape, xcorr_shape_weighted. yseries_score).

### Publication Abstract
Spatiotemporal organization of protein interactions in cell signaling is a fundamental process that drives cellular functions. Given differential protein expression across tissues and developmental stages, the architecture and dynamics of signaling interaction proteomes is, likely, highly context dependent. However, current interaction information has been almost exclusively obtained from transformed cells. In this study, we applied an advanced and robust workflow combining mouse genetics and affinity purification (AP)-SWATH mass spectrometry to profile the dynamics of 53 high-confidence protein interactions in primary T&#xa0;cells, using the scaffold protein GRB2 as a model. The workflow also provided a sufficient level of robustness to pinpoint differential interaction dynamics between two similar, but functionally distinct, primary T&#xa0;cell populations. Altogether, we demonstrated that precise and reproducible quantitative measurements of protein interaction dynamics can be achieved in primary cells isolated from mammalian tissues, allowing resolution of the tissue-specific context of cell-signaling events.

### Keywords
Interactome, Primary t cells, Swath, Dia-ms, Grb2

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


