### Accession
PXD022805

### Title
OXPHOS deficiency activates global adaptations to maintain mitochondrial membrane potential

### Description
Reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential is a hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction. It activates adaptive responses in organisms from yeast to human to rewire metabolism, remove depolarized mitochondria, and degrade unimported precursor proteins. It remains unclear how cells maintain mitochondrial membrane potential, which is critical for maintaining iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) synthesis, an indispensable function of mitochondria. Here we show that yeast oxidative phosphorylation mutants deficient in complex III, IV, V, and mtDNA respectively, have graded reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential and proliferation rates. Extensive omics analyses of these mutants show that accompanying mitochondrial membrane potential reduction, these mutants progressively activate adaptive responses, including transcriptional downregulation of ATP synthase inhibitor Inh1 and OXPHOS subunits, Puf3-mediated upregulation of import receptor Mia40 and global mitochondrial biogenesis, Snf1/AMPK-mediated upregulation of glycolysis and repression of ribosome biogenesis, and transcriptional upregulation of cytoplasmic chaperones. These adaptations disinhibit mitochondrial ATP hydrolysis, remodel mitochondrial proteome, and optimize ATP supply to mitochondria to convergently maintain mitochondrial membrane potential, ISC biosynthesis, and cell proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling:  Strains used for SILAC mass spectrometry were in lys2arg4 CAN1+ background. Strains were cultured in SCD (0.67% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.079% complete supplement mixture lacking lysing and arginine, 2% glucose) supplemented with 50 mg/L [13C6/15N4] L-arginine and 50 mg/L [13C6/15N2] L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratory) or non-labeled L-arginine and L-lysine, and grown to mid-log phase (OD 0.5-0.8). The average incorporation efficiency of “heavy” amino acids was detected by LC-MS/MS, reaching 98.0%.  Protein sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis:  For mitochondrial proteome analysis, three biological replicates were prepared in one occasion. 150 OD cells per genotype were harvested accurately and mixed together. Mitochondria were isolated following a previously described method (Diekert et al., 2001). Mitochondria pellets were lysed in 100 l 1% SDS lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and boiled for 10 min at 98℃. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 14000 rpm, 4℃ for 10 min. Mitochondrial proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 ℃ using 8 volumes of ice-cold acetone. The protein pellets were redissolved in 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Aliquot of 100 μg protein was reduced in 2 mM DTT at 56 C for 30 min followed by alkylation in 5 mM iodoacetamide at dark for 1 hour. Around 2.5 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin was added to each protein solution and incubated at 37 C overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted and fractionated into eight fractions with Thermo Scientific Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction of peptides was separated by a home-made analytical capillary column (50 μm × 15 cm) packed with 5 μm spherical C18 reversed phase material (YMC). A Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system was used to generate the following HPLC gradient: 0-30% B in 75 min, 30-70% B in 15 min, 70-90% B in 5 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were sprayed into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS scan followed by ten HCD (High-energy Collisional Dissociation) scans for each cycle. For Puf3 phosphorylation analysis, 350 OD of PUF3-FLAG or PUF3-FLAG rho0 cells were harvested accurately and mixed together. Cells were resuspended in 1 volume 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) plus 2 volumes SDS buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 4% SDS, 8% BME), and lysed by six rounds of bead-beating (20 seconds beating followed by 1 min of cooling on ice). The cell lysates were diluted with 20 volumes Triton buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton), and incubated with 8-10 l anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma) at 4 ℃ for 5-6 hours. The beads were washed for 4 times with yeast lysis buffer (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 14 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 2 mM PMSF, 5 μM pepstatin A, and 10 μM leupeptin) and eluted with FLAG peptides (2 mg/ml) overnight at 4℃. The sample was separated by 4-12% gradient gel, and stained with coomassie blue. Protein bands on the gradient gel were de-stained, and then reduced in 10 mM DTT at 56 C for 30 min followed by alkylation in 55 mM iodoacetamide at dark for 1 hour. The protein bands were isolated and in-gel digested with sequencing grade trypsin (10 ng/μL trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) overnight at 37 C. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid/75% acetonitrile sequentially and then concentrated to ~ 20 μl. The extracted peptides were separated by an analytical capillary column (50 μm × 15 cm) packed with 5 μm spherical C18 reversed phase material (YMC). A Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) was used to generate the following HPLC gradient: 0-30% B in 40 min, 30-70% B in 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were sprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS scan followed by four CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) and four HCD (High-energy Collisional Dissociation) MS/MS scans for each cycle.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis:  MS data of mitochondrial proteome were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016) and searched against UniProt_Scerevisiae protein database. The search parameters were set as follows: variable modification included “Oxidation (M)”, “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” and “Carbamidomethyl (C)”; digestion enzyme was chosen as “Trypsin/P”, and two missed cleavage sites were allowed; protein quantification was based on at least one unique peptide with minimal length of 7 amino acids; protein identification was based on at least one peptide, and false discovery rate at peptide spectrum level and protein level was 0.01; “First search peptide tolerance” was 20 ppm, and “Main search peptide tolerance” was 4.5 ppm. Other parameters used default settings if not indicated. SILAC ratios were calculated separately for each biological replicate.  MS data of Puf3 phosphorylation were analyzed using an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Science Ltd.) against yeast Puf3 protein sequence. SILAC quantification of the phosphorylated peptides was performed by Mascot Distiller. The search parameters are: 7 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.5 Da mass tolerance for product ions; three missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin digestion; and the following variable modifications were included: oxidation on methionine, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Q exactive mass spectrometer, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
National Institute of Biological Sciences
National institute of biological sciences

### Submitter
Siqi Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Jiang
National Institute of Biological Sciences


