### Accession
PXD005688

### Title
Characterization of Early-Phase Neutrophil Extracellular Traps in Urinary Tract Infections

### Description
Neutrophils have an important role in rapid antimicrobial defenses against and resolution of urinary tract infections (UTIs). We show that a mechanism known as neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation is a strategy to combat pathogens in the urinary tract. Viscous aggregates that were present in human urine sediments revealed high extracellular DNA content. The DNA formed a scaffold to which antimicrobial effector proteins derived from different neutrophil subcellular compartments bound. Treatment with deoxyribonuclease I solubilized these structures. We observed massive proteolytic degradation in the NETs with apparently dominant roles for the neutrophil granule proteases elastase, proteinase 3, and cathepsin G. In a UTI case with Staphylococcus aureus as the infectious agent, high abundance of autolysins and immune evasion factors in a cell-free NET extract suggested that controlled cell wall autolysis plays a role in derailing the host immune response and allows some bacterial cells to survive following entrapment in NETs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were processed using FASP protocol; LCMSMS were performed using QExactive MS (Thermo Scientific); data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils have an important role in the antimicrobial defense and resolution of urinary tract infections (UTIs). Our research suggests that a mechanism known as neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation is a defense strategy to combat pathogens that have invaded the urinary tract. A set of human urine specimens with very high neutrophil counts had microscopic evidence of cellular aggregation and lysis. Deoxyribonuclease I (DNase) treatment resulted in disaggregation of such structures, release of DNA fragments and a proteome enriched in histones and azurophilic granule effectors whose quantitative composition was similar to that of previously described in vitro-formed NETs. The effector proteins were further enriched in DNA-protein complexes isolated in native PAGE gels. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a flattened morphology of neutrophils associated with decondensed chromatin, remnants of granules in the cell periphery, and myeloperoxidase co-localized with extracellular DNA, features consistent with early-phase NETs. Nuclear staining revealed that a considerable fraction of bacterial cells in these structures were dead. The proteomes of two pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, were indicative of adaptive responses to early-phase NETs, specifically the release of virulence factors and arrest of ribosomal protein synthesis. Finally, we discovered patterns of proteolysis consistent with widespread cleavage of proteins by neutrophil elastase, proteinase 3 and cathepsin G and evidence of citrullination in many nuclear proteins.

### Keywords
Urine, Lcmsms, Neutrophil extracellular traps (nets), Proteomics, Urinary tract infection (uti)

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville MD 20850 USA

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville MD 20850 USA


