### Accession
PXD032028

### Title
Requirement of hepatic pyruvate carboxylase during fasting, high fat and ketogenic diet

### Description
Pyruvate has two major fates upon entry into mitochondria, the oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl-CoA or the biotin-dependent carboxylation to oxaloacetate via pyruvate carboxylase (Pcx).  Here we have generated mice with a liver specific knockout of pyruvate carboxylase (PcxL-/-) to understand the role of Pcx in hepatic mitochondrial metabolism under disparate physiological states.  PcxL-/- mice exhibited a deficit in hepatic gluconeogenesis as expected but were able to maintain systemic euglycemia following a 24hr fast and enhanced ketogenesis.  Feeding a high fat diet to PcxL-/- mice resulted in animals that were resistant to glucose intolerance without affecting body weight.  However, PcxL-/- mice fed a ketogenic diet for 1 week became severely hypoglycemic, demonstrating a requirement for hepatic Pcx for long term glycemia under carbohydrate limited diets.  Loss of Pcx was associated with an induction of protein acetylation in PcxL-/- mice regardless of physiologic state.  Furthermore, liver acetyl-proteomics revealed a  biased induction in mitochondrial lysine acetylation.  These data show that Pcx is important for maintaining the proper balance of pyruvate metabolism between oxidative and anaplerotic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Flash-frozen liver tissue from nine week old mice fasted for 24 hours was submitted to the Johns Hopkins Center for Proteomics Core for acetyl-proteome analysis. Samples were prepared in lysis buffer with 8M urea and 50mM tetraethyl ammoniumbicarbonate. Lysates were treated with LysC and trypsin, then labeled with 10-plex TMT. Peptide fractionation was done using basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography, resulting in 8 fractions. Fractions were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) and an UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) for on-line liquid chromatography with the following parameters: MS1 resolution = 120,000, MS2 resolution = 50,000, HCD fragmentation method, and MS2 collision energy = 35. Each fraction received a two hour run time.

### Data Protocol
Acetyl-proteome was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the uniport_mouse_120119_UP000000589 as a search database. The following parameters were used: cleavage enzyme was set as trypsin, no more than five missed cleavages were allowed, minimum amino acid length = 6, minimum peptides for protein = 1, fixed modifications included carbamidomethyl on cysteine residue and TMT6plex on any N-terminus, dynamic modifications included acetyl group on lysine or N-terminus as well as oxidation on methionine and TMT6plex on lysine residue. A 1% false discovery rate was applied for both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Pyruvate has two major fates upon entry into mitochondria, the oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl-CoA via the pyruvate decarboxylase complex or the biotin-dependent carboxylation to oxaloacetate via pyruvate carboxylase (Pcx). Here, we have generated mice with a liver-specific KO of pyruvate carboxylase (Pcx<sup>L-/-</sup>) to understand the role of Pcx in hepatic mitochondrial metabolism under disparate physiological states. Pcx<sup>L-/-</sup> mice exhibited a deficit in hepatic gluconeogenesis and enhanced ketogenesis as expected but were able to maintain systemic euglycemia following a 24 h fast. Feeding a high-fat diet to Pcx<sup>L-/-</sup> mice resulted in animals that were resistant to glucose intolerance without affecting body weight. However, we found that Pcx<sup>L-/-</sup> mice fed a ketogenic diet for 1&#xa0;week became severely hypoglycemic, demonstrating a requirement for hepatic Pcx for long-term glycemia under carbohydrate-limited diets. Additionally, we determined that loss of Pcx was associated with an induction in the abundance of lysine-acetylated proteins in Pcx<sup>L-/-</sup> mice regardless of physiologic state. Furthermore, liver acetyl-proteomics revealed a biased induction in mitochondrial lysine-acetylated proteins. These data show that Pcx is important for maintaining the proper balance of pyruvate metabolism between oxidative and anaplerotic pathways.

### Keywords
Acetyl-proteomics, Mitochondria, Ketogenesis, Pyruvate carboxylase

### Affiliations
Departments of Biological Chemistry & Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, MD
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 

### Submitter
Michael Wolfgang

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Wolfgang
Departments of Biological Chemistry & Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, MD


