### Accession
PXD044864

### Title
UCHL1 is a Molecular Indicator and a Therapeutic Target for Neuroendocrine Carcinomas

### Description
Quantitative proteomics analysis was performed on patient derived neuroendocrine tissue xenografts comparing sh control (N=2), and shUCHL1 (N=4), and in NCI-H660 cell line xenografts comparing control (N=3) and LDN-57444 treated (N=3). Each condition was injected in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor samples underwent protein extraction by sonication with SDS and protease inhibitors. Proteins were quantified using a BCA assay. For proteomics, proteins were treated with TCEP and iodoacetamide, and then precipitated in cold acetone. After centrifugation, proteins were digested with trypsin for LC/MS-MS analysis. Peptides were separated by reversed phase chromatography (C18 column) and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Data dependent acquisition was performed on the top eight most abundant ions using HCD. Mass resolution was set to 30,000.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched using Byonic 2.11.0, against the human and mouse proteomes. Search parameters included trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, and a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance. Fixed and variable modifications, such as cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation, were considered. Peptides with over 1% FDR were excluded. Overlapping peptides between human and mouse were removed, and quantitative analysis of human-specific proteins was conducted using specialized R scripts and algorithms, with final evaluations using the Student’s T-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uchl1, Neuroendocrine carcinomas, Xenografts, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Radiology  Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection  Stanford School of Medicine  Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Department of Radiology  Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection  Stanford School of Medicine  Stanford University


