### Accession
PXD020510

### Title
Value of lipocalin 2 as a potential biomarker for bacterial meningitis

### Description
Objectives: Central nervous system (CNS) infections are common causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. We aimed to discover protein biomarkers that could rapidly and accurately identify the likely cause of the infections, essential for clinical management and improving outcome.  Methods: We applied liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry on 45 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from a cohort of adults with/without CNS infections to discover potential diagnostic biomarkers. We then validated the diagnostic performance of a selected biomarker candidate in an independent cohort of 364 consecutively treated adults with CNS infections admitted to a referral hospital in Vietnam.  Results: In the discovery cohort, we identified lipocalin 2 (LCN2) as a potential biomarker of bacterial meningitis (BM) other than tuberculous meningitis. The analysis of the validation cohort showed that LCN2 could discriminate BM from other CNS infections (including tuberculous meningitis, cryptococcal meningitis and viral/antibody-mediated encephalitis), with the sensitivity: 0.88 (95% confident interval (CI): 0.77-0.94), the specificity: 0.91 (95%CI: 0.88-0.94) and the diagnostic odd ratio: 73.8 (95%CI: 31.8-171.4)). LCN2 outperformed other CSF markers (leukocytes, glucose, protein and lactate) commonly used in routine care worldwide. The combination of LCN2, CSF leukocytes, glucose, protein and lactate resulted in the highest diagnostic performance for BM (area under receiver-operating-characteristic-curve 0.96; 95%CI: 0.93-0.99).  Conclusions: Our results suggest that LCN2 is a sensitive and specific biomarker for discriminating BM from a broad spectrum of other CNS infections. A prospective study is needed to assess the diagnostic utility of LCN2 in the diagnosis and management of CNS infections..

### Sample Protocol
CSF liquid material per patient was thawed on ice and digested using heatstable immobilized trypsin (SMART digest; Thermo Fisher Scientific). CSF (50 uL) was mixed with 150 uLof SMART digest buffer and added to SMART digest plates. Samples were protelysed by incubation at 70 oC and shaking at 1,400 rpm for 60 minutes. Digested samples were desalted using SOLAu plates (ThermoFisher Scientific), dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 20 uL buffer A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water). Samples were kept at -20 C until analysis. Peptide concentrations were assayed using a Pierce (ThermoFisher Scientific) quantitative colorimetric peptide assay according to the manufacturer's instructions. A pooled sample was produced by combining equal quantities of digested peptide from each individual sample and injected after every 10th sample for use in quality control (QC) analysis. Peptide samples were analysed by nano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nUHPLC LC-MS/ MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 26 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 500 nL peptide material from each sample was injected and analyzed using a 60-minute linear gradient at a flow rate of ~250-nl/minute. The gradient used to elute the peptides was 3 minutes with 2% buffer B (0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and 5 % dimethyl sulfoxide in acetonitrile) / 98 % buffer A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water), increasing to 5 % B by 6 minutes, followed by a linear ramp up to 35 % B at 63 minutes. Data were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum ion intensity with a mass/charge ratio of 400 and a lock mass of 445.120025 m/z. The 12 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation by high energy collisional dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 28 followed by peak exclusion for 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline in a meta-search combining results from Mascot (v.2.5.1), X!Tandem and OMSSA search engines. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens Reference proteome (retrieved October 15, 2014), allowing for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da. Oxidation on methionine was included as a variable modification and Carbamidomethylation on cysteine as a fixed modification. Protein-level quantitation was performed by SINQ with a fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da and peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) set at 1%. Analysis of CNS infection diagnostic groups based on the obtained protein quantitation was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial meningitis, Csf, Cns

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit National Hospital for Tropical Diseases Hanoi, Viet Nam

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Tan Le Van
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit National Hospital for Tropical Diseases Hanoi, Viet Nam


