### Accession
PXD029247

### Title
Liver phosphoproteomics in response to AgRP activated neurons in the presence/absence of NPY

### Description
Autophagy represents a key regulator of aging and metabolism upon cell autonomous sensing of energy deprivation. We find that fasting in mice activates autophagy in liver paralleled by activation of hypothalamic AgRP neurons. Optogenetic and chemogenetic activation of AgRP neurons induces autophagy, alters phosphorylation of autophagy regulators and promotes ß-oxidation in the liver. AgRP neuron dependent induction of liver autophagy relies on NPY expression in these neurons. AgRP neuron projections in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) and the lateral hypothalamus (LHA) mediate AgRP neuron-dependent control of liver autophagy. Conversely, inhibiting AgRP neurons during energy deprivation abrogates induction of hepatic autophagy and re-wiring of metabolism. Finally, AgRP neuron activation increases circulating corticosterone concentrations, and reduction of hepatic glucocorticoid receptor expression attenuates AgRP neuron-dependent activation of hepatic autophagy. Collectively, our study reveals a fundamental regulatory principle of non-cell autonomous control of liver autophagy in control of metabolic adaptation during nutrient deprivation. 

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion. Liver lysates were generated using the Tris 50 mM, NaCl 130 mM, EDTA 5 mM, NP-40 1%, PMSF 100mM, NaF 100mM, cOmplete mini protease inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/10 mL) and PhosSTOP™ protease inhibitor (1 tablet/10 mL) were freshly added. Proteins were reduced using TCEP and alkylated by CAA for 45 min at 45°C by adding both chemicals simultaneously to a final concentration of 10 mM and 20 mM respectively.  Protein concentration was determined and 4000 µg protein were subjected for acetone precipitation (4x volume, -20°C overnight). The pellet was washed twice using ice-cold 80% acetone. Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich)/LysC (Wako) mixture in 100 mM HEPES pH=8.5 was added on the pellet in a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 850rpm).  Generated peptides were desalted using the SepPak (Waters, 186000308, 50 mg sorbent).  Peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and 30 µg peptides were removed for whole proteome measurements.  Samples were dried to complete dryness in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C.  Phosphopeptide Enrichment. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using the HighSelect TiO2 Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32993) following the manufactory’s protocol using peptide equivalent to a total of 1500 µg protein input. The eluate containing enriched p-sites was dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 8 µL 2% formic acid and 2.5% acetonitrile.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry. The mass spectrometry instrumentation consisted out of a nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to an Exploris480. The mass spectrometer operated in a data-independent mode. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60.000. The covered mass range by data-independent acquisition (DIA) was 320-1150 m/z using 48 windows. The MS2 resolution at 200 m/z was set to 15,000, the maximal injection time was defined as 23ms, the AGC target was 3e6 and the collision energy was set to 26,28,30 (stepped mode). MS2 Spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. The mass spectrometry data were correlated against the mouse referemce proteome (Mus Musculus Uniprot) using the Spectronaut directDIA approach. Phosphorylation, acetylation the protein N-term as well as methionine oxidation were defined as a variable modification. PTM localization was enabled and the probability cutoff was set to 0.75. The maximum of variable modification was set to 4. Caramidmethylation at cysteine residues were set as a fixed modification. The PRIDE upload (see below) contains parameter files for more details about the Spectronaut settings. Peptide grouping was done on the modified sequence and the peptide MS2 intensity was used for statistical testing. The normalization strategy was set to ‘Global Normalization’. The data were quantile normalized. Statistical analysis as well as visualizations were performed using the InstantClue software (Nolte et al., 2018)

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy represents a key regulator of aging and metabolism in sensing energy deprivation. We find that fasting in mice activates autophagy in the liver paralleled by activation of hypothalamic AgRP neurons. Optogenetic and chemogenetic activation of AgRP neurons induces autophagy, alters phosphorylation of autophagy regulators, and promotes ketogenesis. AgRP neuron-dependent induction of liver autophagy relies on NPY release in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) via presynaptic inhibition of NPY1R-expressing neurons to activate PVH<sup>CRH</sup> neurons. Conversely, inhibiting AgRP neurons during energy deprivation abrogates induction of hepatic autophagy and rewiring of metabolism. AgRP neuron activation increases circulating corticosterone concentrations, and reduction of hepatic glucocorticoid receptor expression attenuates AgRP neuron-dependent activation of hepatic autophagy. Collectively, our study reveals a fundamental regulatory principle of liver autophagy in control of metabolic adaptation during nutrient deprivation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


