### Accession
PXD009951

### Title
2nSILAC_effect of proline on BY4741

### Description
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a systems-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Sample Protocol
BY4741 cells were cultured in synthetic complete (SC) medium containing 0.17% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.5% (w/v) ammonium sulfate, L-histidine, L-leucine, L-methionine, L-tryptophan, adenine, and uracil (20 mg/l each), with and without proline (200 mg/l each), and 2% (w/v) glucose. Cells were pre-cultured in 30 ml of medium with an initial OD600 of 0.1 and grown overnight at 160 rpm and 30°C. Pre-cultured cells were diluted into 150 ml of fresh medium to reach an OD600 of 0.025. Cells were further cultivated at 160 rpm and 30°C. Cells were harvested at exponential growth phase (OD600 1.0-1.5) by centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 x g and washed with deionized water.  Whole cell lysates were prepared by resuspending the cells in 500 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA) followed by cell lysis (bead-beating; twice for 4 min) using a MiniLys homogenizer (Peqlab/VWR) operated at 5,000 rpm. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 15,000 x g and 4°C. 10 µg of protein were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 10 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated as described previously (Peikert et al., 2017, Nature Communications). The urea concentration was diluted to 1.6 M using 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were digested using trypsin (200 ng; incubation overnight at 37°C). Reactions were stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 0.5% [v/v] final concentration) and peptide mixtures were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 12,000 x g (RT). Tryptic peptides were chemically labeled with ‘light’ formaldehyde (CH2O; Sigma-Aldrich) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN; Sigma-Aldrich) or the corresponding ‘heavy’, deuterated versions (CD2O/NaBD3CN; Sigma-Aldrich) essentially as described before (Lau et al., 2014, J. Proteome Res. 13) with minor adaptations. In brief, StageTips were conditioned with 100% methanol (MeOH) followed by 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% (v/v) acetic acid and 100 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Peptides were loaded onto StageTips and washed twice with 100 mM TEAB. Labeling was performed by adding 2x 150 µl of light or heavy labeling reagents (17.5 µl 4% [v/v] CH2O/CD2O, 17.5 µl 0.6 M NaBH3CN/NaBD3CN, 70 µl 50 mM NaH2PO4, 245 µl 50 mM Na2HPO4). StageTips were washed twice with 100 mM TEAB and labeled peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid. Solvents were evaporated and peptides were resuspended in 75 µl of 0.1% TFA. The labeling efficiency (> 95%) for light and heavy dimethyl-labeled peptides was determined by LC-MS. Heavy and light labeled peptides were mixed in equal ratios based on the average MS intensities of individual peptide samples. Experiments were performed in three biological replicates including a label switch.   Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with PepMap C18 pre-columns (Thermo Scientific; length: 5 mm; inner diameter: 0.3 mm; loading flow rate: 30 µl/min) and an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (Thermo Scientific; length: 500 mm; inner diameter: 75 µm; particle size: 2 µm; packing density: 10 nm; flow rate: 0.25 µl/min) online coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on precolumns and subsequently separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted applying the following gradient: 4% solvent B for 25 min followed by 4 - 39% B in 25 min, 39 - 54% B in 175 min, 54 - 95% B in 15 min, and 5 min at 95% B. The Q Exactive was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel (Thermo Scientific) or fused silica emitters (New Objective, Woburn, USA). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: full MS scans were acquired with a mass range of m/z 375 - 1,700, a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 10E6, and a maximum ion time (IT) of 60 ms. The 15 most intensive peptide ions (z ≥ +2) were chosen for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). A normalized collision energy of 28% was applied. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. The AGC for MS/MS scans was set to 10E5, the maximum IT to 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant with its integrated search engine Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1). MS/MS data were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/; downloaded September 2011) and a list of common contaminants included in the MaxQuant software. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity, a maximum number of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Proteins were identified based on at least one razor peptide with a length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein identifications. DimethylLys0/dimethylNter0 and dimethylLys6/dimethylNter6 were set as light and heavy labels. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled. Relative protein quantification was based on razor peptides and a ratio count (i.e., SILAC peptide pairs) of ≥ 1. The mean log2 of normalized protein abundance ratios and the corresponding p-values (two-sided Student's t-test, n = 3 including a label switch) were calculated. Proteins exhibiting a p-value of ≤ 0.05 and a fold change of at least ± 1.5 were considered significantly changed in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a system-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide comparative quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions, making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Native silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


