### Accession
PXD021279

### Title
Characterization of odontogenic differentiation from human dental pulp stem cells using TMT-based proteomic analysis

### Description
The repair of dental pulp injury relies on the odontogenic differentiation of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs). To better understand the odontogenic differentiation of DPSCs and identify proteins involved in this process, tandem mass tags (TMTs) coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were applied to compare the proteome profiles of induced and control DPSCs. The proteins expressed during osteogenic differentiation of human DPSCs were profiled using the TMT method combined with LC-MS/MS analysis. The identified proteins were subjected to gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. Then a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed. Two selected proteins were confirmed by western blot (WB) analysis. A total of 223 proteins that were differentially expressed were identified. Among them, 152 proteins were significantly upregulated and 71 were downregulated in the odontogenic differentiation group compared with the control group. On the basis of biological processes in GO, the identified proteins were mainly involved in cellular processes, metabolic processes, and biological regulation, which connected with the signaling pathways highlighted by KEGG pathway analysis. PPI networks showed that most of the differentially expressed proteins were implicated in physical or functional interaction. The protein expression levels of FBN1 and TGF-β2 validated by WB were consistent with the TMT analysis. This is the first proteomic analysis of human DPSC odontogenesis using a TMT method. We identified many new differentially expressed proteins that are potential targets for pulp-dentin complex regeneration and repair.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein samples Induced DPSCs were cultured for 14 days, and SDT lysate (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) was added. After ultrasound (80 W, 10 s per operation, 15 s intermittency, 10 cycles), the metal was bathed at 100°C for 15 min and then centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min. The supernatant was kept, and a BCA kit was used for protein quantification. SDS-PAGE separation Twenty micrograms of protein was taken from each sample, and 5X loading buffer (10% SDS, 0.5% bromophenol blue, 50% glycerol, 500 mM DTT, 250 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8) was added. 12.5% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis (constant current 14 mA, 90 min) was performed after 5 min of boiling in a water bath, and the gel was then stained with Coomassie blue. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP digestion) Thirty microliters of protein solution were taken from each sample. DTT (100 mM) was added separately, and the solution was cooled to room temperature after 5 min in a boiling water bath. We added 200 μL UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris‐HCl, pH 8.0) and mixed it well, then transferred it to a 10 kD ultrafiltration centrifuge tube, centrifuged the tube at 14000g for 15 min, discarded the filtrate, and repeated this centrifugation once. We added 100μL IAA buffer (100 mM IAA in UA), oscillated the sample at 600 rpm for 1 min, let it react at room temperature in the dark for 30 min, and centrifuged it at 14000g for 15 min. We added 10 μL UA buffer and centrifuged the sample at 14000g for 15 min. This step was repeated twice. We next added 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB buffer and centrifuged the sample at 14000g 15 min. This step was also repeated twice. After 40 μL trypsin buffer (4 μg trypsin in 40 μl 100 mm TEAB buffer) was added, the sample was oscillated at 600 rpm for 1 min and placed at 37°C for 16-18 h. The collection tube was replaced, and the tube was centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min. Then, 40 μl of 10-fold diluted 100 mM TEAB buffer was added, and the sample was centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min. The filtrate was collected, and the peptide was quantified for its OD280. TMT Labeling Each sample was labeled with 100 μg of peptide fragments according to the manufacturer's instructions for the TMT labeling kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides of the two groups were labeled with different TMTs: three biological repeats of the control group were labeled with TMT-126, TMT-127 and TMT-128, respectively, and three biological repeats of the exercise group were labeled with TMT-129, TMT-130 and TMT-131, respectively. Peptide Fractionation with High pH with reversed phase After mixing the labeled peptide segments of each group in equal amounts, classification was performed using a high-pH RP spin column. After peptide labels were mixed and lyophilized, 100 μg was diluted with 300 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and transferred to a high-pH RP spin column. The FT component was collected centrifugally, 300 μL of pure water was added, the wash component was collected centrifugally, and step gradient elution was started. After freeze-drying, the sample was redissolved with 12 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and the peptide concentration was calculated by determining the OD280. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and LC-MS/MS Analysis Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Each sample was separated by a high-performance liquid phase system, EASY-nLC with a nanoliter flow rate. The chromatographic column was balanced with 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid aqueous solution). The sample was loaded onto the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap 100, 100 μ m×2 cm, Nanoviper C18) by an automatic sampler and then separated by an analysis column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm, ID75 μ m, 3 μ m, C18-A2) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by IntelliFlow technology. Samples were separated by liquid chromatography and analyzed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The analysis duration was 60/90 min, positive-ion mode was used for detection, the scanning range of the parent ions was 300-1800 m/z, the primary mass spectrum resolution was 70,000 at 200 m/z, the AGC target was 3e6, the primary maximum IT was 10 ms, the number of scan ranges was 1, and the dynamic exclusion was 40 s. The mass-to-charge ratio of polypeptides and polypeptide fragments was determined according to the following methods: 10 fragment patterns (MS2 scan) were collected after each full scan, the MS2 activation type was HCD, the isolation window was 2 m/z, the secondary mass spectrum resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z (TMT6plex) or 35000 at 200 m/z (TMT10plex), there was 1 microscan, the secondary maximit was 60 ms, the normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill was 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The search criteria were set as follows: all tryptic specificity was required; 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6plex (N-terminal) and TMT 6plex (lysine, K) were set as the fixed modifications; oxidation (methionine, M) and TMT 6plex (tyrosine, Y) were set as the variable modifications; peptide mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS1 spectra acquired; and fragment mass tolerances were set at 0.1 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤0.01. All peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio. The thresholds were set at the ratio of exercise/control ≥1.2 and P-value ≤0.05 for upregulation and at the ratio of exercise/control ≤0.83 and P value ≤0.05 for downregulation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Odontogenesis, Tmt-label, Hdpscs

### Affiliations
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 510515

### Submitter
Jianjia Li

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Qiu
Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 510515


