### Accession
PXD041583

### Title
Protein expression profiling in eggs and embryos from control and Eif4e1b knockout female mice.

### Description
We have identified eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E family member 1B (Eif4e1b) as a regulator of maternal RNA translation, whose maternal deletion leads to 2-cell arrest phenotype in mouse embryos. eIF4E1b protein binds mRNA selectively in oocytes and controls their translation in early embryos. We aim to profile the global changes in protein expression in metaphase II (MII) eggs and zygotes collected from control or Eif4e1b knockout female mice. An encapsulated proteomic-sample processing protocol is used to perform this low-input mass spectrometry to quantify proteomic changes (Kulak et al. 2014/PMID 24497582).

### Sample Protocol
Two groups of ~500 MII eggs or early 2-cell embryos (after mating females to WT males) from control and Eif4e1b KO female mice were collected. The 8 groups of samples were washed with PBS (3X) and transferred into StageTips with a minimal volume of PBS for LC-MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
Originally MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to analyze the resulting data searching against the common contaminants list and a list containing each of the variants. The data was normalized by total number of eggs/embryos in each group and the relative label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant was used to represent signal intensity of detected proteins. For archive compatibility the data were reanalyzed with MaxQuant 2.2.0.0.

### Publication Abstract
Translation of maternal mRNAs is detected before transcription of zygotic genes and is essential for mammalian embryo development. How certain maternal mRNAs are selected for translation instead of degradation and how this burst of translation affects zygotic genome activation remain unknown. Using gene-edited mice, we document that the oocyte-specific eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E family member 1b (eIF4E1b) is the regulator of maternal mRNA expression that ensures subsequent reprogramming of the zygotic genome. In oocytes, eIF4E1b binds to transcripts encoding translation machinery proteins, chromatin remodelers, and reprogramming factors to promote their translation in zygotes and protect them from degradation. The protein products are thought to establish an open chromatin landscape in one-cell zygotes to enable transcription of genes required for cleavage stage development. Our results define a program for rapid resetting of the zygotic epigenome that is regulated by maternal mRNA expression and provide new insights into the mammalian maternal-to-zygotic transition.

### Keywords
Embryo, Expression profiling, Mouse, Fertilization, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, NIH, US GOVERNMENT.
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Jurrien Dean
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, NIH, US GOVERNMENT.


