### Accession
PXD025980

### Title
Proximity-dependent biotinylation detects association between stress granule associated proteins and SARS coronavirus nonstructural protein 1

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) nonstructural protein 1 (nsp1) is a critical viral protein that suppresses host gene expression by blocking the assembly of the ribosome on host messenger RNAs (mRNA). Using proximity-dependent biotinylation assay followed by proteomic analyses of biotinylated proteins, we captured multiple dynamic interactions of nsp1 with host cell proteins. In addition to ribosomal proteins, we have identified several mRNA processing proteins, including splicing factors and transcription termination proteins, exosomes- and stress granule (SG) associated proteins. The interactions with transcription termination factors are primarily governed by the C-terminal region of nsp1 and are disrupted by the mutation of K164 and H165 amino acids. We further show that nsp1 associates with SG protein G3BP and colocalizes with G3BP in SGs under sodium arsenite-induced stress for a short period of time. However, the presence of nsp1 disrupts the maturation of SGs over a long period.

### Sample Protocol
Methods were adapted from Roux et al. extraction of biotinylated proteins. In brief, HEK cells were grown under 5% CO2 at 37C to 50% confluency and in 10 cm plates. Cells in each plate were transfected with 4.8 µg of respective DNA to express BioID2-fused nsp1 protein using Jet Optimus transfection reagent (Genesee Scientific). Twenty-four hours post-transfection, cells were incubated with 100 µM biotin for 16 hours. For the pull-down about 4×〖10〗^7 cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The cells were collected and lysed with 2.4 mL of BirA buffer I (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 2% Triton-X). After 5 minutes of incubation on ice, cell lysate was sonicated two times, each for 30 seconds, at 30% output level. An equal volume of BirA buffer II (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) was added. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation of the lysate at 15,000 × g for 10 min. Each sample of supernatant was incubated with 400 μL Streptavidin beads overnight at 4°C to collect biotinylated proteins. The streptavidin beads were washed four times with modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), time with BirA buffer III (0.2% wt/vol SDS), once with time with BirA buffer IV (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris, pH 8), and twice BirA final buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4). The proteins were eluted from the bead using SDS sample buffer and ran on 4-20% precast gels (Bio-Rad). The gel was stained using Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen). Gel fragments were excised using a clean scalpel for mass spectrometry. In short, gel bands were excised and de-stained. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) at 55°C and alkylated in 25 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein was digested with trypsin (Sigma, 100 ng) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were extracted from the gel and dried. Peptides were resuspended and the entire band was injected.  Peptides were separated and analyzed on an EASY nLC 1200 System (ThermoScientific) in-line with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoScientific) with instrument control software v. 4.2.28.14.  Two µg of tryptic peptides were pressure loaded onto C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) ThermoFisher cat. # 164536) using a gradient of 5% to 40% B in 180 min (Solvent A: 5% acetonitrile/ 0.2% formic acid; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile/ 0.2% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan, mass range of m/z 375-1575, followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 s.  The automatic gain control target value was 4.0e5 for the survey MS scan.  HCD fragmentation was performed with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35%.  Monoisotopic-precursor selection was set to “peptide”.  Precursors within 10 ppm mass tolerance were dynamically excluded from resequencing for 15 sec.    Advanced peak determination was not enabled.  Precursor ions with charge states that were undetermined, 1, or >5 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43 against a Human UniProt protein database (42,278 sequences, updated August 2020) including common contaminants. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed for each condition and searched together matching between runs with a 0.7 min window. At least two peptides were required for protein quantification with at least one unique peptide. Intensity measurements were quantified and normalized by the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm.  Binary comparisons of log2 transformed LFQ protein peak intensities yielded differentially enriched proteins in each affinity purification.

### Publication Abstract
The nonstructural protein 1 (nsp1) of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is a critical viral protein that suppresses host gene expression by blocking the assembly of the ribosome on host mRNAs. To understand the mechanism of inhibition of host gene expression, we sought to identify cellular proteins that interact with nsp1. Using proximity-dependent biotinylation followed by proteomic analyses of biotinylated proteins, here we captured multiple dynamic interactions of nsp1 with host cell proteins. In addition to ribosomal proteins, we identified several pre-mRNA processing proteins that interact with nsp1, including splicing factors and transcription termination proteins, as well as exosome, and stress granule (SG)-associated proteins. We found that the interactions with transcription termination factors are primarily governed by the C-terminal region of nsp1 and are disrupted by the mutation of amino acids K164 and H165 that are essential for its host shutoff function. We further show that nsp1 interacts with Ras GTPase-activating protein SH3 domain-binding protein 1 (G3BP1) and colocalizes with G3BP1 in SGs under sodium arsenite-induced stress. Finally, we observe that the presence of nsp1 disrupts the maturation of SGs over a long period. Isolation of SG core at different times shows a gradual loss of G3BP1 in the presence of nsp1.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Nsp1, Bioid2, Stress granule, Sars-cov

### Affiliations
1Natural Sciences and Engineering, University of South Carolina Upstate, Spartanburg, SC 29303
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Anita Nag
1Natural Sciences and Engineering, University of South Carolina Upstate, Spartanburg, SC 29303


