### Accession
PXD031755

### Title
Molecular basis of nuclear mRNA recognition and packaging

### Description
Newly made messenger RNAs are processed and packaged into compact ribonucleoprotein complexes (mRNPs) and recognized by the essential transcription-export complex (TREX) for nuclear export. However, the mechanisms of mRNP recognition, compaction, and three-dimensional organization are poorly understood.  Here we perform crosslinking MS on Sulfo-SDA crosslinked endogenous ribonucleoprotein complexes (mRNPs). These have been enriched through a pulldown of THOC1-3C-GFP.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing high-salt fractions were collected, cleaned, and dried for LC-MS/MS analysis using StageTips and peptideSEC methods. Peptides were separated using an ÄKTA Pure system and collected into five 50 μl fractions for further analysis. The samples were prepared using 0.1% v/v formic acid and 3.2% v/v acetonitrile and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% v/v formic acid and 80% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid. The flow rate was 0.3 μl/min using optimized gradients for each chromatographic fraction. The MS data were acquired using stepped higher-energy collisional dissociation and recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
A Recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (<1% FDR) linear peptide identifications. To identify crosslinked peptides the Recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (version 1.7.6.4) (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch). The following parameters were applied for the search: MS1 accuracy = 2 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 5 ppm; enzyme = trypsin allowing up to 3 missed cleavages and 2 missing monoisotopic peaks; crosslinker = SDA with an assumed NHS-ester reaction specificity for lysine protein N termini; fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = acetylation on lysine and protein N-termini, oxidation on methionine, hydrolysed SDA on lysines and protein N-termini. MS-cleavage of SDA crosslinks is considered during search. Prior to FDR estimation the matches were filtered to those having at least two fragments matched with a non-cleaved SDA. These candidates were then filtered to 2% FDR on PPI-level using XiFDR (version 2.1.5.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Crosslinking ms, Endogenous, Rnp, Trex

### Affiliations
NCI-NIH

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
NCI-NIH


