### Accession
PXD024736

### Title
UPAB1 secretome analysis of hlyD1 vs hlyD2 vs Wt.

### Description
A. baumannii UPAB1 secretome analysis of hlyD1 vs Wt and hlyD2 vs Wt.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated secretome were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and then reduced for 1 hour with 20mM DTT. Reduced samples were then alkylated with 50mM of iodoacetamide for 1 hour in the dark. The alkylation reaction was then quenched by the addition of 50mM DTT for 15 minutes and samples digested with Lys-C (1/200 w/w) for 3 hours at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 100mM NH4HCO3 four-fold to reduce the urea/thiourea concentration below 2M then trypsin (1/50 w/w) added and allowed to digest overnight at room temperature. Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid and desalted with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and conditioned with Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) prior to use. Acidified samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Secretome samples were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) and searched against the NCBI annotated A. baumannii UPAB1 proteome (NCBI Accession: PRJNA487603, 3750 proteins, downloaded 2020-3-10), a six-frame translation of the UPAB1 genome generated using the six-frame translation generator within Maxquant and the ATCC17978 proteome (Uniprot: UP000319385, 3627 proteins, downloaded 2014-11-16) to allow the use of Uniprot annotation information associated with ATCC17978 proteins. Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled. The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.6.0.7) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to further analysis. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and data was filtered to remove any protein which was not observed in at least one group three times. Missing values were then imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.5σ using Perseus. Student t-tests were undertaken to compare the secretome between groups with the resulting data exported and visualized using ggplot2 within R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
A. baumannii

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario F. Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA


