### Accession
PXD020588

### Title
glycolysis protein-protein interaction

### Description
Arabidopsis glycolysis were overexperssed at plant cell culture to catch the protein-protein interaction in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Zhang, Y., Natale, R., Domingues, A. P., Toleco, M. R., Siemiatkowska, B., Fàbregas, N., & Fernie, A. R. (2019). Rapid identification of protein‐protein interactions in plants. Current Protocols in Plant Biology, 4, e20099. doi: 10.1002/cppb.20099

### Data Protocol
Zhang, Y., Natale, R., Domingues, A. P., Toleco, M. R., Siemiatkowska, B., Fàbregas, N., & Fernie, A. R. (2019). Rapid identification of protein‐protein interactions in plants. Current Protocols in Plant Biology, 4, e20099. doi: 10.1002/cppb.20099

### Publication Abstract
Glycolysis is one of the primordial pathways of metabolism, playing a pivotal role in energy metabolism and biosynthesis. Glycolytic enzymes are known to form transient multi-enzyme assemblies. Here we examine the wider protein-protein interactions of plant glycolytic enzymes and reveal a moonlighting role for specific glycolytic enzymes in mediating the co-localization of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Knockout mutation of phosphoglycerate mutase or enolase resulted in a significantly reduced association of the two organelles. We provide evidence that phosphoglycerate mutase and enolase form a substrate-channelling metabolon which is part of a larger complex of proteins including pyruvate kinase. These results alongside a range of genetic complementation experiments are discussed in the context of our current understanding of chloroplast-mitochondrial interactions within photosynthetic eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Glycolysis, Protein-proteinin teraction

### Affiliations
The Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology

### Submitter
Youjun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Alisdair Fernie
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology


