### Accession
PXD037670

### Title
ASCL1: a pioneer factor that induces subtype switching and characterizes adrenergic neuroblastoma

### Description
Neuroblastoma is an embryonic malignancy originating from early nerve cells. Neuroblastoma retains plasticity, interconverting between the mesenchymal (MES) and adrenergic (ADRN) states, which are controlled by different sets of transcription factors forming the core regulatory circuit (CRC). However, their functional roles and cooperative mechanisms in neuroblastoma pathogenesis are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that overexpression of ASCL1 in MES neuroblastoma cells opens closed chromatin at the promoters of key ADRN genes, accompanied by epigenetic activation and establishment of enhancer-promoter interactions, thereby initiating subtype switching. ASCL1 inhibits the TGFb-SMAD2/3 pathway but activates the BMP-SMAD1-ID3/4 pathway, serving as negative feedback to balance the function of ASCL1-TCF12 dimers. ASCL1 and other ADRN CRC members potentiate each other’s activity, increasing the expression of the original targets and inducing a new set of genes, thereby promoting conversion to ADRN neuroblastoma. Thus, via its pioneer factor function, ASCL1 serves as a master regulator that characterizes ADRN neuroblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
GI-MEN cells transduced with the inducible ASCL1 construct were cultured in light SILAC medium or heavy SILAC medium separately for at least 14 passages. Heavy SILAC medium was composed of 500 mL of RPMI 1640 medium without Arg and Lys, 5 mL penicillin/streptomycin (100x), 50 mL of dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 500 µL of L-arginine-10 (84 mg/mL) and 170 µL of L-lysine-8 (146 mg/mL). Light SILAC medium was composed of 500 mL of RPMI 1640 medium without Arg and Lys, 5 mL of penicillin/streptomycin (100x), 50 mL of dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 500 µL of L-arginine-0 (84 mg/mL) and 170 µL of L-lysine-0 (146 mg/mL). The prepared media were filtered prior to use. The amino acid incorporation efficiency in the SILAC media was determined to be greater than 98% before the immunoprecipitation step. As described, anti-ASCL1 antibodies and control IgG were used for the immunoprecipitation step. Equal amounts of cells cultured in light SILAC medium and heavy SILAC medium were subjected to immunoprecipitation. Anti-ASCL1 antibody-conjugated beads incubated with lysate from cells cultured in heavy SILAC medium were mixed with IgG-conjugated beads incubated with lysate from cells cultured in light SILAC medium, and vice versa, prior to elution with Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) containing 10% β-mercaptoethanol and boiled for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were then prepared for separation by SDS-PAGE and LC‒MS analysis. ASCL1 IP samples were seperated on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and each lane was processed as a single sample. For in-gel digestion, samples were destained (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 75 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and searched against the human Uniprot database (95,934 entries). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications.The re-quantify option was activated. For enzyme specificity, trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both labeling combinations (ASCL1 IP heavy vs. IgG light and ASCL1 light vs. IgG heavy).

### Publication Abstract
Neuroblastoma originates from developing neural crest and can interconvert between the mesenchymal (MES) and adrenergic (ADRN) states, each of which are controlled by different sets of transcription factors forming the core regulatory circuit (CRC). However, the roles of CRC factors in induction and maintenance of specific state are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that overexpression of ASCL1, an ADRN CRC factor, in MES neuroblastoma cells opens closed chromatin at the promoters of key ADRN genes, accompanied by epigenetic activation and establishment of enhancer-promoter interactions, initiating the ADRN gene expression program. ASCL1 inhibits the transforming growth factor &#x3b2;-SMAD2/3 pathway but activates the bone morphogenetic protein SMAD1-ID3/4 pathway. ASCL1 and other CRC members potentiate each other's activity, increasing the expression of the original targets and inducing a new set of genes, thereby fully inducing the ADRN program. Our results demonstrate that ASCL1 serves as a pioneer factor and cooperates with CRC factors to characterize the ADRN gene expression program.

### Keywords
Subtype switching, Pioneer factor, Neuroblastoma, Core regulatory circuit, Ascl1

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore


