### Accession
PXD030159

### Title
Cubilin is a Novel Target Antigen in Anti-Brush Border Antibody Disease

### Description
Autoimmune diseases that affect the kidney proximal tubule (PT) cause proteinuria and are implicated in the pathogenesis of kidney failure. Previous evidence demonstrated that circulating anti-brush border antibodies (ABBA) target megalin (LRP2) but whether other components of the PT drive autoimmunity was unknown. Here we investigate a patient with LRP2-negative ABBA disease, and applied immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, and confocal imaging to identify cubilin as a novel antigen associated with the autoimmune disorder.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were produced through trypsin digestion of the immune complexes adhered to protein G beads. Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry was used for analysis as follows. An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) was used to separate tryptic peptides on a 150 x 0.075 mm column packed with a reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 µm resin. The peptides were eluted with a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid + 0.5% acetonitrile)/buffer B (0.1% formic acid + 99.9% acetonitrile), from a 97:3 ratio to a 60:40 ratio over 1 hour. Electrospray (2.25 kV) was used to ionize the eluted peptides on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Six gas-phase fractions of a pooled sample were acquired on the Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer with 4 m/z DIA spectra (30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum inject time 66 ms) in a staggered window pattern to assemble a chromatogram library . Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle, spanning the m/z range of the gas-phase fraction (i.e. 496-602 m/z, 596-702 m/z).  For wide-window acquisitions, precursor spectra from each DIA cycle were acquired (385-1015 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms), followed by 50x 12 m/z DIA spectra (12 m/z precursor isolation windows at 15,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 33 ms) using a staggered window pattern with optimized window placements.

### Data Protocol
ScaffoldDIA (Proteome software) was used to configure DIA library searches. Gas-phase fractionated peptides were searched against a predicted spectral library by Prosit , followed by searching wide-window acquistions against the generated empirically corrected chromatogram library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Dia, Kidney

### Affiliations
Arkana Laboratories, Little Rock, AR
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Larsen
Arkana Laboratories, Little Rock, AR


