### Accession
PXD005428

### Title
Proteolytic processing of CD99

### Description
The adhesion molecule CD99 is essential for transendothelial migration (TEM) of leukocytes. Here we demonstrate by biochemical and cellular assays that CD99 undergoes ectodomain shedding by the metalloprotease meprin β and subsequent intramembrane proteolysis by γ-secretase. The cleavage site in CD99 was identified by mass spectrometry within an acidic region highly conserved through different vertebrate species.

### Sample Protocol
CD99 C-term was immunoprecipitated from HeLa cell lysates transfected with myc/FLAG-tagged CD99 and untagged meprin β using an anti FLAG antibody. Precipitate was separated by SDS-PAGE (12% gel) and stained by Coomassie. Samples were dehydrated (100% ACN) and dried using vacuum centrifugation followed by overnight reductive dimethylation of protein amino groups (protein N-term, and lysine residues) using 40 mM formaldehyde in 40 mM NaCNBH3.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI MS/MS analyses were performed starting with low molecular weight samples (from gels, Suppl. Fig. 1B); each run was followed by a blank run in order to minimize sample carryover. Nano-UHPLC-MS was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSL Nano/Cap System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap-Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were desalted for 4 minutes (Acclaim PepMap100 C-18, 300 µm I.D. x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min using 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA. An Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 column (75 µm I.D. x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for analytical separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using binary gradients of buffers A (0.05% FA) and B (80% ACN and 0.04% FA). The elution used gradient steps of 5-50% B (4-30 min) and 50-90% B (30-35 min) followed by an isocratic wash (90% B, 35-45 min) and column re-equilibration (5% B, 45-60 min) steps. Samples were analysed on the Q-Exactive from low to high molecular weight.  MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The ten most intense signals were subjected to HCD (higher collisional energy dissociation) using a dynamic exclusion of 15 s. MS/MS parameters - minimum signal intensity: 1000, isolation width: 3.0 Da, charge state: ≥2, HCD resolution: 15,000, Normalized collision energy of 25. Lock mass (445.120025) was used for data acquired in MS mode. HCD spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT search algorithm against the reviewed and canonical human database with contaminants (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/) appended to the database (20,319 sequences). The following database search settings were used: MS tolerance; ± 10 ppm, MS2 Tolerance; 0.02 Da, enzyme specificity; none, fixed modification at lysine (dimethylation) and cysteine (carbamidomethylation) residues. Modification at the peptide N-term (dimethylation) was set as a variable modification. Only peptides which were identified with high (FDR<1%) or medium confidence (FDR <5%) were included.

### Publication Abstract
The adhesion molecule CD99 is essential for the transendothelial migration of leukocytes. In this study, we used biochemical and cellular assays to show that CD99 undergoes ectodomain shedding by the metalloprotease meprin &#x3b2; and subsequent intramembrane proteolysis by &#x3b3;-secretase. The cleavage site in CD99 was identified by mass spectrometry within an acidic region highly conserved through different vertebrate species. This finding fits perfectly to the unique cleavage specificity of meprin &#x3b2; with a strong preference for aspartate residues and suggests coevolution of protease and substrate. We hypothesized that limited CD99 cleavage by meprin &#x3b2; would alter cellular transendothelial migration (TEM) behavior in tissue remodeling processes, such as inflammation and cancer. Indeed, meprin &#x3b2; induced cell migration of Lewis lung carcinoma cells in an <i>in vitro</i> TEM assay. Accordingly, deficiency of meprin &#x3b2; in <i>Mep1b</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice resulted in significantly increased CD99 protein levels in the lung. Therefore, meprin &#x3b2; could serve as a therapeutic target, given that in a proof-of-concept approach we showed accumulation of CD99 protein in lungs of meprin &#x3b2; inhibitor-treated mice.-Bedau, T., Peters, F., Prox, J., Arnold, P., Schmidt, F., Finkernagel, M., K&#xf6;llmann, S., Wichert, R., Otte, A., Ohler, A., Stirnberg, M., Lucius, R., Koudelka, T., Tholey, A., Biasin, V., Pietrzik, C. U., Kwapiszewska, G., Becker-Pauly, C. Ectodomain shedding of CD99 within highly conserved regions is mediated by the metalloprotease meprin &#x3b2; and promotes transendothelial cell migration.

### Keywords
Protease, Proteolysis, Adhesion molecule, Inflammation, Tem, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik -  Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik -  Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel


