### Accession
PXD004144

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mucus from chronic rhinosinusitis patients with or without nasal polyps

### Description
Patients with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) have abnormal immune responses triggered by a variety of infectious agents, airborne toxins and fungi. Respiratory epithelial cells serve as relay stations capable of amplifying or augmenting cues received from external stimuli to nearby immune cells located in the sinus mucosa. Previous studies have identified increases in complement components and complement gene expression in the mucosa of patients with atopic CRS with nasal polyps (CRSwNP). As part of a larger study, we used shotgun proteomics to quantify changes in mucus proteins between patients with and without nasal polyps.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration of each mucus sample was determined using a BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific). Equal amounts of protein from each sample (50 µg) were acetone precipitated (1:10) overnight at -20 °C. Precipitated proteins were brought up in 6 M urea, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (1:50) at 37 °C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a C-18 column, vacuum dried, then reconstituted in mobile phase (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were converted to the mgf file format using msconvert (ProteoWizard v 3.0.4472) and default settings (including prefer vendor for peak picking), and searched using the Mascot search algorithm (v 2.4.1; Matrix Science). The database used was the 2015_12 UniProt SwissProt release and varsplic isoform database, Homo sapiens taxonomy, as well as the common repository of adventitious proteins (v 2012.1.1; The Global Proteome Machine) with a combined total of 42,159 sequences. The following search parameters were specified: trypsin as the enzyme; carbamidomethyl fixed modification (C); variable modifications of acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ), pyro-Glu (N-term Q), and oxidation (M); precursor mass tolerance of 2 Da and fragment mass tolerance of 1 Da; 2 missed cleavages are allowed; instrument type is specified as ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nasal mucus, Human, Lc-ms/ms, Mucus

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Richard R. Drake
Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America


