### Accession
PXD005596

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus coinfection

### Description
The present work comprises the study of wound pathogenic bacteria as part of a community. It considers the interactions of two different S. aureus isolates with B. thuringiensis and K. oxytoca; all of them isolated from the same chronic wound of a patient with epidermolysis bullosa. Particular focus has been given on the interactions of S. aureus with other microbes due to its high prevalence among chronic wounds. During cultivation, no species performed as dominant or inhibited the growth of one another. Mass spectrometry was used to explore the inherent relationships between the staphylococcal strains and the coexisting bacteria exproteomes. The analysis showed an important reduction in the amount of staphylococcal cytoplasmic proteins when co-cultured with K. oxytoca and B. thuringiensis, this decrement did not occur with klebsiella and bacillus proteins. Interestingly, K. oxytoca and B. thuringiensis seemed to have a more evident response towards the presence of S. aureus in the culture, while the opposite was not observed with the staphylococcal isolates. Genomic analysis revealed isolate t13595 hypermutable characteristics, placing the interactions between staphylococcal isolates in the context of a chronic wound. Overall, the nature of the exoproteome variations among cultures suggests that adaptive mechanisms differ in all strains.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were collected according to the to the growth curves of the S. aureus isolates. Therefore, samples were taken within 90 min of the stationary phases of growth. Cells were removed by centrifugation (10 min, 8000 x g, 4°C) from 2 mL culture aliquots and the supernatant was subsequently filtrated with a 0.22 mm filter (GE Healthcare Systems, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom). Proteins were precipitated with 10% w/v TCA on ice at 4°C overnight. The precipitates were harvested by centrifugation (20 min, 8000×g, 4°C) and washed with ice-cold acetone. The protein pellets were dried at room temperature and stored at -20°C until further use). Protein pellets were suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland). As reducing agent, 10 mM dithiothreitol (Duchefa Biochemie, Haarlem, the Netherlands) was used for 30 min, and as alkylating agent, 10 mM iodoacetamide was used (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 30 min in the dark. Further, overnight incubation with 80 ng of trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37°C was followed by the addition of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) to end the digestive reaction. The samples were desalted by Zip-Tip filtration (Millipore, Billerica, USA) as previously described by Dreisbach et al.32 The final eluates were concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at 4°C until further use. Mass spectrometry and analysis The peptides were separated by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,Waltham, MA) creating an electro spray ionization by Picotip Emitter (SilicaTip, FS360-20-10 Coating P200P, New Objective). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm inner diameter × 20 mm, Waters). Elution was performed onto an analytical column (BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm, 100 μm inner diameter× 100 mm, Waters) by a binary gradient of buffer A (0,1% (v/v) acetic acid) and B (0,1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile (acn)) over a period of 80 min with a flow rate of 400 nL min-1. A stepped gradient was applied. For MS/MS analysis a full survey scan was recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z 300-2000) with a resolution of 30,000. The five most abundant precursor ions from each survey scan were consecutively isolated in the LTQ XL and fragmented via CID. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 30 s and unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected33. Internal calibration was applied (lock mass 445.120025).

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. The target database was the Uniprot reference database of B. thuringiensis, K. oxytoca, and S. aureus (downloaded on September 2014). The *.out files were compiled with Scaffold 4 (version Scaffold_4.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identification criteria were carried out as mentioned by Bonn et al.34, but with the following XCorr values: > 2.2, 3.3, 3.75 for doubly, triply and higher charged peptides. To allow protein abundance comparisons between samples, Scaffold MS/MS data was normalized by adjusting the sum of the selected quantitative values for all proteins in the list within each MS sample to a common value: the average of the sums of all MS samples present in the experiment. This is achieved by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein or protein group adjusting in this way the selected value to a normalized “Quantitative Value”35. These values were exported from Scaffold and further curated in spreadsheets for further analysis. Volcano plots used the normalized values for calculating the fold-changes in each protein among the monocultures versus the co-cultured samples.

### Publication Abstract
Wound-colonizing microorganisms can form complex and dynamic polymicrobial communities where pathogens and commensals may co-exist, cooperate or compete with each other. The present study was aimed at identifying possible interactions between different bacteria isolated from the same chronic wound of a patient with the genetic blistering disease epidermolysis bullosa (EB). Specifically, this involved two different isolates of the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, and isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis and Klebsiella oxytoca. Particular focus was attributed to interactions of S. aureus with the two other species, because of the high staphylococcal prevalence among chronic wounds. Intriguingly, upon co-cultivation, none of the wound isolates inhibited each other's growth. Since the extracellular proteome of bacterial pathogens is a reservoir of virulence factors, the exoproteomes of the staphylococcal isolates in monoculture and co-culture with B. thuringiensis and K. oxytoca were characterized by Mass Spectrometry to explore the inherent relationships between these co-exisiting bacteria. This revealed a massive reduction in the number of staphylococcal exoproteins upon co-culturing with K. oxytoca or B. thuringiensis. Interestingly, this decrease was particularly evident for extracellular proteins with a predicted cytoplasmic localization, which were recently implicated in staphylococcal virulence and epidemiology. Furthermore, our exoproteome analysis uncovered potential cooperativity between the two different S. aureus isolates. Altogether, the observed exoproteome variations upon co-culturing are indicative of unprecedented adaptive mechanisms that set limits to the production of secreted staphylococcal virulence factors.

### Keywords
K. oxytoca, Chronic wound, Bacillus thuringiensis, Exoproteome, Co-culture, . aureus

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 864073 fax:        +49 3834 864202
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 864073 fax:        +49 3834 864202


