### Accession
PXD012150

### Title
wheat root MALDI-TOF-MS/MS -  Root Proteomics Reveals the Effects of Wood Vinegar on Wheat Growth and Subsequent Tolerance to Drought Stress

### Description
To investigate the proteome pattern of wheat roots following a WV seed presoaking treatment under drought stress, comparative proteomic analysis using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was employed for wheat roots. Obtained DEPs were digested with trypsin and subjected to 5800 MALDI-TOF-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Root proteins were extracted using the TCA-acetone extraction method and were separated by using a IPG strip with a 17 cm linear pH 4-7 gradient(Bio-Rad, USA), followed by a 12% polyacrylamide gel. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. The protein spots were digested by trypsin and identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis using 5800 MALDI Time of Flight (TOF)/TOF analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Root proteins were extracted using the TCA-acetone extraction method and were separated by using a IPG strip with a 17 cm linear pH 4-7 gradient(Bio-Rad, USA), followed by a 12% polyacrylamide gel. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. The protein spots were digested by trypsin and identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis using 5800 MALDI Time of Flight (TOF)/TOF analyzer.

### Publication Abstract
Wood vinegar (WV) or pyroligneous acid (PA) is a reddish-brown liquid created during the dry distillation of biomass, a process called pyrolysis. WV contains important biologically active components, which can enhance plant growth and tolerance to drought stress. However, its mechanism of action remains unknown. Our results after presoaking wheat seeds with various concentrations of WV indicate that a 1:900 WV concentration can significantly enhance growth. To investigate the response of wheat roots to drought stress, we compared quantitative proteomic profiles in the roots of wheat plants grown from seeds either presoaked (treatment) or non-presoaked (control) with WV. Our results indicated that the abscisic acid (ABA) content of wheat roots in the WV treatment was significantly increased. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and malonaldehyde (MDA) levels roots were significantly lower than in the control treatment under drought stress, while the activity of major antioxidant enzymes was significantly increased. Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) identified 138 differentially accumulated protein (DAP) spots representing 103 unique protein species responding to drought stress in wheat roots of the control and WV-treated groups. These DAPs are mostly involved in the stress response, carbohydrate metabolism, protein metabolism, and secondary metabolism. Proteome profiles showed the DAPs involved in carbohydrate metabolism, stress response, and secondary metabolism had increased accumulation in roots of the WV-treated groups. These findings suggest that the roots from wheat seeds presoaked with WV can initiate an early defense mechanism to mitigate drought stress. These results provide an explanation of how WV enhances the tolerance of wheat plants to drought stress.

### Keywords
Root, Maldi-tof-ms/ms, Wheat

### Affiliations
College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Yuying Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qiu
College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China


