### Accession
PXD008835

### Title
Data in support of Identification of brain antigens recognized by autoantibodies in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis-induced animals treated with Etomoxir or Interferon-beta

### Description
Multiple Sclerosis is a neurogenerative disease, where inflammation plays an essential role and the loss of tolerance for self produces proteins is a key feature. To investigate the autoimmune response, we use serum from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) induced rats and investigate autoantibody chance in connection with induced disease and treatment with Etomoxir or Interferon-beta. Several significant differences in suggested antigens were identified comparing healthy, diseased and treated groups, suggesting a role of these antigens in the progression of Multiple Sclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) was induced in 45 rats and five rats were used as controls and thereby not EAE-induced. The rats were treated with either Etomoxir (Meta-IQ ApS, Denmark) or Interferon- (Extavia, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark) at day one or day five.  When the rats were euthanized, blood sample collection was obtained by cardiac puncture. Blood samples were used for Western Blot and immunoprecipitation. Proteomics Sample Preparation was performed according to the FASP digestion protocol by Bennike et al. The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with a NanoRSLC system coupled online with an emitter for nanospray ionization to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, The peptide samples were separated using an analytical 75 cm reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column and elution was performed with a 45 min ramp gradient.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation analysis was performed in MaxQuant 1.5.7.4, where the raw files were searched against the Rattus norvegicus Uniprot database UP000002494. The output contains a list of proteins identified below 1% false discovery rate and their abundances was further filtered and processed in Perseus v1.5.6.0. All  identified proteins due to reverse peptide hits were removed from further analysis and the data was log2-transformed in order to approximate normal distribution. Two unique peptides or more was a requirement for protein quantitation. Additionally, a non-zero quantitation value in at least 70% the samples in one of the groups was required for the quantifiable proteins. The identified quantifiable proteins in the different groups were compared in a Venn diagram, and for investigation of differences in the expression of proteins between the groups unpaired t-tests were performed. All data are presented as mean ± SEM. P values of 0.05 were used for truncation and only proteins regulated with more than factor two was reported.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative autoimmune disease, where chronic inflammation plays an essential role in its pathology. A feature of MS is the production of autoantibodies stimulated by an altered-peptide-ligand response and epitope spreading, resulting in loss of tolerance for self-proteins. The involvement of autoantibodies in MS pathogenesis has been suggested to initiate and drive progression of inflammation; however, the etiology of MS remains unknown. The effect of etomoxir and interferon-&#x3b2; (IFN-&#x3b2;) was examined in an experimental-autoimmune-encephalomyelitis (EAE) model of MS. Moreover, the impact of etomoxir and IFN-&#x3b2; on recognition of brain proteins in serum from EAE rats was examined with the purpose of identifying the autoantibody reactivities involved in MS. Animals treated with etomoxir on day 1 exhibited a statistically significantly lower disease score than animals treated with IFN-&#x3b2; (on day 1 or 5) or placebo. Etomoxir treatment on day 5 resulted in a significantly lower disease score than IFN-&#x3b2; treatment on day 1. After disease induction antibodies was induced to a broad pallet of antigens in the brain. Surprisingly, by blocking CPT1 and therewith lipid metabolism several alterations in the antibody response was observed suggesting that autoantibodies play a role in the EAE animal model.

### Keywords
Rat model, Multiple sclerosis, Autoantibodies, Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, Autoantigens, Inflammation, Etomoxir

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Mass Spectrometry Department of Health Science and Technology Aalborg University | Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Mass Spectrometry Department of Health Science and Technology Aalborg University | Denmark


