### Accession
PXD024769

### Title
Cytosine methylation of tRNA in Plasmodium falciparum disrupts translational homeostasis to prime for sexual commitment

### Description
Malaria parasites have evolved a well-adjusted developmental program to progress through the complex life cycle in the human and mosquito host. Here we identify cytosine methylation of tRNAAsp (GTC) as being critical to maintain stable protein synthesis under cellular stress. Using conditional knock out of a member of the DNA methyltransferases family called Pf-DNMT2, RNA bisulfite sequencing demonstrates the selective cytosine methylation of this enzyme of tRNAAsp (GTC) at position C38. Although no growth defect on parasite asexual proliferation was observed, Pf-DNMT2 KO parasites show a striking increase in their sexual commitment and an increased sensitivity to Dihydroartemisinin. In mutant parasites we observe a dramatic decrease of tRNAAsp (GTC) when compared to non-stressed parasites and mass spectrometry analysis shows the selective downregulation of proteins with GAC codon bias. Here we identify an epitranscriptomic mechanism that safeguards protein translation and homeostasis of sexual commitment during cellular stress in malaria parasites

### Sample Protocol
Parasite infected red blood cells were pelleted at 2200g for 4 min at ambient temperature and subsequently lysed with ice-cold 0.15% (w/v) saponin (Sigma). The lysate was thoroughly mixed using an aspiration pipette and incubated on ice for 10 min to ensure complete lysis of the RBC membrane. The parasite pellet was centrifuged at 4000g for 10 min at minimum deceleration and washed twice with ice cold PBS and frozen at -80 °C. The parasite pellet was resuspended in 6x volume of 8M urea containing 1mM sodium orthovanadate and homogenized using a sonicator pulse for 3 min at 25% amplitude and 2 sec on, 3 sec off pulse time. The lysate was spun at 16,000g at 4 °C for 30 min to pellet the insoluble fraction and the lysate was transferred into a new tube. Protein (100 μg) was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 C for 1 h and followed by reduction using 100 mM IAA for 1 hour in the dark. This solution was diluted to 1 M urea and digested with 2 μg Trypsin (Thermo) overnight at ambient temperature. The resulting peptides were desalted using Pierce desalting columns as per manufacturer’s instructions. These peptides were reconstituted in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and labelled using tandem-mass-tag TMT labels (Thermo) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled peptides were combined, dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA. After checking for labeling efficiency, these peptides were then further fractionated using high-pH fractionation columns (Pierce) as per manufacturer’s instructions into 8 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) using a precolumn (Thermo) and a self-pack 5 µm tip analytical column (15 cm of 5 µm C18, New Objective) over a 140 emin gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  The parameters for the full scan MS were:  resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 300 ms.  The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 28 (34 for TMT samples) and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.  Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo). Sequest (REF) search parameters were:  10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.08Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were lysine-labelled TMT residues, peptide N-terminal TMT labels, methionine oxidation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation.  Only peptides with a SEQUEST Xcorr score greater than or equal to 2 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis.  For TMT samples, a minimum abundance of 500 was used a threshold in order to ensure robustness of data. PSM data was further processed using MSStatsTMT (REF) in order to carry out a differential analysis. For interpretations of the relationships between codon usage (codon frequency) and up-regulated proteins at different time points, PLS-R was performed using NIPALS algorithm. The values of codon usage in synonymous codon choices of those proteins were retrieved from the pre-calculated genome-wide codon usage. Outliers which could cause over-fitting were removed by manual inspection of residual sample variances and leverages, as well as Hotelling’s T2 statistics. Marten’s uncertainty test with optimal number of PCs was used to cross-validate the PLS model. Eigenvector based multivariate statistics was performed using UnscramblerX (v10.3, Camo).

### Publication Abstract
Malaria parasites need to cope with changing environmental conditions that require strong countermeasures to ensure pathogen survival in the human and mosquito hosts. The molecular mechanisms that protect Plasmodium falciparum homeostasis during the complex life cycle remain unknown. Here, we identify cytosine methylation of tRNA<sup>Asp (GTC)</sup> as being critical to maintain stable protein synthesis. Using conditional knockout (KO) of a member of the DNA methyltransferase family, called Pf-DNMT2, RNA bisulfite sequencing demonstrated the selective cytosine methylation of this enzyme of tRNA<sup>Asp (GTC)</sup> at position C38. Although no growth defect on parasite proliferation was observed, Pf-DNMT2KO parasites showed a selective downregulation of proteins with a GAC codon bias. This resulted in a significant shift in parasite metabolism, priming KO parasites for being more sensitive to various types of stress. Importantly, nutritional stress made tRNA<sup>Asp (GTC)</sup> sensitive to cleavage by an unknown nuclease and increased gametocyte production (&gt;6-fold). Our study uncovers an epitranscriptomic mechanism that safeguards protein translation and homeostasis of sexual commitment in malaria parasites. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> P. falciparum is the most virulent malaria parasite species, accounting for the majority of the disease mortality and morbidity. Understanding how this pathogen is able to adapt to different cellular and environmental stressors during its complex life cycle is crucial in order to develop new strategies to tackle the disease. In this study, we identified the writer of a specific tRNA cytosine methylation site as a new layer of epitranscriptomic regulation in malaria parasites that regulates the translation of a subset of parasite proteins (&gt;400) involved in different metabolic pathways. Our findings give insight into a novel molecular mechanism that regulates P. falciparum response to drug treatment and sexual commitment.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Epitranscriptomics, Trna, Dmt2

### Affiliations
Biological Engineering, CEHS, MIT
NTU

### Submitter
AMEYA SINHA

### Lab Head
Dr Peter C Dedon
Biological Engineering, CEHS, MIT


