### Accession
PXD034440

### Title
Chemical degradation of BTK/TEC as a novel approach to inhibit platelet function.

### Description
Determination of the effect of the generic tyrosine kinase degrader TL12-186, and the BTK degraders DD-04-15 and DD-03-171 on human platelet protein content and function.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet incubation: Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP) was incubated with 3 uM of TL12-186, DD-04-15 and DD-03-171 and incubated for 20 hours at 30°C. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was collected and supplemented with 2µM PGE1/0.02U/ml apyrase before pelleting (650g/10 min). Platelets were washed in CGS (13mM trisodium citrate, 22mM glucose, 120mM sodium chloride) with 0.02U/ml apyrase before resuspension in HEPES-Tyrode (HT, 145mM sodium chloride, 3mM potassium chloride, 0.5mM disodium phosphate, 1mM magnesium sulphate, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) supplemented with 5.5mM D-glucose and 0.02U/ml apyrase at a platelet concentration of 4x108 platelets/ml. Platelets were lysed in RIPA buffer.   TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography: Aliquots of 50µg of each sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) sixteen plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. A 200ug aliquot of the pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions (20 in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).    Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry: High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.   All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%.  For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2022: 178486 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da), Methionine loss (-131.040Da) from the protein N-terminus and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text]

### Keywords
Human, Platelet, Tec, Targeted protein degradation, Protac, Btk

### Affiliations
Bristol univeristy Phd Student
School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience Faculty of Life sciences University of Bristol

### Submitter
Justin Trory

### Lab Head
Dr Ingeborg Hers
School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience Faculty of Life sciences University of Bristol


