### Accession
PXD036976

### Title
Liver RBFOX2 regulates cholesterol homeostasis via Scarb1 alternative splicing in mice

### Description
RNA alternative splicing (AS) expands the regulatory potential of eukaryotic genomes. The mechanisms regulating liver-specific AS profiles and their contribution to liver function are poorly understood. Here, we identify a key role for the splicing factor RNA-binding Fox protein-2 (RBFOX2) in maintaining cholesterol homeostasis in an obesogenic environment in the liver. Using enhanced individual-nucleotide resolution UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (eiCLIP), we identify physiologically relevant targets of RBFOX2 in mouse liver, including the scavenger receptor class B type I (Scarb1). RBFOX2 function is decreased in the liver in diet-induced obesity, causing a Scarb1 isoform switch and alteration of hepatocyte lipid homeostasis. Our findings demonstrate that specific AS programmes actively maintain liver physiology, and underlie the lipotoxic effects of obesogenic diets when dysregulated. Splice-switching oligonucleotides targeting this network alleviate obesityinduced inflammation in the liver and promote an anti-atherogenic lipoprotein profile in the blood, underscoring the potential of isoform-specific RNA therapeutics for treating metabolism-associated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Flash frozen livers were lysed using a homogenizer with SDS lysis buffer (2.5% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 150mM NaCl, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 15 min and protein concentration was measured by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo scientific). 20 mg of protein was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 mins, then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 mins, and finally quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 mins. All reactions were performed at RT. Proteins were chloroform-methanol precipitated and the pellet resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5. To help with the resuspension, protein precipitates were passed 10 times through a 22G needle and protein concentration was measured again. Before protein digestion, 5 mg of protein was collected, and urea concentration diluted to 1 M with 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Then, LysC was added at 1:100 (LysC:protein) and digested for 12 hours at RT. Samples were further digested for 5 hours at 37ºC with trypsin at 1:100 (trypsin:protein). To stop the digestion 0.4 % TFA (pH < 2) was added to the samples. Digested samples were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 10 min. Peptide concentration was measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo scientific). 25 μg of peptides were desalted using 10 mg SOLA HRP SPE Cartridges (Thermo scientific). To allow the comparison of both TMT, 2 bridge channels were prepared and processed in parallel. For that, 1.39 μg of each sample was added for to each bridge channel. Then, dried peptides from all 20 samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and labelled with TMT-10plex following the protocol described in53. After labelling, both bridge channels were combined and split again to ensure homogeneity. Finally, samples were mixed in equal amounts. After combining, both TMT were desalted using the tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and dried in the SpeedVac. Next, desalted peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN, 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8. Both TMT were fractionated in a basic pH reversed phase chromatography using a HPLC equipped with a 3.5 μm Zorbax 300 Extended-C18 column (Agilent). 96 fractions were collected and combined into 24. 12 of these were desalted following the C18 Stop and Go Extraction Tip (STAGE-Tip) and dried down in the SpeedVac. Finally, samples were resuspended in 3% ACN, 1% FA and run in an Orbitrap Fusion running in MS3 mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were converted to mzXML format using a modified version of RawFileReader and searched using the search engine Comet56 against a mouse target-decoy protein database (Uniprot, June11, 2019) that included the most common contaminants. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and product ion tolerance at 1 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) and TMT tag (+229.1629 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini were set up as static modifications. Up to 2 variable methionine oxidations (+15.9949 Da) and 2 miss cleavages were allowed in the searches. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% FDR with a linear discriminant analysis57 and proteins were further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. TMT quantitative values we obtained from MS3 scans. Only those with a signal-to-noise > 100 and an isolation specificity > 0.7 were used for quantification. Each TMT was normalised to the total signal in each column. To allow the comparison of both TMT, those proteins quantified in both TMT, data was normalised using the bridge channels present in each TMT. Quantifications included in Supplementary Table 1 are represented as relative abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Splicing, Liver, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Prado
Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain


