### Accession
PXD039249

### Title
Temporal Profiling of Epitranscriptomic Reader, Writer and Eraser Proteins during Osteogenic Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem Cells

### Description
Osteogenesis is the process of bone formation and is modulated by multiple regulatory networks. With the rapid development of the epitranscriptomics field, RNA modifications and their reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins are shown to be involved in the regulation of various biological processes. Few studies, however, were conducted to investigate the functions of RNA modifications and their RWE proteins in osteogenesis. By using a parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM)-based targeted proteomics method, we performed a comprehensive quantitative assessment of 154 epitranscriptomic RWE proteins during the time course of osteogenic differentiation of H9 human embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We found that approximately half of the 126 detected RWE proteins were downregulated during osteogenic differentiation, and they included mainly those proteins involved in RNA methylation and pseudouridine synthesis. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis revealed a high connectivity between the downregulated epitranscriptomic RWE proteins and osteogenesis-related proteins. Gene set enrichment analysis of previously published RNA-seq data from osteogenesis imperfecta patients suggested a potential role of METTL1, the top-ranked hub protein of downregulated RWE proteins, in osteogenesis through the cytokine network. Together, this is the first targeted profiling of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins during osteogenic differentiation of human ESCs and our work unveiled potential regulatory roles of these proteins in osteogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
H9 Human embryonic stem cells (WiCell) were cultured on a Matrigel (BD Bioscience)-coated surface in mTeSR plus medium (Stem Cell Technologies). The cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified chamber supplemented with 5% CO2. To subculture, cell colonies were detached by accutase (Innovative cell technologies) digestion for 30 sec followed by scrapping. The colonies were seeded in fresh culture medium in no less than 1:6 ratio to prevent undesired differentiation. Differentiation was initiated as described previously. In brief, cells at confluency were incubated in Dulbecco’s Modified Medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals), 0.5% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco), 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), and 1% non-essential amino acids (Gibco) for 5 days. Osteogenesis was further induced by supplementing the cells with 50 µg/ml sodium ascorbate (Sigma), 10 mM β-glycerolphosphate, and 0.12 µM vitamin D3 for additional 15 days. Confluent cells prior to differentiation induction were collected as Day-0 and the cells after differentiation/osteogenesis induction were collected as indicated. Confluent cells prior to differentiation induction and after differentiation/osteogenesis induction were collected as indicated. The harvested cells were subsequently processed according to the protocol described in the previous study. Cells were lysed on ice for 30 min using CelLytic M cell lysis reagent (Sigma) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations in the supernatants were quantified using the Bradford assay. Following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, 40 μg of protein samples were denatured twice with 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 using the polyethersulfone (PES) membrane (molecular weight cutoff at 30 kDa) centrifugal filter unit (VWR), and the sample tubes were centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 min at room temperature. The denatured samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 hr, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark at room temperature for 30 min, followed by three times washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3. The samples were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) at 1:50 ratio (trypsin: protein, by mass) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C for 18 hr. The tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation, dried in a Speed-vac, desalted using OMIX C18 pipet tips (Agilent Technologies), reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and spiked in a mixture of SIL peptides at a final concentration of 2 fmol/µL. Up to 1 µg of trypsin-digested peptides and 4 fmol of SIL peptides were subjected for LC-PRM analysis.  LC-PRM quantification results during the osteogenic differentiation were from two independent experiments, except Day-5 and Day-6 owing to lack of sufficient quantities of protein samples. The results of each independent experiment were from two LC-PRM technical replicates, that is, the samples of each biological replicate were processed and analyzed by LC-PRM twice to ensure the reliability of the quantification results.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-PRM data were imported to Skyline v21.2 for processing. The acquired MS/MS of each precursor ion was compared with that in the spectral library, where similarity is measured by dot product (dotp) value. A dotp value of > 0.7 and 4-6 fragment ions eluting at the same retention time was considered a positive identification. Because the levels of some epitranscriptomic RWE proteins were substantially decreased during the course of osteogenic differentiation, which may lead to low dotp values. Only when the dotp values of the peptide were < 0.7 for all the time points, the peptide was considered below the detection limit, and it was removed from the list for following quantification. Additional data processing was conducted in Excel, shown in Table S2c-f. In summary, the ratio of each peptide representing a specific RWE protein was calculated based on a two-step normalization: (1) the peak area of an endogenous peptide is normalized to that of its corresponding SIL peptide or a surrogate standard with similar retention time; (2) further normalized to the sum of peak areas for all light peptides over the sum of peak areas for all heavy peptides in each LC-PRM run. The relative ratios of the peptides were normalized to that in the Day-0 samples. The peptide ratios in each sample, averaged from the quantification results of two technical replicates, were represented by mean ± S.D. The relative ratios of the epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in one biological replicate were calculated by the mean of the relative ratios of the peptides derived from the same protein. The final ratios of the RWE proteins were averaged from the quantification results of two biological samples (except Day-5 and Day-6, which contained only one replicate).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Writer and eraser, Epitranscriptomic reader, Osteogenesis

### Affiliations
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Jiekai Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States


