### Accession
PXD029522

### Title
Lineage factor-dependent signalling by kidney cancer-associated genetic alteration

### Description
As shown by large-scale human genetic data, cancer mutations display  strong tissue-selectivity, but how this selectivity arises remains unclear. Here,  using experimental models, functional genomics and analysis of patient samples, we demonstrate that the lineage transcription factor paired box 8  (PAX8) is required for oncogenic signalling by two common clear cell renal cell  carcinoma (ccRCC)-causing genetic alterations in humans: the germline variant  rs7948643 at 11q13.3 and somatic inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour  suppressor (VHL). VHL loss, observed in ~90% of ccRCCs, can lead to  hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF2A) stabilization. We show that HIF2A is  preferentially recruited to PAX8-bound transcriptional enhancers, including a  pro-tumorigenic cyclin D1 (CCND1) enhancer that is controlled by PAX8 and  HIF2A. The ccRCC protective allele C at rs7948643 inhibits PAX8 binding at this  enhancer and downstream activation of CCND1 expression. Co-option of a  PAX8-dependent physiological programme that supports proliferation of normal  renal epithelial cells is also required for MYC expression from the ccRCC  metastasis-associated amplicons at 8q21.3-q24.3. These results  demonstrate that transcriptional lineage factors are essential for the expression  of canonical oncogenes and they mediate tissue-specific cancer risk associated  with somatic and inherited genetic variants

### Sample Protocol
The following antibodies were used: PAX8 (ProteinTech 10336-1-AP),  HIF2A (Novus Biologicals NB100-122) and rabbit polyclonal IgG (Abcam, ab27478).  Briefly, bead-bound proteins were digested with the addition of 10ul trypsin (15ng/ul,  Pierce) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC), followed by overnight incubation  at 37oC. The next day, a second digestion step was performed by adding again trypsin  solution for 4h at 37oC. The peptides were acidified with the addition of 5% formic acid  and purified using the Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) according  to manufacturer’s instructions. After the purification the samples were dried with  speedvac concentrator and reconstituted in 20ul 0.1% formic acid prior to mass  spectrometry analysis. For the analysis of the peptides, the Dionex Ultimate 3000  UHPLC system coupled with the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)  was used.

### Data Protocol
The collected HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with the  SequestHT search engine on the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. All spectra were  searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot fasta file containing 20,394 reviewed  human entries and the node for SequestHT included the following parameters:  Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da, Dynamic  Modifications were Oxidation of Methionine (M) (+15.995 Da) and Deamidation of  Asparagine (N) and Glutamine (Q) (+0.984 Da). Proteins detected in IgG control RIME  were excluded from further analysis whereas proteins detected at least in three out of  four replicates for HIF2A and PAX8 RIME were included. Nuclear proteins were  identified using the Gene Ontology resource, and the highest confidence  experimental and database-derived physical connections between PAX8 and HIF2A  shared hits were identified using String 11.0, followed by MCL clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale human genetic data<sup>1-3</sup> have shown that cancer mutations display strong tissue-selectivity, but how this selectivity arises remains unclear. Here, using experimental models, functional genomics and analyses of patient samples, we demonstrate that the lineage transcription factor paired box&#x2009;8 (PAX8) is required for oncogenic signalling by two common genetic alterations that cause clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) in humans: the germline variant rs7948643 at 11q13.3 and somatic inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor (VHL)<sup>4-6</sup>. VHL loss, which is observed in about 90% of ccRCCs, can lead to hypoxia-inducible factor&#x2009;2&#x3b1; (HIF2A) stabilization<sup>6,7</sup>. We show that HIF2A is preferentially recruited to PAX8-bound transcriptional enhancers, including a pro-tumorigenic cyclin&#x2009;D1 (CCND1) enhancer that is controlled by PAX8 and HIF2A. The ccRCC-protective allele&#x2009;C at rs7948643 inhibits PAX8 binding at this enhancer and downstream activation of CCND1 expression. Co-option of a PAX8-dependent physiological programme that supports the proliferation of normal renal epithelial cells is also required for MYC expression from the ccRCC metastasis-associated amplicons at 8q21.3-q24.3 (ref. <sup>8</sup>). These results demonstrate that transcriptional lineage factors are essential for oncogenic signalling and that they mediate tissue-specific cancer risk associated with somatic and inherited genetic variants.

### Keywords
Hif2a, Pax8, Renal cell carcinoma, Lineage factors

### Affiliations
MRC Cancer Unit, University of Cambridge; Hutchison/MRCResearch Centre, Box 197, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Sakari Vanharanta
MRC Cancer Unit, University of Cambridge; Hutchison/MRCResearch Centre, Box 197, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK


