### Accession
PXD031113

### Title
Pathological heart remodeling promotes unconventional secretion of protein quality control components via exosomes in cardiomyocytes

### Description
After reporting that mice with inducible CM-specific Wnt activation (β-catΔex3) mimic pathological remodelling condition and heart failure, we further explored the cardiac-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs analysis in vivo are challenging, therefore we used a genetic model to analyze the extracellular compartment as well as the cell composition in vivo, which provided advantageous by focusing only on the relative changes between control and transgenic cells. With an improved protocol we isolated EVs from CT and β-catΔex3 hearts. The fraction containing small EVs was confirmed by electron microscopy and nanoparticle-tracking-analysis and further characterized with EV, endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi markers as well as mass spectrometry analysis. This analysis confirmed the cardiac origin of EVs and showed 47% proteins included in Exocarta Top100 candidate with a major exosome (Exo) representation. By proteomic analysis, 391 significantly differentially enriched proteins in β-catΔex3 hearts were identified, which were significantly loaded with all seven α and β chains of the constitute 20S proteasome, molecular chaperones and co-chaperones as well as proteasome associated proteins previously described in Exo (HSPA70, HSP90AB1, CRYAB, PKACA and BAG2). CRYAB, a cardiac chaperone protein that triages misfolded proteins for proteasomal degradation or repair, was confirmed to co-localize with labelled Exo in vitro. We performed single whole cell transcriptome, followed by pairwise comparison of differential expressed gene analysis (DEG) and their functional enrichment between β-catΔex3 and CT cell clusters. This revealed that different cardiomyocytes and endothelial cell subpopulations of β-catΔex3 CM were significantly active transcriptional activity of EVs secretion and protein quality control pathways. This finding was confirmed in cardiomyocytes populations of old mice subjected to experimental pressure overload to induce hypertrophy at early and late stages of remodeling, including an acute early upregulation of exosome biogenesis processes and chaperons transcripts including CRYAB at early stages. In order to model this molecular mechanism in human cells, human induced pluripotent stem cells (IPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes were subjected to pharmacological Wnt activation, which recapitulated the increased cell cycle activation as well as exosomal markers in vitro. Our results indicate a contribution of Exo-mediated maintenance of cardiomyocytes proteostasis upon pathological remodeling. Upon stress, CRYAB and co-chaperones increase binding to damaged-sarcomeric-proteins heading towards degradation, which overload the intracellular proteasomal capacity. This may activate EV-mediated cellular extrusion of misfolded proteins as a mechanism of cellular protection. Cardiac extracellular proteosome may serve as read-out of disease progression and for monitoring cellular remodeling in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis and cell treatment, cardiac EV isolation from mouse hearts was performed with Langendorff perfusion as described above. The hearts were disconnected from the Langendorff apparatus, atria were separated and ventricles were minced in petri dish with 2.5 ml perfusion buffer. The homogenate was transferred to a Falcon tube and the Petri dish is rinsed with an additional 5 ml of perfusion buffer, which was also transferred to the Falcon tube. Non-digested heart tissue was allowed to sediment for 1 min. Supernatant was filtered through a 40 µm cell strainer and subsequently through a 0.2 µm syringe filter. All steps take place at 4 °C. Exosomes were isolated using subsequent steps of centrifugation. First, samples were centrifuged at 2.000 x g for 10 min to pellet remaining cells, cell debris and large apoptotic bodies. In the next step supernatants were centrifuged at 14.000 x g for 35 min to remove microvesicles and other large extracellular vesicles. After this supernatants were transferred to ultracentrifugation tubes, and centrifuged at 100.000 x g for 2 h at 4 °C. Pellets were then washed with PBS and recentrifuged at 100.000 x g for 1,5 h. Supernatants were kept (S100) and pellets resuspended (P100) in 50-100 µl of PBS or RIPA buffer for Western blot and stored at -20 °C until further analysis. Samples were reconstituted in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and applied to 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen). Samples were run 1 cardiomyocyte into the gel for purification and stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz). Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 µg/µl. For each analysis 1.5 µg of digested protein were enriched on a precolumn (0.18 mm ID x 20 mm, Symmetry C18, 5 µm, Waters, Milford/MA, U.S.A) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, HSS T3, 1.8 µm, Waters) using a 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top25 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 350 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Two technical replicates per sample were analyzed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using data-independent acquisition (DIA) with 65 variable size windows across the 400-1,050 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.75 s. 3 technical replicates were acquired for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. The combined qualitative analyses were searched against the UniProtKB mouse reference proteome (revision 12-2017, 60717 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1%. The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values per injection, which were used for further statistical analysis in Perseus 1.5.6.0 software (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant Wnt activation has&#xa0;been reported in failing cardiomyocytes. Here we present single cell transcriptome profiling of hearts with inducible cardiomyocyte-specific Wnt activation (&#x3b2;-cat<sup>&#x394;ex3</sup>) as well as with compensatory and failing hypertrophic remodeling. We show that functional enrichment analysis points to an involvement of extracellular vesicles (EVs) related processes in hearts of &#x3b2;-cat<sup>&#x394;ex3</sup> mice. A proteomic analysis of in vivo cardiac derived EVs from &#x3b2;-cat<sup>&#x394;ex3</sup> hearts has identified differentially enriched proteins involving 20&#x2009;S proteasome constitutes, protein quality control (PQC), chaperones and associated cardiac proteins including &#x3b1;-Crystallin B (CRYAB) and sarcomeric components. The hypertrophic model confirms that cardiomyocytes reacted with an acute early transcriptional upregulation of exosome biogenesis processes and chaperones transcripts including CRYAB, which is ameliorated in advanced remodeling. Finally, human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes subjected to pharmacological Wnt activation recapitulated the increased expression of exosomal markers, CRYAB accumulation and increased PQC signaling. These findings reveal that secretion of EVs with a proteostasis signature contributes to early patho-physiological adaptation of cardiomyocytes, which may serve as a read-out of disease progression and can&#xa0;be used for monitoring cellular remodeling in vivo with a possible diagnostic and prognostic role in the future.

### Keywords
Exosomes; cardiomyocytes; remodeling; data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


