### Accession
PXD002397

### Title
Helianthus annuus (sunflower) allergen identification by mass spectrometry

### Description
Background: Respiratory allergy triggered by pollen allergens is increasing at an alarming rate worldwide. Sunflower pollen is thought to be an important source of inhalant allergens. Present study aims to identify the prevalence of sunflower pollinosis among the Indian allergic population and characterizes the pollen allergens using immuno-proteomic tools.  Methodology: Clinico-immunological tests were performed to understand the prevalence of sensitivity towards sunflower pollen among the atopic population. Sera from selected sunflower positive patients were used as probe to detect the IgE-reactive proteins from the one and two dimensionally separated proteome of sunflower pollen. The antigenic nature of the sugar moiety of the glycoprotein allergens was studied by meta-periodate modification of IgE-immunoblot. Finally, these allergens were identified by mass-spectrometry (MALDI TOF/TOF and LC ESI qTOF). MASCOT searching was performed against NCBInr database. However, Helianthus annuus genome is not fully sequenced and partially annotated. So in case of low confidence (p> 0.05) protein identification, searching was performed against EST library of Helianthus annuus. Results: Prevalence of sunflower pollen allergy was observed among 21% of the atopic population and associated with elevated level of specific IgE and histamine in the sera of these patients. Immunoscreening of sunflower pollen proteome with patient serum detected seven IgE-reactive proteins with varying molecular weight and pI. Hierarchical clustering of 2D-immunoblot data highlighted three allergens characterized by a more frequent immuno-reactivity and increased levels of IgE antibodies in the sera of susceptible patients. These allergens were considered as the major allergens of sunflower pollen and were found to have their glycan moiety critical for inducing IgE response. Homology driven search of MS/MS data of these IgE-reactive proteins identified seven previously unreported allergens from sunflower pollen. Three major allergenic proteins were identified as two non-isoformic pectate lyases and a cystein protease.  Conclusion: Novelty of the present report is the identification of a panel of seven sunflower pollen allergens for the first time at immuno-biochemical and proteomic level, which substantiated the clinical evidence of sunflower allergy. Further purification and recombinant expression of these allergens will improve component-resolved diagnosis and therapy of pollen allergy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry  For mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF/TOF and LC ESI qTOF), spots from 2D gel corresponding to the IgE reactive spots on 2D blot, were excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion following the protocol as described by Shevchenko et al. with slight modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy, the gel pieces were destained with ethanol in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) (1:1 v/v) and Acetonitrile (ACN). Reduction and alkylation was done with 10mM DTT and 55mM iodoacetamide respectively. Digestion was carried out in 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing grade Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 37ºC for 16 hrs. Tryptic fragments were eluted from gel pieces by vigorous vortexing in extraction buffer containing 3% TFA and 30% ACN. Final volume of the sample was reduced up to 10 times in Speed Vac (Thermo Fischer). Approximately, 1.5 μl of peptide digests were mixed with 5 volumes of 0.5 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix solution (Bruker Daltonics), spotted on MTP 384 ground steel target plate (Bruker Daltonics) and air dried. For LC-ESI experiments the solvent was completely evaporated and the peptides were dissolved in a suitable volume of 2% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid. This reconstituted sample was then mixed with solvent A used for loading onto LC-column.   MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis  Mass spectra of trypsin digested proteins were obtained in Autoflex II MALDI TOF/TOF (Bruker Daltonics). Mass spectra were recorded in linear mode equipped with a pulsed N2 laser (λ = 337nm, 50 Hz) at 54% power in positive ion mode. After MS spectra acquisition, the instrument was switched to LIFT mode. The MS/MS spectra of top ten peptides with highest intensity were recorded by fragmentation of these peptides using LID (laser induced dissociation).  MS/MS spectra were acquired with a minimum of 4000 and a maximum of 8000 laser shots using the instrument calibration file. Spectra baseline subtraction, smoothing and centroiding were performed in Flex Analysis software v3.0 (Bruker Daltonics).   LC-ESI qTOF analysis  All the MS and MS/MS experiments for peptide identification were performed using a maXis impact™ high resolution QTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) equipped with a Captive Spray (Bruker Michrom) electrospray ionization platform. Separation was performed on a Dionex PepMap C18 column (250mmx75µm, 3 µm particle). The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN, respectively.  Positive ions (charge state +1, +2, +3) were generated by the electrospray ionization captive source. The following source settings were used for all subsequent data collection: Drying gas (nitrogen): 3 L/min, Dry temperature: 150°C, Capillary voltage: start at 1500–1700 V, decrease in 50 V steps until signal drops and add 300 V, End plate offset: 0 V. Survey scans were acquired within a range from 200 to 2000 m/z. The spectrometer sequentially conducted MS/MS (in CID chamber) on the precursor ions (+2 and +3 charge state, excluding +1) detected in the full scan in data independent manner. MS/MS scans were conducted within a range from 25 to 2000 m/z. All MS and MS/MS raw data were acquired in .mgf format using Bruker’s ProteinScape™ software (version 3.0).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS spectra processed using MS Biotools™ 3.2 (Bruker Daltonics) was used as input to an in house MASCOT search engine version 2.2 using the following criteria: minimum signal-to noise ratio: 20; peak density filter: 5 peaks per 200 Da and maximum number of peaks: 20. Searches were conducted with the following settings: one missed cleavage, P < 0.05 as significance threshold, the mass tolerance of precursor and fragment ions: 0.5 Da and 1.2 Da, respectively for MALDI TOF/TOF whereas 40 ppm and 100 ppm respectively for LC-ESI qTOF, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, peptide charge: +1 for MALDI TOF/TOF and +2, +3, +4 for LC-ESI qTOF. Spectra were initially searched against NCBInr database, however unmatched peptides with low significance score were further subjected to similarity searches against the H. annuus EST database (downloaded from NCBI on June, 2015) containing 134474 entries.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi tof/tof, Lc esi qtof, Ncbinr, Est library of helianthus annuus, Allergen

### Affiliations
Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India
Senior Professor and Professor-in-Charge, Division of Plant Biology Bose Institute, Kolkata, India

### Submitter
Nandini  Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Swati Gupta Bhattacharya
Senior Professor and Professor-in-Charge, Division of Plant Biology Bose Institute, Kolkata, India


