### Accession
PXD017125

### Title
Ligustilide targets SMAD3, obstructing vascular fibrosis process in preventing atherosclerosis

### Description
Atherosclerosis is a persistent inflammatory state accompanied by lipid overload. Vascular fibrosis is one of the primary causes of atherosclerosis development. Although ligustilide (Lig) was shown to exert obvious antiatherogenic effects in previous studies, its precise mechanism has not been comprehensively discussed. In this paper, pharmacologic studies were performed to explore the pharmacodynamic effects of Lig on protecting aorta vascular wall structures and modulating serum inflammatory factors in ApoE-/- mice. Chemical proteomics based on a Lig-derived photoaffinity labelling (Lig-PAL) probe were applied to identify potential therapeutic targets. Mothers against decapentaplegic homologue 3 (SMAD3), which is closely related to the development of vascular fibrosis and atherosclerosis, was identified as a potential target of Lig. Lig suppressed the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of SMAD3 by blocking the interaction between SMAD3 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptor 1, thereby inhibiting the collagen synthesis process, preventing vascular fibrosis and improving atherosclerosis. The quantitative proteomics results from Lig-treated atherosclerotic ApoE-/- mice also indicated that Lig inhibits the expression of collagens I and III, interferes with collagen fibril organization processes and protects the aorta from vascular fibrosis. Hence, developing a novel SMAD3 inhibitor may present another therapeutic option for preventing atherosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS conditions of proteomics analysis The tryptic peptides were fractionated using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm2, 5 µm) with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. The fractionated peptides were dried and then redissolved in 0.1% formic acid to being loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm × 75µm) in an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The optimal mobile phase consisted of a linear gradient system of (A) 0.1% formic acid and (B) 0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile: 0-26 min, B 6-23%; 26-34 min, B 23-35%; 34-37 min, B 35-80%; 37-40 min, B 80%. The flow rate was 0.4 µL/min.  MS spectra were acquired by a tandem mass spectrometry in Q ExactiveTM plus (Thermo). The optimal conditions as: the electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV; the mass range for full scan was set at 350-1800 m/z; the resolution of intact peptides was 70000; one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15 s dynamic exclusion; Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The standard for identifying differentially expressed proteins were set as greater than 1.20-fold change, p < 0.05 (student’s t test, assuming unequal variance) compared proteins in model group with proteins in control groups.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ligustilide; smad3; atherosclerosis; vascular fibrosis; chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Haihe Education Park, 38 Tongyan Road, Tianjin 300353, People’s Republic of China
NanKai Univeristy

### Submitter
Wei Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Lei
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Haihe Education Park, 38 Tongyan Road, Tianjin 300353, People’s Republic of China


