### Accession
PXD000292

### Title
ChaFRADIC: A novel SCX-based approach for N-terminal Enrichment

### Description
Step 1:  Cell lysis of yeast sphaeroblast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and carbamidomethylation. Step 2:  Isotopic labeling with dimethylation (light + medium). Step 3:  Proteolytic digestion with trypsin (ArgC specificity because of blocked lysines by dimethylation). Step 4:  Enrichment via ChaFRADIC method Step 5:  Nano-LC-MS/MS measurements Step 6:  Data interpretation.  Specifications: --ESI spray ionisation o Q Exactive mass spec. --Quadrupole selection, HCD fragmentation and orbitrap detection o Identification + Quantification: PD version 1.3.0039. Search engine: Mascot 2.4. SGD database (Sep 2011), 6717 target sequences. Special nodes: precursor ions quantifier (within a 1 min retention time window), percolator (default settings). Protease: SemiArgC with max. 2 missed cleavage sites. Used modifications: Yeast_N-term_Enriched_Search_Acetylation  Variable --  N-terminal Acetylation (42.0105 Da)  --  Dimethylation light (28.0313 Da) at Lys  --  Dimethylation medium (34.0689 Da) at Lys    fixed --  Carbamidomethylation at Cys (57.0214 Da) Quantification --  Peptides with labeled lysine     Yeast_N-term_Enriched_Search_Dimethylation  Variable --  N-terminal Dimethylation light (28.0313 Da)  --  N-terminal Dimethylation medium (34.0689 Da)  --  Dimethylation light (28.0313 Da) at Lys  --  Dimethylation medium (34.0689 Da) at Lys   fixed --  Carbamidomethylation at Cys (57.0214 Da) Quantification --  Peptides with labeled N-terminus  --  Peptides with labeled N-terminus and labeled lysine. Mass tolerance: 10 ppm for MS, 0.02 Da for MS/MS. Applied filters: high confidence (FDR <1%), search engine rank 1

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We present a novel straightforward method for enrichment of N-terminal peptides, utilizing charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC). Our method is robust, easy to operate, fast, specific, and more sensitive than existing methods, enabling the differential quantitation of 1459 nonredundant N-terminal peptides between two S. cerevisiae samples within 10 h of LC-MS, starting from only 50 &#x3bc;g of protein per condition and analyzing only 40% of the obtained fractions. Using ChaFRADIC we compared mitochondrial proteins from wild-type and icp55&#x394; yeast (30 &#x3bc;g each). Icp55 is an intermediate cleaving peptidase, which, following mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP)-dependent cleavage of signal sequences, removes a single amino acid from a specific set of proteins according to the N-end rule. Using ChaFRADIC we identified 36 icp55 substrates, 14 of which were previously unknown, expanding the set of known icp55 substrates to a total of 52 proteins. Interestingly, a novel substrate, Isa2, is likely processed by Icp55 in two consecutive steps and thus might represent the first example of a triple processing event in a mitochondrial precursor protein. Thus, ChaFRADIC is a powerful and practicable tool for protease and peptidase research, providing the sensitivity to characterize even samples that can be obtained only in small quantities.

### Keywords
Cofradic, Yeast, Peptidase, N-terminal, Degradomics, Protease, Icp55, Chafradic

### Affiliations
Bioanalytik

### Submitter
Saskia Venne

### Lab Head


