### Accession
PXD013764

### Title
Human Milk Site-specific N-Glycoproteome Changes Across Lactation

### Description
N-glycosylation is an essential post-translational modification (PTM) of human milk proteins for the promotion of infant health. N-glycosylation is relevant regarding proteolytic susceptibility and functions as a competitive inhibitor of pathogen binding and immunomodulators. Due to the individual uniqueness of human milk, the overall complexity and temporal changes of N-glycosylation, the analysis for site-specific information of this PTM must take these factors into consideration. Here we demonstrate, by adapting the automated platform and hydrophilic-interaction chromatography (HILIC)-based cartridge with 150 μg of milk protein digestion, that proteome-wide N-glycopeptides can be reproducibly enriched in technical triplicates and biological samples across lactation. With higher energy c-trap dissociation  (HCD) triggered electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD), we were able to map, to our knowledge, the most comprehensive human milk N-glycoproteome to date. We found 1697 glycopeptides from 110 glycoproteins and 191 glycosites of which 43 novel sites were not yet reported in experimental evidence. We next quantified the glycopeptides in targeted monitoring mode with scheduled selective ion monitoring (SIM) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Co-trending HCD fragment ions enabled us to pinpoint the MS1 extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) of intact glycopeptide. In a 90 min gradient, we could measure 318 glycopeptides from 51 glycoproteins, catching at least 10 data points in their chromatographic peaks. We observed distinctive quantitative site-specific glycosylation trends, indicating the potential of specific temporal changes associated with functions that support the developing infant’s health.

### Sample Protocol
For each time-point, an aliquot of 200 μL of a thawed whole milk sample was centrifuged at 1000g for 1 h at 4 °C and the upper-fat layer was discarded. The lower skimmed milk was further ultracentrifuged at 150000g for 1 h at 4 °C to remove the insoluble pellet and the supernatant milk serum was kept.  The protein concentration was estimated by measuring absorbance at 280nm on a Nanodrop (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Scientific).  Up to a final concentration of 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 30 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) were added to the milk serum. Trypsin and Lys-C were added to a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio (w/w), respectively. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. The next day SDC was removed with acid precipitation (0.5% trifluoroacetic acid) (TFA) and the final peptide concentration was estimated by measuring absorbance at 280nm on a Nanodrop (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Scientific)[16].  The peptides were desalted by Oasis PRiME HLB plate then dried and stored at -80 °C.  Automated HILIC enrichment HILIC enrichment was automatically performed with technical triplicates for each milk serum sample in the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent technologies) coupled with HILIC-based cartridges (GlykoPrep® APTS Cleanup Module, ProZyme, CA). HILIC-based columns were first washed with 50 µL of 1% FA and equilibrated with 50 µL of loading buffer (80% ACN/0.5% TFA). Tryptic peptides (150 µg) were reconstituted with 50 µL of loading buffer and loaded onto the column. The cartridges were washed with 50 μL of loading buffer, and the glycopeptides were step eluted with 75% ACN/0.5% TFA,  70% ACN/0.5% TFA, 65% ACN/0.5% TFA and 0.5% FA. Samples were dried down and stored in −80 °C until subjected to LC-MS/MS. Milk Proteome Analysis For milk proteome, 800 ng of the mixture of tryptic peptides was analyzed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) coupled on-line to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first trapped by using a 100 μm inner diameter 2 cm trap column  (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm) (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) coupled to a 50 m inner diameter 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm) (Agilent Technologies, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in ACN. Trapping was performed at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 5 min with 0% B and peptides were eluted using a passively split flow of 300 nl/min for 170 min with 10% to 36% B over 155 min, 36% to 100% B over 3 min, 100% B for 1 min, 100% to 0% B over 1 min, and finally held at 0% B for 10 min. Peptides were ionized using 2.0 kV spray voltage and a capillary temperature of 320°C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (375-1600 m/z) for a maximum injection time of 50 ms at a mass resolution of 60,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. Up to 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). HCD MS/MS (375-1600 m/z) acquisition was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 (isolation window of 1.4 Th) and an AGC target value of 1e5 or a maximum injection time of 50 ms with a normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Raw shotgun LC-MS/MS data files were searched by processing workflow in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.1) against the Swiss-Prot database (release date: Feb 2017, 20 172 entries, taxonomy: Homo sapiens) with fixed Cys carbamidomethylation and variable Met oxidation of peptides. Trypsin was chosen for cleavage specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da followed by data filtering using Percolator, resulting in a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only peptide to spectrum matches (PSMs) with Mascot scores > 20 were accepted. The search result was then used as a focused database for the identification of glycopeptides (1259 entries). For label-free quantification, the node called minora feature detector was used with high PSM confidence, a minimum 5 non-zero points in a chromatographic trace, a minimum number of 2 isotopes and maximum retention time difference of 0.2 min for isotope peaks. Consensus workflow in Proteome Discoverer was used to open the search results and enable retention time (RT) alignment with a maximum RT shift of 5 min and mass tolerance of 10 ppm in order to match the precursor between runs. Label-free quantification of peptides was represented using the intensities of the XIC. Protein intensity was determined by the average intensity of unique peptides. Protein abundance was estimated by taking the proportion of the protein intensity for each protein to the total protein intensity. To relatively compare the proportional change in each time point, protein abundance of week 1 was defined as the baseline, giving the adjustment factor of 1. Other adjustment factors of protein in other weeks were calculated using their abundances dividing by the one in week 1.All the raw files for glycopeptide identification including reference samples were processed in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) using the Byonic node (Protein Metrics Inc, ver 3.2.0) searching against focused milk protein database (1259 entries) obtained in shotgun milk proteome with the following search parameters: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragmentation type, both HCD & EThcD; fragment mass tolerance, 20 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification; variable modifications: methionine oxidation. For glycan analysis we used the Byonic database of 182 glycans with no multiple fucose, whereby we added manually several reported glycan compositions with multiple fucoses (Supplementary Table S1).  Maximum number of precursors per scan as one and set FDR as 1%. Only PSMs matched to EThcD spectra, non-negligible error probabilities (|log Prob|>4.0) and Byonic score >=200 were accepted. MS1 feature of high confident PSMs was captured by the node called minora feature detector and precursor was matched between runs by enabling retention time (RT) alignment with a maximum RT shift of 5 min and mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-glycosylation on human milk proteins assists in protecting an infant's health and functions among others as competitive inhibitors of pathogen binding and immunomodulators. Due to the individual uniqueness of each mother's milk and the overall complexity and temporal changes of protein N-glycosylation, analysis of the human milk <i>N</i>-glycoproteome requires longitudinal personalized approaches, providing protein- and N-site-specific quantitative information. Here, we describe an automated platform using hydrophilic-interaction chromatography (HILIC)-based cartridges enabling the proteome-wide monitoring of intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides using just a digest of 150 &#x3bc;g of breast milk protein. We were able to map around 1700 glycopeptides from 110 glycoproteins covering 191 glycosites, of which 43 sites have not been previously reported with experimental evidence. We next quantified 287 of these glycopeptides originating from 50 glycoproteins using a targeted proteomics approach. Although each glycoprotein, N-glycosylation site, and attached glycan revealed distinct dynamic changes, we did observe a few general trends. For instance, fucosylation, especially terminal fucosylation, increased across the lactation period. Building on the improved glycoproteomics approach outlined above, future studies are warranted to reveal the potential impact of the observed glycosylation microheterogeneity on the healthy development of infants.

### Keywords
Hilic, Glycoproteomics, Human milk, Parallel reaction monitoring, Glycosylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands ( lab head )
Utrecht University

### Submitter
yuhsien lin

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands ( lab head )


