### Accession
PXD003811

### Title
SILAC-Based Proteomics of Primary Human Kidney Cells treated with Sex Hormones.

### Description
Male sex predispose to many kidney diseases. Considering that androgens exert deleterious effects in a variety of cell types within kidney, we hypothesized that dihydrotestosterone (DHT) would impair the biology of the renal tubular cell by inducing changes in the proteome. We employed stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) in an indirect spike-in fashion to accurately quantify the proteome in DHT- and 17β-estradiol (EST)-treated human proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTEC), in 4 different experiments. Of the 5043 quantified proteins, 76 were differentially regulated. Biological processes related to energy metabolism were significantly enriched among DHT-regulated proteins. SILAC ratios of 3 candidates representing glycolysis, N-acetylglucosamine metabolism and fatty acid β-oxidation, namely glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), glucosamine-6-phosphate-N-acetyltransferase 1 (GNPNAT1) and mitochondrial trifunctional protein subunit alpha (HADHA), were verified in vitro. In vivo, renal GPI and HADHA protein expression was increased in males. Furthermore, male sex was associated to higher GPI, GNPNAT1 and HADHA protein expression in diabetic Akita mice.  Functional group enrichment analysis revealed a link between our DHT-regulated proteins and glycosphingolipid metabolism within the male kidney. This is the most in depth quantitative proteomic study of human primary PTEC response to sex hormone treatment. In this study we open new perspectives on how to explore the molecular mechanisms responsible for the deleterious effects of androgens in the context of kidney disease, especially diabetic nephropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from treated PTEC (light) and labeled HK-2 cells (heavy) were thawed on ice, resuspended in 200 microliters of 0.1% w/v acid-labile detergent RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, vortexed, and sonicated three times for 30 s. All lysates were centrifuged for 20 min at 15,000 rpm at 4 °C. Total protein concentration was measured using a Coomassie (Bradford) protein assay reagent (Pierce). 150 micrograms of protein from heavy HK-2 cells were spiked to 150 micrograms of each sample from light treated PTEC (1:1 mixing ratio). Proteins in detergent solution were denatured at 60°C, and the disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol. Following reduction, the samples were alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison WI). A trypsin/total protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) was used. After digestion, RapiGest SF detergent was cleaved with trifluoroacetic acid, 1% (v/v) final concentration, and samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 15,000 rpm at 4 °C. Upon removal of Rapigest, tryptic peptides were diluted to 500l with strong cationic exchange (SCX) mobile phase A (0.26 M formic acid in 5% v/v acetonitrile; pH2) and loaded directly onto a 500l loop connected to a PolySULFOETHYL A column (2.1-mm inner diameter x 200mm, 5µm, 200 Å, The Nest Group Inc.). The SCX chromatography and fractionation were performed on an HPLC system (Agilent 1100) using a 60 min two-step gradient. An elution buffer that contained all components of mobile phase A with the addition of 1M ammonium formate was introduced at 10min and increased to 20% at 30 min and then to 100% at 45min. Fractions were collected every 3min from the 20min time point onward. The resulting 10 fractions (600l each) corresponding to chromatographic peaks of eluting peptides were collected. Peptides in each fraction were identified by LC-MS/MS as described previously. Briefly, peptides were extracted with OMIX C18 MB tips (Agilent Technologies, Lake Forest,CA), eluted in 3l of 65% v/v acetonitrile, diluted to 41l with 0.1% v/v formic acid in pure water, and loaded onto a 3.3cm C18 pre-analytical column (IntegraFrit capillary, New Objective; inner diameter of 150 m; 5 μm bead size; Agilent Pursuit C18, Agilent Technologiest). Eluted peptides from the pre-analytical column were loaded onto a resolving analytical column with dimensions 15 cm x 75 μm ID (PicoTip emitter, 8 μm tip, New Objective Agilent Pursuit C18, 3 μm bead size). The trap and analytical columns were operated on the EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), and this liquid chromatography setup was coupled on line to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a nano-ESI source (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Each fraction was run using a 60min gradient, and analyzed in a data-dependent mode in which a full MS1 scan acquisition from 400 – 1500 m/z with resolution 70,000 was acquired. This was followed by MS2 scan acquisition of the top 12 parent ions with resolution 17,500. The following parameters were enabled: monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening, and dynamic exclusion (enabled for 45s), MS1 target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms, MS2 target value of 5e4 with maximum IT of 50 ms, isolation window of 1.6 Da, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, peptide match set to preferred, underfill ratio set to 2% (underfill ratio of 2e4), exclude isotopes set to ON. In addition, charge states of +1, >4, and unassigned charge states were not subjected to MS2 fragmentation. For protein identification and data analysis, Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63; Thermo Fisher) was utilized to generate RAW files of each MS run.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 38 and searched with Andromeda search engine 39 against the human UniProt database (release 01_07_2015, 89649 entries). The raw files from all biological replicates were analyzed simultaneously with MaxQuant. To assess the false-positive rate, a reverse hit database was created by MaxQuant. The false discovery rates at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. First search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm against a small ‘human-first-search’ database for the purpose of mass recalibration and for main search precursor ion mass deviation of 4.5ppm was allowed, while fragment mass deviation of 20ppm was used. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Searches were performed with fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine and proline residues, and N-terminal acetylation. Multiplicity of 2 was used, selecting Arg (+6 Da) and Lys (+8 Da) as heavy labels. Re-quantification and matching between runs was selected. Protein was identified with a minimum of one unique peptide. Quantification was performed using unmodified unique and razor peptides and a minimum of one counted ratio. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Only proteins identified with at least one peptide uniquely assigned to the respective sequence were considered for the analysis. The distributions of all Log2 transformed H/L and H/L normalized ratios were normal, thus the H/L normalized ratios of biological replicates were used to calculate DHT/CONT and EST/CONT ratios. These ratios express the fold change between 2 different conditions and were calculated in all four experiments. Significance A of DHT/CONT and EST/CONT ratios was calculated for all the quantified proteins. A protein was considered to be significantly differentially regulated if its ratio was significant by significance A with p<0.01 in at least 2 experiments. Proteins were eliminated if their ratios in the other 2 experiments showed significant changes in the opposite direction, defined as ≥2 fold change in the opposite direction, or change in the opposite direction with p<0.05. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide with two or more ratio counts were further pursued. In addition, if ratios of proteotypic (unique) peptides of the same protein were changing in opposite directions, these proteins were also discarded for the validation studies. A total of 76 proteins were found to be differentially regulated in at least one of the three comparisons. The corresponding gene IDs of the 76 sex hormone-regulated proteins were used to perform the gene ontology enrichment analyses using BiNGO plugin in Cytoscape software (version 3.2.1) 44, 45. For the statistical analyses in BiNGO, hypergeometric test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used and corrected p < 0.05 was considered significant. In addition, Enrichment Map plugin, was used to assess the significantly enriched functional categories among our DHT-regulated proteins and other previous data sets reflecting the effect of diabetes 46 on kidney transcriptome. These data sets were publically available in GEO and Nephromine online platforms. Hypergeometric test with FDR=0.05 and Jaccard coefficient cutoff = 0.25 was set to build the enrichment map. Hypergeometric test cutoff of 0.05 was set for post-analysis involving comparison of our dataset with the diabetic transcriptional data set above.  The corresponding gene IDs of the 76 sex hormone-regulated proteins were used to perform the gene ontology enrichment analyses using BiNGO plugin in Cytoscape software (version 3.2.1). For the statistical analyses in BiNGO, hypergeometric test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used and corrected p < 0.05 was considered significant. In addition, Enrichment Map plugin, was used to assess the significantly enriched functional categories among our DHT-regulated proteins and other previous data sets reflecting the effect of diabetes on kidney transcriptome. These data sets were publically available in GEO and Nephromine online platforms. Hypergeometric test with FDR=0.05 and Jaccard coefficient cutoff = 0.25 was set to build the enrichment map. Hypergeometric test cutoff of 0.05 was set for post-analysis involving comparison of our dataset with the diabetic transcriptional data set above.

### Publication Abstract
Male sex predisposes to many kidney diseases. Considering that androgens exert deleterious effects in a variety of cell types within the kidney, we hypothesized that dihydrotestosterone (DHT) would alter the biology of the renal tubular cell by inducing changes in the proteome. We employed stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) in an indirect spike-in fashion to accurately quantify the proteome in DHT- and 17&#x3b2;-estradiol (EST)-treated human proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTEC). Of the 5043 quantified proteins, 76 were differentially regulated. Biological processes related to energy metabolism were significantly enriched among DHT-regulated proteins. SILAC ratios of 3 candidates representing glycolysis, N-acetylglucosamine metabolism and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation, namely glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), glucosamine-6-phosphate-N-acetyltransferase 1 (GNPNAT1), and mitochondrial trifunctional protein subunit alpha (HADHA), were verified <i>in vitro. In vivo</i>, renal GPI and HADHA protein expression was significantly increased in males. Furthermore, male sex was associated with significantly higher GPI, GNPNAT1, and HADHA kidney protein expression in two different murine models of diabetes. Enrichment analysis revealed a link between our DHT-regulated proteins and oxidative stress within the diabetic kidney. This finding was validated <i>in vivo</i>, as we observed increased oxidative stress levels in control and diabetic male kidneys, compared with females. This in depth quantitative proteomics study of human primary PTEC response to sex hormone administration suggests that male sex hormone stimulation results in perturbed energy metabolism in kidney cells, and that this perturbation results in increased oxidative stress in the renal cortex. The proteome-level changes associated with androgens may play a crucial role in the development of structural and functional changes in the diseased kidney. With our findings, we propose a possible link between diabetic and non-diabetic kidney disease progression and male sex hormone levels. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) with identifier PXD003811.

### Keywords
Sex hormones, Proteomics, Silac, Kidney cells

### Affiliations
Toronto General Hospital
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Sergi Clotet

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Konvalinka
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada


