### Accession
PXD005936

### Title
Antibody validation in estrogen receptor beta research

### Description
Three antibodies targeting estrogen receptor beta were evaluated with respect to their specificity towards the target protein, by immunoprecipitation followed by LC-Orbitrap MS.

### Sample Protocol
SDS PAGE, in-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as described by Sundberg et al. (Biochem Biophys Rep 3, 68–75 (2015)). Gel bands corresponding to 50-80 kDa, including the molecular weights of ERα and ERβ, were collected for analysis. Additional bands, seen in WB or SDS PAGE were also cut out, for identification of proteins detected by the examined antibodies. An Easy-nLC II system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for the on-line nano-LC separation. The peptides were separated applying a 90 min gradient, and thereafter electrosprayed on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ETD mass spectrometer operating in data dependent MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
. Data analysis was performed in Proteome Discoverer, version 1.4.1.14 (ThermoFischer Scientific). Gene ontology (GO) (www.geneontology.org) annotation was obtained with the support of the Proteome Discoverer software. The searches were performed against the Uniprot human fasta library downloaded from www.uniprot.org (2013-12-02) applying Sequest HT in combination with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap ms, Ip-ms, Estrogen receptor beta, Antibody validation

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics Dept of Chemistry–BMC, Analytical Chemistry Box 599 751 23 Uppsala

### Submitter
Margareta Ramstrom

### Lab Head
Dr Margareta Ramström
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics Dept of Chemistry–BMC, Analytical Chemistry Box 599 751 23 Uppsala


