### Accession
PXD002889

### Title
Stage-specific proteomes from Onchocerca ochengi, sister species of the human river blindness parasite, uncovers adaptations to a nodular lifestyle

### Description
In spite of 40 years of control efforts, onchocerciasis (river blindness) remains one of the most important neglected tropical diseases, with 17 million people affected. The aetiological agent, Onchocerca volvulus, is a filarial nematode with a complex lifecycle involving several distinct stages in the definitive host and blackfly vector. The challenges of obtaining sufficient material have prevented high-throughput studies and the development of novel strategies for disease control and diagnosis. Here, we utilise the closest relative of O. volvulus, the bovine parasite Onchocerca ochengi, to compare stage-specific proteomes and host-parasite interactions within the secretome. We identified a total of 4,260 unique O. ochengi proteins from adult males and females, infective larvae, intrauterine microfilariae, and fluid from intradermal nodules. In addition, 135 proteins were detected from the obligate Wolbachia symbiont. Observed protein families that were enriched in all whole body extracts relative to the complete search database included immunoglobulin-domain proteins, whereas redox and detoxification enzymes and proteins involved in intracellular transport displayed stage-specific overrepresentation. Unexpectedly, the larval stages exhibited enrichment for several mitochondrial-related protein families, including members of peptidase family M16 and proteins which mediate mitochondrial fission and fusion. Quantification of proteins across the lifecycle using the Hi 3 approach supported these qualitative analyses. In nodule fluid, we identified 94 O. ochengi secreted proteins, including two homologs of transforming growth factor  and a second member of a novel 6 ShK toxin domain family, which was originally identified from a model filarial nematode (Litomosoides sigmodontis). Strikingly, the 498 bovine proteins identified in nodule fluid were strongly dominated by antimicrobial proteins, especially cathelicidins. This first high-throughput analysis of an Onchocerca spp. proteome highlights its profound complexity and emphasises the extremely close relationship between O. ochengi and O. volvulus. The insights provided here provide new candidates for vaccine development, drug targeting and diagnostic biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Soluble nematode whole body extracts (WBE) were prepared by adding pooled material for each O. ochengi life stage to fresh lysis buffer [40 mM Tris, 6 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 66 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma), complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] and a 1:1 mixture of 1 mm glass and 0.1 mm zirconia-silica beads. Sample were homogenised using a Mini-Beadbeater (Biospec) for four, 1-min cycles at top speed (with 2-min rest periods on ice between cycles). Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min (4°C), and both pellet and the supernatant retained. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific).  GeLC MS  Proteins were fractionated using a NuPAGE® (Life Technologies) precast 4-12% Tris-Bis gradient gel. Each gel lane was cut into 20 slices and in-gel tryptic digestions peformed as described by Darby et al (2012)   Tryptic digestion Soluble proteins (100 µg) were precipitated by addition of an equal volume of ice-cold 30 % (w/v) TCA in acetone with incubation at  20°C for 2 hr. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min (4°C) to pellet proteins. Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold acetone and allowed to air dry. Protein pellets were re-suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters). Insoluble material from the initial worm homogenisation step was washed three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest SF. The NF samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min (4°C) and the supernatant retained. The NF protein concentration was determined as described above, and the sample was diluted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest SF. All protein samples were digested with trypsin as described by Armstrong et al (2014).   Anion exchange fractionation Peptides were fractionated by strong AEX chromatography into four fractions using a method described previously   NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptide solutions were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) MS as previously (Armstrong et al 2014) The gradient consisted of 3 - 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 45 min (in-gel digests) or 150 min (non-fractionated soluble and insoluble digests), then a ramp of 40 - 85% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 3 min in positive ionisation mode. Anion exchange peptide samples were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 50 cm Easy-Spray column with an internal diameter of 75 µm, packed with 2 µm C18 particles, fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C. Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 5 – 50 % buffer B over 240 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2, +3 and/or +4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100 ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1e6 for survey scans and 1e4 for the MS/MS scans. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics), and processed as described previously (Armstrong et al 2014). Tandem MS data were searched against 13,991 partially revised Onchocerca gene models and those from the Wolbachia symbiont, wOo  (Uniprot release 2014_03; 647 protein sequences); together with predicted proteomes for the bovine host (Bos taurus, Uniprot release 2014_02; 24,233 protein sequences) and a general contaminant database (GPMDB, cRAP version 2012.01.01; 115 protein sequences). The search parameters were a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 or 0.01 Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further validated using the machine learning algorithm Percolator embedded within Mascot. The Mascot decoy database function was utilised and the false discovery rate was <1%, while individual percolator ion scores >13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05). Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as XML files. Relative protein abundance was calculated by the Hi-3 default method in Progenesis. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides and were present in at least 3 replicate analyses per stage were used for protein abundance comparisons. Protein abundance was normalised across samples by average intensity utilising the Normalyzer software package. Dirofilaria immitis ESP spectral data was searched against the D. immitis theoretical proteome (http://parasite.wormbase.org/Dirofilaria_immitis_prjeb1797/Info/Index; 12,857 protein sequences) using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine with settings as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Despite 40 years of control efforts, onchocerciasis (river blindness) remains one of the most important neglected tropical diseases, with 17 million people affected. The etiological agent, Onchocerca volvulus, is a filarial nematode with a complex lifecycle involving several distinct stages in the definitive host and blackfly vector. The challenges of obtaining sufficient material have prevented high-throughput studies and the development of novel strategies for disease control and diagnosis. Here, we utilize the closest relative of O. volvulus, the bovine parasite Onchocerca ochengi, to compare stage-specific proteomes and host-parasite interactions within the secretome. We identified a total of 4260 unique O. ochengi proteins from adult males and females, infective larvae, intrauterine microfilariae, and fluid from intradermal nodules. In addition, 135 proteins were detected from the obligate Wolbachia symbiont. Observed protein families that were enriched in all whole body extracts relative to the complete search database included immunoglobulin-domain proteins, whereas redox and detoxification enzymes and proteins involved in intracellular transport displayed stage-specific overrepresentation. Unexpectedly, the larval stages exhibited enrichment for several mitochondrial-related protein families, including members of peptidase family M16 and proteins which mediate mitochondrial fission and fusion. Quantification of proteins across the lifecycle using the Hi-3 approach supported these qualitative analyses. In nodule fluid, we identified 94 O. ochengi secreted proteins, including homologs of transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; and a second member of a novel 6-ShK toxin domain family, which was originally described from a model filarial nematode (Litomosoides sigmodontis). Strikingly, the 498 bovine proteins identified in nodule fluid were strongly dominated by antimicrobial proteins, especially cathelicidins. This first high-throughput analysis of an Onchocerca spp. proteome across the lifecycle highlights its profound complexity and emphasizes the extremely close relationship between O. ochengi and O. volvulus The insights presented here provide new candidates for vaccine development, drug targeting and diagnostic biomarkers.

### Keywords
River blindness, Lc-msms, Onchocerca ochengi

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,  University of Liverpool. Liverpool,  UK.
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,  University of Liverpool. Liverpool,  UK.


