### Accession
PXD035504

### Title
A discovery-based proteomics approach identifies protein disulfide isomerase (PDIA1) as a biomarker of β cell stress in type 1 diabetes

### Description
Background: Activation of stress pathways intrinsic to the β cell are thought to both accelerate β cell death and increase β cell immunogenicity in type 1 diabetes (T1D). However, information on the timing and scope of these responses is lacking.   Methods: To identify temporal and disease-related changes in islet β cell protein expression, SWATH-MS/MS proteomics analysis was performed on islets collected longitudinally from NOD mice and NOD-SCID mice rendered diabetic through T cell adoptive transfer.   Findings: In islets collected from female NOD mice at 10, 12, and 14 weeks of age, we found a time-restricted upregulation of proteins involved in the maintenance of β cell function and stress mitigation, followed by loss of expression of protective proteins that heralded diabetes onset. Pathway analysis identified EIF2 signaling and the unfolded protein response, mTOR signaling, mitochondrial function, and oxidative phosphorylation as commonly modulated pathways in both diabetic NOD mice and NOD-SCID mice rendered acutely diabetic by adoptive transfer, highlighting this core set of pathways in T1D pathogenesis. In immunofluorescence validation studies, β cell expression of protein disulfide isomerase A1 (PDIA1) and 14-3-3b were found to be increased during disease progression in NOD islets, while PDIA1 plasma levels were increased in pre-diabetic NOD mice and in the serum of children with recent-onset T1D compared to age and sex-matched non-diabetic controls. Interpretation: We identified a common and core set of modulated pathways across distinct mouse models of T1D and identified PDIA1 as a potential human biomarker of β cell stress in T1D.

### Sample Protocol
Islet pellets were lysed and denatured by adding 48 mg of urea to ~100 μL of pelleted cells. Lysates were ultrasonicated with 5 successive 10s pulses to ensure complete lysis and to shear DNA. Protein content was measured by BCA assay, (Pierce) and 50 μg of protein was transferred to a 1.5-mL tube and the volume was adjusted to 250 μL using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Sample were subsequently reduced with 25 mM of freshly prepared tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 37°C for 40 min, alkylated with 10 mM of freshly prepared iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in the dark, and diluted to 800 μL with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The pH of the sample was adjusted to 8.0, and digested using a 50:1 ratio of protein:trypsin (Sequence grade, Promega) at 37°C overnight in the presence of 10% acetonitrile with constant agitation, using trypsin at a 50:1 ratio. The digest was then acidified with 10% Formic Acid (pH 2-3), desalted on a 96-well microelution plate(Oasis HLA, Waters), and dried before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide library generation: Individually acquired DIA files were processed using the Signal Extraction module of the DIA-Umpire software tool (DIAu-SE). A protein sequence database was built by concatenating the target SwissProt mouse proteome database (canonical sequences), Biognosys iRT peptides for retention time alignment (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland), and a random decoy sequence database with the same size as the target database for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation. Pseudospectra generated in the DIAu-SE step were then searched against the concatenated database for peptide identification. Identified peptides filtered with a 1% peptide-level FDR  were used for library generation.  Quantitation of individual specimen DIA-MS files: Raw intensity data for peptide fragments were extracted from DIA files using the open-source openSWATH workflow against the sample-specific peptide spectral library described above. Briefly, peptide assay peak groups were extracted from raw DIA files and scored against the peptide- and a decoy- spectral libraries with the same size based on a composite of 11 data-quality subscores.  Target peptides with a 1% FDR were included for downstream analyses. Curating files for quality: All files were individually curated prior to protein-level roll-up and subsequent quantitation. The following parameters were considered: total ion chromatogram profile and intensity, file quality within the library build (Q1, Q2, Q3 data distribution from DIAumpire ), and raw distribution of proteins compared to decoys derived in openSWATH. Files exhibiting aberrant or low-quality results for any of these parameters were excluded from subsequent analysis steps. All steps were performed while blinded to filenames or experimental group. Data normalization, protein-level roll-up, and statistical analyses: The total ion current associated with the MS2 signal across the chromatogram was calculated for normalization, excluding the last 15 min to avoid including the signal from contaminants/noise.  This ‘MS2 signal’ of each file, akin to a total protein load stain on a Western blot gel, was used to adjust each transition intensity of each peptide in the corresponding file.  Normalized transition-level data were then processed using mapDIA software to remove noisy/interference transitions from the peptide peak groups, calculate peptide and protein level intensities, and perform pairwise comparisons between groups.  The following pairwise comparisons were made: NOD vs. CD1 for each time point (weeks 10, 12, and 14); NOD-BDC2.5 vs. NOD-SCID ctrl; NOD resistant vs. NOD mice with diabetes. The mapDIA tool generated a q-value to indicate an FDR rather than a simple p-value. We assumed that protein expression differs significantly between two groups when the log2(fold-change) was >0.6 (i.e., ~1.5 fold-change) and q-value/FDR was <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Β cell stress, Type 1 diabetes, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Protein disulfide isomerase a1

### Affiliations
Cedars Sinai Medical Center
Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Niveda Sundararaman

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


