### Accession
PXD024162

### Title
Thymosin 4 protects against aortic aneurysm via endocytic regulation of growth factor signalling

### Description
Vascular stability and tone are maintained by contractile smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). However, injury-induced growth factors stimulate a contractile-synthetic phenotypic modulation which increases susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). As a regulator of embryonic VSMC differentiation, we hypothesised that Thymosin β4 (Tβ4) may function to maintain healthy vasculature throughout postnatal life. This was supported by the identification of an interaction with Low density lipoprotein receptor related protein 1 (LRP1), an endocytic regulator of PDGF-BB signalling and VSMC proliferation. LRP1 variants have been implicated by genome-wide association studies with risk of AAA and other arterial diseases. T4-null mice displayed aortic VSMC and elastin defects, phenocopying LRP1 mutants, and their compromised vascular integrity predisposed to Angiotensin II-induced aneurysm formation. Aneurysmal vessels were characterised by enhanced VSMC phenotypic modulation and augmented platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor (PDGFR)β signalling. In vitro, enhanced sensitivity to PDGF-BB, upon loss of Tβ4, associated with dysregulated endocytosis, with increased recycling and reduced lysosomal targeting of LRP1-PDGFRβ. Accordingly, the exacerbated aneurysmal phenotype in T4-null mice was rescued upon treatment with the PDGFRβ antagonist, Imatinib. Our study identifies Tβ4 as a key regulator of LRP1 for maintaining vascular health and provides insights into the mechanisms of growth factor-controlled VSMC phenotypic modulation underlying aortic disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
SAMPLE PREP BEAD DIGESTION: beads were denatured in 200ul 8  M urea /100 mM TEAB for 30 min at RT, Reduction performed with 10 mM TCEP for 30min at RT, Alkylation performed with 50 mM Iodoacetamide for 30min at RT, 8 M urea was diluted down to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM TEAB, Digestion performed with 1 ug trypsin at 37C over night, C18 de-salting step was performed, samples were speedvaced to dryness, re-suspension of samples in 20 ul 5% DMSO and 5% formic acid.  MASS SPECTROMETRY METHOD: Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and 5% DMSO and then trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (5µm, 0.1 x 20mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid in water) at a pressure of 60 bar and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were separated on an EASY-SPRAY RSLC C18 column (2UM, 50CM X 75UM ,100 Å, Thermo Fischer Scientific ) and then electrosprayed directly into an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a linear gradient (length: 60 minutes, 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), flow rate: 250 nL/min). The raw data was acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1800 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms). After the MS scans, the 15 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 28% of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 128 ms) with first fixed mass at 100 m/z. 

### Data Protocol
The  raw  data  files  generated  were  processed  using  MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43),  integrated  with the  Andromeda  search  engine  as  previously  described.16,17  For  protein  groups identification, peak lists were searched against human database (UPR_Homo sapiens_9606_UP000005640) as well as list  of  common  contaminants  by  Andromeda.  Trypsin  with  a  maximum  number  of  missed  cleavages of  2  was  chosen. Deamidation (N,Q) and Oxidation  (M) were  used  as  variable modifications  while  Carbamidomethylation  (C)  was  set  as  a  fixed  modification.  Protein  and PSM false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.01. Match between runs was applied.      (16)  Cox, J.; Mann, M. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.  (17)  Cox, J.; Neuhauser, N.; Michalski, A.; Scheltema, R. A.; Olsen, J. V.; Mann, M. J.  Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 1794.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular stability and tone are maintained by contractile smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). However, injury-induced growth factors stimulate a contractile-synthetic phenotypic modulation which increases susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). As a regulator of embryonic VSMC differentiation, we hypothesized that Thymosin &#x3b2;4 (T&#x3b2;4) may function to maintain healthy vasculature throughout postnatal life. This was supported by the identification of an interaction with low density lipoprotein receptor related protein 1 (LRP1), an endocytic regulator of platelet-derived growth factor BB (PDGF-BB) signaling and VSMC proliferation. LRP1 variants have been implicated by genome-wide association studies with risk of AAA and other arterial diseases. T&#x3b2;4-null mice displayed aortic VSMC and elastin defects that phenocopy those of LRP1 mutants, and their compromised vascular integrity predisposed them to Angiotensin II-induced aneurysm formation. Aneurysmal vessels were characterized by enhanced VSMC phenotypic modulation and augmented PDGFR-&#x3b2; signaling. In vitro, enhanced sensitivity to PDGF-BB upon loss of T&#x3b2;4 was associated with dysregulated endocytosis, with increased recycling and reduced lysosomal targeting of LRP1-PDGFR-&#x3b2;. Accordingly, the exacerbated aneurysmal phenotype in T&#x3b2;4-null mice was rescued upon treatment with the PDGFR-&#x3b2; antagonist Imatinib. Our study identifies T&#x3b2;4 as a key regulator of LRP1 for maintaining vascular health, and provides insights into the mechanisms of growth factor-controlled VSMC phenotypic modulation underlying aortic disease progression.

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Thymosin β4, Abdominal aortic aneurysm, Smooth muscle cells, Lrp1lrp1, Vascular stability, Pdgfr)β signalling

### Affiliations
Nuffield Department of Medicine
University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Centre for Medicines Discovery

### Submitter
Svenja Hester

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Roman Fischer
University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Centre for Medicines Discovery


