### Accession
PXD020539

### Title
Contribution of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) transcription factor XBP1 to brain aging

### Description
In this project we aimed to evaluate the contribution of endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor IRE1 and its downstream transcription factor XBP1s to mammalian brain aging. We compared traits associated to aging at behavioral, electrophysiological, morphological and proteomic levels. We used transgenic animals overexpressing XBP1s in brain tissue and also wild type animals injected with adeno-associated virus to overexpress XBP1s in the brain during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Following euthanasia, animals were perfused with ice-cold PBS trough the heart. After removing the brain, hippocampal tissue was quickly dissected and fast frozen in dry ice. Later, hippocampi were homogenized in PBS plus protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). For each sample, 20 μg of lysate was precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and diluted to final volume in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher) for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C with 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega). After digestion, the peptides from each sample were reacted for 1 h with the appropriate tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric reagent (Thermo Fisher) in 40% (v/v) anhydrous acetonitrile and quenched with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h. Samples with different TMT labels were pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated on a SpeedVac and debris removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 18,000g. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate 3000 nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). MudPIT experiments were performed by 10 μl sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) and a final step of 90% buffer C/10% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v) and each step followed by a gradient from buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to buffer B. Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.2 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with the following settings: eluted peptides were scanned from 300 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. The top 15 peaks for each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 38%, isolation window of 0.7 m/z, a resolution of 45,000, ACG target 1e5, maximum IT 60 ms, and scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher). Spectra were searched using SEQUEST against a UniProt mouse proteome database. The database was curated to remove redundant protein and splice-isoforms, and common contaminants were added. Searches were carried out using a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences using Percolator node for filtering and the following settings: 10 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 6 amino acid minimum peptide length, trypsin cleavage (maximum 2 missed cleavage events), static Cys modification of 57.021517 (carbamidomethylation), and static N-terminal and Lys modification of 229.1629 (TMT-sixplex), FDR 0.01, 2 peptide IDs per protein. Normalization of TMT reporter ion intensities was carried out based on total peptide abundance in each channel, and subsequently, TMT ratios for each identified protein were calculated in reference to a common pooled sample. Finally, the reference- normalized TMT intensities were compared between young WT and XBP1s Tg (n=4,4), middle aged WT and XBP1s Tg (n=3,4) and aged WT and XBP1s Tg (n=3 ,4) transduced samples and significance was assessed using a background based t-test in the Reporter Ions Quantifier node.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is a major risk factor to develop neurodegenerative diseases and is associated with decreased buffering capacity of the proteostasis network. We investigated the significance of the unfolded protein response (UPR), a major signaling pathway activated to cope with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, in the functional deterioration of the mammalian brain during aging. We report that genetic disruption of the ER stress sensor IRE1 accelerated age-related cognitive decline. In mouse models, overexpressing an active form of the UPR transcription factor XBP1 restored synaptic and cognitive function, in addition to reducing cell senescence. Proteomic profiling of hippocampal tissue showed that XBP1 expression significantly restore changes associated with aging, including factors involved in synaptic function and pathways linked to neurodegenerative diseases. The genes modified by XBP1 in the aged hippocampus where also altered. Collectively, our results demonstrate that strategies to manipulate the UPR in mammals may help sustain healthy brain aging.

### Keywords
Aging, Xbp1s, Unfolded protein response, Dementia

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Lars Plate

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Vanderbilt University


