### Accession
PXD022752

### Title
Proteome glioma cell lines LC-MS/MS

### Description
Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 (IDH1/2) define glioma subtypes and are 38 considered primary events in gliomagenesis, impacting tumor epigenetics and metabolism. 39 IDH enzymes are crucial for the generation of reducing potential, yet the impact of the mutation 40 on the cellular antioxidant system is not understood. Here, we investigate how glutathione 41 (GSH) levels are maintained in IDH1 mutant gliomas, despite an altered NADPH/NADP 42 balance. We find that IDH1 mutant astrocytomas specifically upregulate cystathionine γ-lyase 43 (CSE), the enzyme responsible for cysteine production upstream of GSH biosynthesis. Genetic 44 and chemical interference with CSE in patient-derived glioma cells carrying the endogenous 45 IDH1 mutation, sensitized tumor cells to cysteine depletion, an effect not observed in IDH1 46 wild-type gliomas. This correlated with reduced GSH synthesis as shown by in vitro and in vivo 47 serine tracing and led to delayed tumor growth in mice. Thus we show that IDH1 mutant 48 astrocytic gliomas critically rely on NADPH-independent de novo GSH synthesis to maintain 49 the antioxidant defense, which uncovers a novel metabolic vulnerability in this dismal disease.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analysis, 6 glioma patient derived cell lines were used: 3 IDH1wildtype (NCH644, NCH601, NCH421k) and 3 IDH1mutant (NCH1681, NCH551b and NCH612). Cells were extracted by two different preparation methods for a total of two replicates per cell line (except for NCH612 where only one replicate could be analysed). In the first preparation, proteins were extracted using methanol/chloroform and protein pellets were dissolved in 8M urea buffer, while in the 2nd preparation the cells were lysed with 1% sodium deoxycholate detergent.  Protein concentrations were determined by EZQ assay (Invitrogen, cat#R33200). Equal amounts of proteins were used for the analysis. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT followed by a two-step sequential protein digestion with Lys-C (Wako, cat#125-05061) for 3 h at 37°C, and trypsin (Promega, cat#V5111) at 37°C overnight. Tryptic peptides were desalted on C18 SPE (Sep Pak tC18, 25 mg, Waters) and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC chromatography system operated in column switching mode. Peptides were trapped on a 75 µm x 2 cm pre-column (C18 pepmap 100, 3 µm) and separated onto a 75 µm × 50 cm column (C18 pepmap 100, 2 µm) by a 240 min linear gradient starting from 2 % solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100 % acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with a survey scan acquired at a resolving power of 120,000 at 200m/z. The 12 most intense multiple-charged ions (z ≥ 2) were isolated and fragmented at normalized collision energy of 28 and the resulting fragment ions acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z. Fragmented precursors m/z were excluded for another fragmentation for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS files were analyzed in the MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software version 1.6.7.0. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the TrEMBL UniProt Homo sapiens (February 2019, 73,928 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. For protein quantification, label‐free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2 (Cox et al., 2014) with match between runs activated. The FDR cut-off for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%. Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus platform version 1.6.2.1 (Tyanova et al, 2016). Two‐sample Student's t‐test was used to determine the significantly changed proteins between IDH1wildtype and IDH1mutant cell lines with a permutation‐based FDR of 0.05 for multiple testing correction. Results were filtered to have both a significant FDR‐corrected P‐value and a minimum fold change of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Idh1mutant, Idh1wt, Glioma cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Biology Unit, Luxembourg Institute of Health,Luxembourg
Quantitative Biology Unit. Luxembourg Institute of Health


### Submitter
Elena Martinez Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Quantitative Biology Unit, Luxembourg Institute of Health,Luxembourg


