### Accession
PXD026042

### Title
Bone Diagenesis in Short Timescales: Insights from an Explor-atory Proteomic Analysis

### Description
The evaluation of bone diagenetic phenomena in archaeological timescales has a long history, however little is known about the origins of the microbes driving bone diagenesis and on the ex-tent of bone diagenesis on short timeframes such as in forensic contexts. Previously, the analysis of non-collagenous proteins (NCPs) through bottom-up proteomics revealed the presence of potential biomarkers useful to estimate the postmortem interval (PMI). However, there is still a great need for enhancing the understanding of the diagenetic processes taking place in forensic timeframes, and to clarify if proteomic analyses can help to develop better models for estimating PMI reliably. To address these knowledge gaps, we designed an experiment based on whole rat carcasses, defleshed rat long bones and excised but still fleshed rat limbs that were either buried in soil or exposed on a clean plastic surface, left to decompose for 28 weeks and retrieved at different time intervals. This aimed to assess differences in bone protein relative abundances for the various deposition modalities and intervals. We further evaluated the effects that extrinsic factors, autol-ysis, and gut and soil bacteria had on bone diagenesis via bottom-up proteomics. Results showed six proteins whose abundance was significantly different between samples subjected to either mi-crobial decomposition (gut or soil bacteria) or to environmental factors. In particular, muscle and calcium-binding proteins were found to be more prone to degradation by bacterial attack where-as plasma and bone marrow proteins by the exposure to extrinsic agents. Results suggest that both gut and soil bacteria play a key role in bone diagenesis and protein decay on relatively short timescales and that bone proteomics is a proficient resource to identify microbially-driven versus extrinsically-driven diagenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted following the protocol proposed by Procopio and Buckley. Briefly, each bone fragment was put in a separated 1.5 mL tube and decalcified with 1 mL of 10% formic acid (Fisher Scientific UK) for six hours at 4°C. The acid soluble fraction was discarded, and the pellet was then treated with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (Sig-ma-Aldrich UK)/100 mM TRIS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific UK) with an adjusted pH of 7.4 for 18 hours at 4°C. The acid insoluble fraction was then exchanged with 50 mM ammonium acetate (Scientific Laboratories Supplies UK) using 10 kDa molecular-weight cut off filters (Vivaspin®500 from Sartorius, Germany) and the proteins were then reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Fluorochem, UK) for 40 min at room temperature, alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) for 45 min in the dark at room tem-perature and quenched adding 5 mM dithiothreitol. Proteins were digested using trypsin (Promega, UK) for five hours at 37°C and then frozen. 1 v/v% trifluoroacetic acid (Fluo-rochem, UK) was added to the samples prior to their desalting and purification to bring them to a final concentration of 0.1 v/v% trifluoroacetic acid. The purification was achieved using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies, UK) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were finally eluted into 100 µL of 50 v/v% acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK)/0.1v/v% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were then left in the fume cupboard with lids open to dry them completely at room temperature prior to their submission for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples resuspended in 5 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) nano LC system (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ reverse phase LC Column (500 mm x 75 µm diameter (i.d.), 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a gradient from 96 v/v% A (0.1 v/v% FA in 5 v/v% ACN) and 4 v/v% B (0.1 v/v% FA in 95 v/v% ACN) to 8 v/v%, 30 v/v% and 50% B at 14, 50, and 60 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column (5 mm x 0.3 mm i.d., 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Sci-entific) was used as trap column at a flow rate of 25 µL min-1 kept at 45 °C. The LC separation was followed by a cleaning cycle with an additional 15 min of column equi-libration time. Then, peptide ions were analysed in full scan MS scanning mode at 35,000 MS resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1e6, injection time of 200 ms and scan range of 375-1,400 m/z. The top ten most abundant ions were selected for da-ta-dependent MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy (NCE) level of 30 performed at 17,500 MS resolution with an AGC of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, with an underfilled ratio of 0.4%, dynamic exclusion was employed; thus, one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans in total) was ac-quired in a 45 s repeat duration with the precursor being excluded for the subsequent 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were then searched against the Swiss-Prot database using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; www.matrixscience.com) for matches to primary protein sequences, specifying the taxonomy filter as Rattus rattus. This search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine as it results from addition of DTT to proteins. In the light of our aims, deamidation (asparagine and glutamine) and oxidation (lysine, methionine and proline) were also considered as variable modifications. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. It was assumed that all spectra hold either 2+ or 3+ charged precursors.  Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.2; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) was used to identify the proteins and assess their relative abundance in each sample. The relative abundance of the proteins present in the samples is calculated by the software by measuring the peptide ion abundances as a result of the sum of the areas under the curve (AUC) for each peptide ion. The software normalizes each LC-MS/MS run against a ref-erence run automatically selected as the normalization reference, to consider and to correct systematic experimental variations that can occur between different runs. Then, it enables protein comparisons among different experimental conditions and the identification of protein expression changes. Peptide ions with a score of <23, which indicates identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05), were excluded from the analysis based on the Mascot evaluation of the peptide score distribution. To further increase the reliability of the obtained results, proteins with a peptide count of <2 were also excluded from further analysis.  STRING software (version 11.0) was used to visualize links among the identified proteins and to evaluate the significance of their interactions. The confidence score set for showing interactions was wet to “medium = 0.400”. Statistical analysis was carried out on arcsinh normalised data, in the same way in which the software Progenesis operates. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was per-formed on the normalized abundance values exported from Progenesis, using R software with the factoextra and ggplot2 packages, using proteins sorted by their ANOVA FDR adjusted p value (or “q value”), in order to exclude the ones that showed similar relative abundances across different conditions (and that did not contribute to cluster separations). Protein abundances were considered to have significantly contributed to the explanation of the variance between different group of samples when their ANOVA p < 0.05. For post-hoc analysis, Tukey HSD test was employed with significance set at p <0.05 for pairwise comparison.

### Publication Abstract
The evaluation of bone diagenetic phenomena in archaeological timescales has a long history; however, little is known about the origins of the microbes driving bone diagenesis, nor about the extent of bone diagenesis in short timeframes-such as in forensic contexts. Previously, the analysis of non-collagenous proteins (NCPs) through bottom-up proteomics revealed the presence of potential biomarkers useful in estimating the post-mortem interval (PMI). However, there is still a great need for enhancing the understanding of the diagenetic processes taking place in forensic timeframes, and to clarify whether proteomic analyses can help to develop better models for estimating PMI reliably. To address these knowledge gaps, we designed an experiment based on whole rat carcasses, defleshed long rat bones, and excised but still-fleshed rat limbs, which were either buried in soil or exposed on a clean plastic surface, left to decompose for 28 weeks, and retrieved at different time intervals. This study aimed to assess differences in bone protein relative abundances for the various deposition modalities and intervals. We further evaluated the effects that extrinsic factors, autolysis, and gut and soil bacteria had on bone diagenesis via bottom-up proteomics. Results showed six proteins whose abundance was significantly different between samples subjected to either microbial decomposition (gut or soil bacteria) or to environmental factors. In particular, muscle- and calcium-binding proteins were found to be more prone to degradation by bacterial attack, whereas plasma and bone marrow proteins were more susceptible to exposure to extrinsic agents. Our results suggest that both gut and soil bacteria play key roles in bone diagenesis and protein decay in relatively short timescales, and that bone proteomics is a proficient resource with which to identify microbially-driven versus extrinsically-driven diagenesis.

### Keywords
Taphonomy; bone proteomics; pmi; microbial decomposition; bioerosion

### Affiliations
Ellison Place, Northumbria University Newcastle, NE18ST, Newcastle upon Tyne (UK)
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Noemi Procopio
Ellison Place, Northumbria University Newcastle, NE18ST, Newcastle upon Tyne (UK)


