### Accession
PXD029691

### Title
Reprogramming of sorghum proteome in response to sugarcane aphid infestation

### Description
Sugarcane aphids (SCA; Melanaphis sacchari Zehntner) is a key piercing-sucking type pest of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) which cause significant yield losses. While feeding on host plants, complex signaling networks are invoked from recognition of insect attack to induction of plant defenses. Consequently, these signaling networks lead to the production of insecticidal compounds or limited access to nutrients to insects. Previously, several studies are published on the transcriptomics analysis of sorghum in response to SCA infestation, but no information is available on the physiological changes of sorghum at proteome level. We used SCA resistant sorghum genotype SC265 for the global proteomics analysis after 1 and 7 days of SCA infestation using TMT-plex technique.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from sorghum were extracted according to Zogli et al., (2020a) then redissolved in 8 M Urea, 0.1 M tris HCl, pH 7.6 containing 5 mM DTT and 1x complete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). 160 µg of each sample was reduced at 37°C for 2 h and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at RT in darkness), then quenched with an equimolar amount of DTT.  Samples were diluted to 4 M urea and digested with 3.2 µg Lys-C at 25°C for 8h. The urea was then diluted to 1 M and trypsin digestion carried out for 16 h. Digests were acidified with 20% TFA to pH 3, then desalted using 50mg Sep-Pak® C18 reverse-phase SPE columns (Waters Corp, Milford, MA). Eluted samples were dried down and redissolved in 100mM TEAB.  An additional sample mix of all 12 samples was made to act as a pooled channel (labeled with 126) between the two TMT sets.  Seven samples for each set were labeled using TMT-10-plex reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific). For each sample, 70 µg of desalted peptides was labeled with 400 µg of TMT 10-plex reagent. The samples were combined into 2 7plex (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C) experiments, acidified to 1% formic acid and desalted using 50mg Sep-Pak® C18 reverse-phase SPE columns (Waters Corp, Milford, MA). 200 µg of each set was sub-fractionated offline into 96 fractions using high pH reverse phase C18 chromatography (ACQUITY UPLC® BEH™ C18, 1.7µm, 2.1 x 100mm, Waters Corp) at pH 10.0 and then recombined to give a total of 12 fractions (Yang et al., 2012). Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples were first injected onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75µm x 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3.0 min at a flow rate of 5 µL/min, 1.5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid before switching in line with the main column. Separation was performed on a C18 nano column (Acquity UPLC® M-class, Peptide CSH™ 130A, 1.7µm 75µm x 250mm, Waters Corp) at 260 nL/min with a linear gradient from 5-35% over 96 min. The LC aqueous mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and the organic mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Mass spectra for the eluted peptides were acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 375–1500, resolution 120,000, AGC target 3 x 106, maximum injection time 60 ms for the MS1 peptide measurements. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired by HCD as a Top20 experiment with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 33%, AGC target set to 1 x 105, 45,000 resolution, intensity threshold 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was set at 45 sec and the isolation window set to 1.2 m/z to reduce co-isolation.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to Mascot 2.6.1, which searched the common contaminants database cRAP (116 entries, www.theGPM.org) and the SbicolorRT_2.1 database. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation were set as variable modifications, whilst TMT10plex (K) and TMT10plex (N-term) were specified as fixed modifications. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted and the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.06 Da, respectively. Peptides were validated by Percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. The data were searched using a decoy database to set the false discovery rate to 1% (high confidence). The protein quantification was processed in Proteome Discoverer with the co-isolation threshold set to 50% and the average S/N to 10. The peptides were quantified using the peak intensity of the reporter ion in the MS2 spectrum. The peak abundance was normalized for differences in sample loading using total peptide amount where the peptide group abundances are summed for each sample and the maximum sum across all runs is determined. The pooled sample was used to normalize each TMT experiment based on the same sample. The protein ratios, expressed as log2 fold change, are calculated as the median of all possible pairwise peptide ratios calculated between replicates for each sample. To compensate for missing values in some of the replicates, the low abundance resampling imputation mode was selected. The significance of differential expression is tested using a t-test, which provides P-values for all the calculated ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Sugarcane aphid (SCA; Melanaphis sacchari Zehntner) is a key piercing-sucking pest of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) that cause significant yield losses. While feeding on host plants, complex signaling networks are invoked from recognition of insect attack to induction of plant defenses. Consequently, these signaling networks lead to the production of insecticidal compounds or limited access of nutrients to insects. Previously, several studies were published on the transcriptomics analysis of sorghum in response to SCA infestation, but no information is available on the physiological changes of sorghum at the proteome level. We used the SCA resistant sorghum genotype SC265 for the global proteomics analysis after 1 and 7 days of SCA infestation using the TMT-plex technique. Peptides matching a total of 4211 proteins were identified and 158 proteins were differentially expressed at day 1 and 7. Overall, proteome profiling of SC265 after SCA infestation at days 1 and 7 revealed the suppression of plant defense-related proteins and upregulation of plant defense and signaling-related proteins, respectively. The plant defense responses based on proteome data were validated using electrical penetration graph (EPG) technique to observe changes in aphid feeding. Feeding behavior analyses revealed that SCA spent significantly longer time in phloem phase on SCA infested plants for day 1 and lesser time in day 7 SCA infested sorghum plants, compared to their respective control plants. Overall, our study provides insights into underlying mechanisms that contribute to sorghum resistance to SCA.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sorghum, Tmt, Sugarcane aphid

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, USA
University of Nebraska - Lincoln

### Submitter
Sophe Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Alvarez
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, USA


