### Accession
PXD001843

### Title
Protein Interactome of U2AF2 during T cell activation

### Description
T cell activation leads to dramatic changes in cellular phenotype.  We used activated human CD4 T cells to study how RNA binding proteins define the post-transcriptional landscape. Using RIPseq, we identified the RNA interactome of U2AF2 and show that U2AF2 binds the majority of transcripts that are differentially expressed and/or alternatively spliced during activation. Using RIP mass spectrometry, a unique protein interactome centered on U2AF2 is assembled by activation and comprised of both directly bound central members (RNAse-resistant) and indirectly bound peripheral members (RNAse-sensitive). Knocking down specific U2AF2 interactome members (U2AF1, SYNCRIP, SRRM2, ILF2) selectively affects cytokine secretion and activation markers. The expression and/or alternative splicing of transcripts important for immune cell function are also affected by knocking down these interactome members, both peripheral and central. Furthermore, we show that knockdown of interactome members can affect the proteins and transcripts bound to U2AF2, altering the transcriptome of activated T cells.  Our work highlights the importance of understanding the assembly of RNA binding protein complexes as regulators of T cell activation and function.

### Sample Protocol
UT (Invitrogen), Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche, Inc.), and the phosphatase inhibitors Sodium Fluoride (Sigma) and Sodium Orthovanadate (Sigma). After sonication (3x15” @ 70% power), insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation (12,000xg for 15’ @ 4oC), supplemented with 0.5ml NET-2 buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0; 150mM NaCl; 1mM MgCl2; 0.05% Igepal-CA 630; 1mM DTT, 1.5mM EDTA, RNaseOUT, protease inhibitor, phosphatase inhibitor), and quantified by BCA Assay (Pierce). Lysates were pre-cleared for 1h at 4oC with mouse IgG-conjugated Protein G beads (Invitrogen), lysates were incubated with U2AF2 antibody (Sigma) conjugated to Protein G beads (rotating overnight @ 4oC).  The beads were then washed 5x with Net-2 buffer.  Where specified, RNAse A digestion was performed on the beads (10 ug/ml for 30 minutes at RT).  After the washes, RNA/Protein complexes were eluted by resuspending the beads in SDS elution buffer (2% SDS in TE pH 8.0), and incubating for 30 minutes at 55oC.   The eluate from U2AF2 RIP was used as input into a TRIZOL LS separation and the protein fraction isolated, washed and pelleted. Protein pellets (~15ug) were resuspended in 40ul of 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate + 5% Acetonitrile (ACN) and sequentially incubated with 4ul of 50mM DTT (10’ @ 65oC), 4ul of 100mM Iodoacetamide (30’ @ 30oC) and 4ul of 400ng of Trypsin (4hrs @ 37oC without light). The digested samples were run over C-18 spin columns (Thermo), vacuum dried, and resuspended in 10ul 5% ACN + 0.1% Formic Acid. Peptides were loaded onto cHiPLC Nanoflex system (Eksigent) with an analytical separation column packed with ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) and eluted off a linear gradient of 5-35% Solvent B at a flow rate of 0.4ul/min over 60’ (Solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water; Solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile). Analysis was performed on the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) with an electrospray ionization source in a mode where a single 250-ms TOF-MS survey scan was collected, from which the top 20 ions were selected for automated MS/MS 50-ms scans. Ions selected for MS/MS were excluded for a period of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Replicate output WIFF files were used as input into the software ProteinPilot (AB Sciex), which generates a list of identified proteins along with their associated false positive probability based on a series of searches through a reverse database. We retain the proteins below a threshold FDR of 1% then remove non-human hits and human hits from a compiled list of known contaminant proteins in mass spectrometry (i.e. Keratins) as well as an empirically generated list based on proteins identified in multiple control samples. The lists of proteins from resting and activated cells were compared to determine the number shared between and unique to each list.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of CD4 T cells is a reaction to challenges such as microbial pathogens, cancer and toxins that defines adaptive immune responses. The roles of T cell receptor crosslinking, intracellular signaling, and transcription factor activation are well described, but the importance of post-transcriptional regulation by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) has not been considered in depth. We describe a new model expanding and activating primary human CD4 T cells and applied this to characterizing activation-induced assembly of splicing factors centered on U2AF2. We immunoprecipitated U2AF2 to identify what mRNA transcripts were bound as a function of activation by TCR crosslinking and costimulation. In parallel, mass spectrometry revealed the proteins incorporated into the U2AF2-centered RNA/protein interactome. Molecules that retained interaction with the U2AF2 complex after RNAse treatment were designated as "central" interactome members (CIMs). Mass spectrometry also identified a second class of activation-induced proteins, "peripheral" interactome members (PIMs), that bound to the same transcripts but were not in physical association with U2AF2 or its partners. siRNA knockdown of two CIMs and two PIMs caused changes in activation marker expression, cytokine secretion, and gene expression that were unique to each protein and mapped to pathways associated with key aspects of T cell activation. While knocking down the PIM, SYNCRIP, impacts a limited but immunologically important set of U2AF2-bound transcripts, knockdown of U2AF1 significantly impairs assembly of the majority of protein and mRNA components in the activation-induced interactome. These results demonstrated that CIMs and PIMs, either directly or indirectly through RNA, assembled into activation-induced U2AF2 complexes and play roles in post-transcriptional regulation of genes related to cytokine secretion. These data suggest an additional layer of regulation mediated by the activation-induced assembly of RNA splicing interactomes that is important for understanding T cell activation.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Rip mass spectrometry, U2af, Cd4 t cells

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Thomas Whisenant

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel R. Salomon, M.D.
Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA 92037


