### Accession
PXD022403

### Title
Discovery of arginine methylation, phosphorylation and their co-occurrence in condensate-associated proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
The formation of condensates in membraneless organelles is thought to be driven by protein phase separation. Arginine methylation and serine/threonine phosphorylation are important in the phase separation process, however these post-translational modifications are often present in intrinsically disordered regions that are difficult to analyse with standard proteomic techniques. Here we use a multi-protease and multi-MS/MS fragmentation approach, coupled with heavy methyl SILAC and phospho- or methyl-peptide enrichment, for the analysis of arginine methylation and serine/threonine phosphorylation, and to understand their co-occurrence in condensate-associated proteins. For Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we report a 50% increase in the known arginine methylproteome, involving 15 proteins that are almost all condensate-associated. Importantly, some of these proteins have arginine methylation on all predicted sites – providing evidence that this modification can be pervasive. We explored whether arginine methylated condensate-associated proteins are also phosphorylated, and found 12 such proteins to carry phosphoserine or phosphothreonine. In Npl3, Ded1 and Ssbp1, single peptides were found to carry both modifications, indicating a co-occurrence in close proximity and on the same protein molecule. We show that these co-modifications occur in regions of disorder and that arginine methylation is typically on basic regions of disorder. For phosphorylation, its association with charged regions of condensate-associated proteins was less consistent, although some regions with multisite phosphorylation sites were strongly acidic. We conclude that arginine-methylated proteins associated with condensates are typically co-modified with protein phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of phosphorylated and arginine-methylated peptides Proteins from light and heavy-labelled samples were mixed 1:1 according to weight, before 1 mg of combined protein was digested for 18 h with 20 μg trypsin/LysC (Promega) (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at 37 °C), 20 μg LysargiNase (Proteolysis Lab, IBMB-CSIC) (50 mM HEPES, 10 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5, at 37 °C) or 20 μg chymotrypsin (Promega) (100 mM Tris-Cl, 10 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5, at 25 °C). Separately, 10 mg of combined protein (mixed 1:1) was digested with 200 μg trypsin/LysC (Promega). Following digestion, phosphopeptides were enriched with Titansphere TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, 5010-21315) using the EasyPhos method, except that enrichments were carried out inside microfuge tubes rather than deep well plates, and elution was performed twice as follows: TiO2 beads were resuspended in 150 μL elution buffer (40% acetonitrile (ACN), 15% NH4OH (25%)), incubated for 30 s with mixing, beads were pelleted by centrifugation (3500 g, 1 min at RT) and the supernatant (elution) transferred to a new tube. Elutions were then dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Flow-throughs from phosphopeptide-enriched samples were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters). Subsequently, methyl-arginine containing peptides were enriched using an anti-monomethylarginine (R*GG) antibody (Cell Signalling Technology, 8711). For serial phospho-methyl enrichment, 5% of the 10 mg phosphopeptide-enriched sample was retained for mass spectrometric analysis, while the remaining 95% was subjected to methylarginine peptide enrichment as above. For GluC phosphopeptide enrichment samples, 1 mg of combined light and heavy hmSILAC protein was digested for with 20 μg of GluC (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, for 18 h at 37 °C. Peptides were then desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges, before phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere TiO2 beads, with a modified protocol. 10mg of TiO2 beads were suspended in 100 μL ACN and transferred onto a Pierce C18 StageTip, 10 μL bed (Thermo) placed inside a microfuge tube. After removal of the ACN by centrifugation at 500 g, the TiO2 beads were rinsed with 60 μL of Buffer A (0.4% TFA/80% ACN) with centrifugation (500 g) followed by 60 μL of Buffer B (25% lactic acid, 0.3% TFA, 60% ACN). Peptide samples were resuspended in 100 μL of Buffer B and transferred to the StageTip. Phosphopeptides were bound by slowly centrifuging peptides through the TiO2 (100 g, 20-40 min). The flow-through was then transferred back onto the StageTip for a second round of binding in the same manner. TiO2 beads were then rinsed with 60 μL Buffer B followed by two rounds of 60 μL Buffer A to remove unbound peptides, with centrifugation at 500 g. Phosphopeptides were then eluted twice with 30 μL elution buffer (as above) by centrifugation at 300 g, before being dried down in a SpeedVac and desalted as above. One replicate of trypsin/LysC-digested sample was also subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment in this way.  Mass spectrometry Enriched peptide samples were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on either an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or a Q Exactive (Thermo) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were concentrated on an,Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column trap (5mm × 300μm) before separation on an in-house-packed C18 column (15-30 cm × 75 μM i.d.). The column was pre-equilibrated with 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid)/2% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) before peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2-45% buffer B at 200 nL/min over 32 (for methyarginine peptide-enriched samples) or 122 minutes (for most phosphopeptide-enriched samples). Eluting peptides were ionised by electrospray at 2000 V. For analysis on the Fusion Lumos, precursor scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range = 400 – 1500 m/z, resolution = 120,000 at 200 m/z, AGC target = 4 × 105, maximum injection time = 50 ms). Subsequently, precursors were selected (intensity ≥ 1 × 104), isolated by the quadrupole (isolation width = 1.6 m/z) and fragmented with either HCD (NCE = 30), EThcD (charge states 1-3, ETD reaction time = 25 ms, ETD reagent target = 1 × 106, supplemental activation NCE = 28) or ETD (using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters). Fragment ion scans were then acquired in the ion trap (scan rate = rapid, first mass = 150 m/z, AGC target = 2 × 104, maximum injection time = 250 ms). The maximum duty cycle time was set to 2 seconds and dynamic exclusion was set to 25 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.2). Data were searched with Mascot (v. 2.6.2) against the SwissProt database (28-08-2019, 560,537 sequences, 201,466,755 residues) and contaminants database (09-08-2018, 246 sequences, 127,422 residues), with taxonomy set to Saccharomyces cerevisiae for SwissProt. For methylarginine peptide enrichment data the following settings were used. Enzyme was set as Trypsin (for trypsin/LysC-digested samples, specificity: KR-C), LysargiNase (for LysargiNase-digested samples, specificity: KR-N) or TrypChymo (for chymotrypsin-digested samples, specificity: KRFYWL-C). Maximum missed cleavages was set to 9 to account for peptides containing RG and RGG repeats. Instrument was set to HCD, EThcD or CID+ETD for HCD, EThcD and ETD analyses, respectively. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.4 Da (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos data) or 20 mmu (Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus data). Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Methyl (R), Methyl:2H(3)13C(1) (R), Dimethyl (R), Dimethyl:2H(6)13C(2) (R), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Label:13C(1)2H(3) (M), Label:13C(1)2H(3)+Oxidation (M), with Phospho (ST) included for phospho-methyl peptide analyses. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification. For phosphopeptide enrichment data, the same settings were used except: enzyme was set as V8-DE for GluC-digested samples (specificity: DE-C); maximum missed cleavages was set to 5 for all enzymes except GluC, where it was set to 9; dynamic modifications only included Methyl (R), Methyl:2H(3)13C(1) (R), Dimethyl (R) and Dimethyl:2H(6)13C(2) (R) when searching for phospho-methyl peptides. Peptide-spectrum matches were subsequently filtered at 1% false-discovery rate using a target-decoy approach. PTM site localisations were analysed with ptmRS, with “report only PTMs” set to “false” for methylarginine peptide enrichment data in order for heavy-labelled peptides to be analysed. PSMs were accepted at a ptmRS isoform confidence probability ≥ 0.75. Alternatively to Proteome Discoverer analyses, data were converted to Mascot Generic Format (mgf) using RawConverter (v. 1.1.0.19) and searched with Mascot (v. 2.6.2), using the same settings as above. Due to the sequence redundancy of many methylarginine-containing proteins, we only used peptides with completely unique sequences for the assignment of methylation sites. This was achieved by counting the number of matches each peptide sequence has to the entire yeast proteome, and disregarding any peptides with more than one match. This is more stringent than the uniqueness assigned during data searching, as peptide do not have to match the sequence specificity of the protease used in order to be considered to have multiple matches across the proteome. Heavy methyl SILAC validation Putative methylarginine PSMs were analysed for the presence of a hmSILAC pair by MethylQuant. First, the theoretical m/z difference between the identified methylpeptide and its hmSILAC pair was calculated as the number of methyl groups and methionines in the peptide, multiplied by 4.022185 and divided by the charge state. For PSMs of heavy-labelled methylarginine peptides, this value was set to be negative. Next, methylarginine PSMs were analysed with MethylQuant with all labels and modifications unselected, and with the following parameters: Mass error = 5 ppm, Pair overlap search window = 0.14 min, Pair elution search window = 1 min, Empty MS allowed = 1, Minimum isotopomers = 2 and Pearson correlation coefficient threshold = 0.5. For manual hmSILAC validation of peptides carrying 3 or more methyl groups, all detected partial heavy methyl labelling states were quantified by taking the area under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (±10 ppm) of each state, using Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser 2.2 SP1.48. The relative abundances of these labelling states were then compared with a theoretical binomial distribution defined by a heavy labelling efficiency of 88.2% (p = 0.882) and the number of methyl groups in the peptide (n).

### Publication Abstract
The formation of condensates in membraneless organelles is thought to be driven by protein phase separation. Arginine methylation and serine/threonine phosphorylation are important in the phase separation process; however, these post-translational modifications are often present in intrinsically disordered regions that are difficult to analyze with standard proteomic techniques. To understand their presence and co-occurrence in condensate-associated proteins, here, we use a multiprotease and multi-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) fragmentation approach, coupled with heavy methyl stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and phospho- or methyl-peptide enrichment. For <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, we report a 50% increase in the known arginine methylproteome, involving 15 proteins that are all condensate-associated. Importantly, some of these proteins have arginine methylation on all predicted sites-providing evidence that this modification can be pervasive. We explored whether arginine-methylated, condensate-associated proteins are also phosphorylated and found 12 such proteins to carry phosphorylated serine or threonine. In Npl3, Ded1, and Sbp1, single peptides were found to carry both modifications, indicating a co-occurrence in close proximity and on the same protein molecule. These co-modifications occur in regions of disorder, whereas arginine methylation is typically on regions of disorder that are also basic. For phosphorylation, its association with charged regions of condensate-associated proteins was less consistent, although some regions with multisite phosphorylation sites were strongly acidic. We conclude that arginine-methylated proteins associated with condensates are typically also modified with protein phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Crosstalk, Methylation

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Joshua Hamey

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Wilkins
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia


