### Accession
PXD025264

### Title
HyPro-MS analysis of proteins proximal to nuclear noncoding RNAs in HeLa cells

### Description
The ability of RNAs to form specific contacts with other macromolecules provides an important mechanism for subcellular compartmentalization. We developed a suite of hybridization-proximity (HyPro) labeling technologies for unbiased discovery of proteins (HyPro-MS) and transcripts (HyPro-seq) associated with RNAs of interest in genetically unperturbed cells. To generate the HyPro-MS dataset reported here, fixed and permeabilized HeLa cells were hybridized with digoxigenin-labeled oligonucleotide probes against noncoding RNAs 45S, NEAT1 or PNCTR and proteins co-localizing with these RNAs were biotinylated in situ using a custom-engineered HyPro enzyme containing a digoxigenin-binding domain. Biotinylated proteins were then captured on streptavidin beads and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity-biotinylated proteins were captured on MyOne streptavidin C1 magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# 11205D). Protein-loaded beads were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and resuspended in 45 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 containing 1.5 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix (Promega). On-bead proteolysis was performed by incubating the suspension at 37°C overnight, with agitation. The next day, an additional 0.75 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C in 15 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 was added to the suspension and the incubation was continued for another 4 hours at 37°C. The beads were collected using a DynaMag™-2 Magnet and the hydrolyzates were transferred to fresh microfuge tubes. Beads were washed twice with 45 μl aliquots of mass-spectrometry grade water and the two washes were combined with the original supernatants bringing the final volume to ~150 μl and the concentration of ammonium bicarbonate to ~20 mM. The samples were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 10 min at 4°C and transferred to fresh tubes. Three replicated samples were prepared for all conditions.  The subsequent sample preparation and label-free mass spectrometry steps were performed by the CEMS Proteomics Core Facility at King's College London, UK. Peptides were purified using PierceTM C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) as recommended, eluted in 70% acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The samples were then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid (both Fisher Scientific, UK) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separation was performed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were resolved by reversed-phase chromatography on a 50 cm-long 75μm I.D. C18 Pepmap column using a linear gradient formed by buffers A (0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, starting at 5% B (0-5 minutes), gradually increasing the percent of B to 40% (5-40 minutes), 99% B wash (40-45 minutes), and re-equilibrating the column at 5% B (45-60 minutes). The eluates were ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.1.5 software. The instrument was first programmed to acquire in data-dependent mode using a ‘universal’ Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3 s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation. Orbitrap spectra (FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 375-1500 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4×105 and maximum injection time of 35 ms. Monoisotopic precursor ions were filtered using charge state (+2 to +7) with an intensity threshold set between 5.0×103 and 1×1020 and a dynamic exclusion window of 35 s with ±10 ppm. MS2 precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole set to a mass width filter of 1.2 m/z. Ion trap fragmentation spectra (ITMS2) were collected with an AGC target setting of 1×104, maximum injection time of 35 ms, and the CID collision energy set at 35%. This method takes advantage of multiple analyzers on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, driving the system to use all available parallelizable time and decreasing the dependence on method parameters.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spec data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) to search against Uniprot Swissprot Homo sapiens Taxonomy (49,974 entries) using Mascot (v2.6.0; www.matrixscience.com) and the Sequest search algorithms {Eng, 1994 #4}. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance set to 0.8 Da with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys) and oxidation (Met). Searching stringency was set to 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR). Downstream analyses were carried out in Scaffold (v 4.11.0; www.proteomesoftware.com) and R/Bioconductor (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DEP/inst/doc/DEP.html).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Orbitrap fusion lumos tribrid, Hela cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King's College London
Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King’s College London, UK

### Submitter
Eugene Makeyev

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene Makeyev
Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King’s College London, UK


