### Accession
PXD001441

### Title
Protein abundance estimation in HeLa cells

### Description
To estimate the amount of proteins in HeLa, whole cell digests were subjected to fractionation by off line reverse phase chromatography at basic pH followed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell digest (5 microg) were desalted by STAGE-tip, dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.6, and loaded on a polymer based reverse-phase column (Zaplous alpha: length 10 cm, diameter 300 microm, AMR inc.). A linear gradient from 24 to 45% acetonitrile in 20 min was used for peptide separation by a gradient pump, Paradigm MS2 with an autosampler, HCT-PAL. Six fractions were collected, dried, and reconstitute in 6 microL of 0.1% TFA/2% acetonitrile. A half of each fraction was analyzed by QExactive mass spectrometer that was coupled with nano-LC (AdvanceLC, Michrom Inc) via a nano-electrospray source with a column oven set at 37C (AMR inc.). The QExactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Up to the top 10 most abundant ions with charge 2+ or 3+ from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 Th and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 60 ms.  The ion target value for both scan modes was set to 3e6.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.2.0.11) using the human IPI database (version 3.68; 87,083 entries). Trypsin was selected as enzyme. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminus acetylation were included as variable modifications. To estimate protein abundance in HeLa cell digest, we utilized iBAQ value calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela proteome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Med. Inst. Bioregulation, Kyshu Univ.
Dep. Mol. Cell Biology, Med. Inst. Bioreg., Kyushu University

### Submitter
Masaki Matsumoto

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi I. Nakayama
Dep. Mol. Cell Biology, Med. Inst. Bioreg., Kyushu University


