### Accession
PXD036485

### Title
Trans-synaptic dwelling of SARS-CoV-2 particles perturbs neural synapse organization and function

### Description
we performed mass spectrometry-based differential proteomics on single cortical organoids infected in the presence or absence of SARS-CoV-2 to identify the molecular perturbations caused by the virus.

### Sample Protocol
Organoid culture,single organoids proteins analysis,stacking gel,nanoLCMSMS,Mascot, Proline, Prostar, IONBOT

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to .mgf peaklists using MsConvert and were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.5.1, MatrixScience, London, UK) against a human (20 342 sequences, 2021-04-20, Taxonomy ID 9606) and SARS-CoV-2 (17 sequences, 2021-04-20, Taxonomy ID 2697049) protein sequences database downloaded from UniProtKB-SwissProt, to which common contaminants and decoy sequences were added. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm in MS mode and 0.07 Da in MS/MS mode. One trypsin missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of proteins n-termini were set as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into the Proline software (version 2.6.2(1)) for validation and label-free quantification. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score. For label free quantification, extracted ion chromatograms were used to derive peptides abundances. An m/z tolerance of 10 ppm was used. Alignment of the LC-MS/MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing. Cross assignment of peptide ions abundances was performed among the samples and controls using a m/z tolerance of 10 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 42 s. Protein abundances were computed using the sum of the unique peptides abundances normalized at the peptide level using the median. To be considered, proteins must be identified in all three or four replicates in at least one condition. The imputation of the missing values and differential data analysis were performed using the open-source ProStaR software (2). Imputation of missing values was done using the approximation of the lower limit of quantification by the 2.5% lower quantile of each replicate intensity distribution (“det quantile”). A Limma moderated t-test was applied on the dataset to perform differential analysis. The adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to adjust the p-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-msms, Quantification, Single-organoid proteomics, Ptms

### Affiliations
CNRS
CNRS, UMR7178, LSMBO, 67087 Strasbourg, FRANCE Université de Strasbourg, IPHC, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, FRANCE

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
CNRS, UMR7178, LSMBO, 67087 Strasbourg, FRANCE Université de Strasbourg, IPHC, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, FRANCE


