### Accession
PXD037405

### Title
Phosphate Starvation Signaling Increases Mitochondrial Membrane Potential through Respiration-independent Mechanisms

### Description
The mitochondrial membrane potential directly powers many critical functions of mitochondria, including ATP production, mitochondrial protein import, and metabolite transport. Its loss is a cardinal feature of aging and mitochondrial diseases, and cells closely monitor membrane potential as an indicator of mitochondrial health. Given its central importance, it is logical that cells would modulate mitochondrial membrane potential in response to demand and environmental cues, but there has been little exploration of this question. We report that loss of the Sit4 protein phosphatase in yeast increases mitochondrial membrane potential mostly by inducing the expression of the electron transport chain but also activates the phosphate starvation response. Indeed, a similarly elevated mitochondrial membrane potential is also elicited by either phosphate starvation or by abrogation of the Pho85-dependent phosphate sensing pathway. This enhanced membrane potential is primarily driven by an unexpected activity of the ADP/ATP carrier. We also demonstrate that this connection between phosphate limitation and enhancement of the mitochondrial membrane potential is evolutionarily conserved as it also is observed in primary and immortalized mammalian cells as well as in Drosophila. These data suggest that the mitochondrial membrane potential is subject to environmental stimuli and intracellular signaling regulation and raise the possibility for therapeutic enhancement even under conditions of mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast proteomes were extracted using a buffer containing 200 mM EPPS, 8 M urea, 0.1% SDS, and 1X protease inhibitor [Peirce protease inhibitor mini tablets]). 100 μg of each proteome was prepared as follows. 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride) and incubated at room temperature for 10 mins. Iodoacetimide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to each sample and incubated for 25 mins. in the dark. Finally, DTT was added to each sample to a final concentration of 10 mM. A buffer exchange was carried out using a modified SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2014, 2019). Briefly, ~500 g of each SpeedBead Magnetic Carboxylate modified particles (Cytiva; 45152105050250, 65152105050250) mixed at a 1:1 ratio was added to each sample. 100% ethanol was added to each sample to achieve a final ethanol concentration of at least 50%. Samples were incubated with gentle shaking for 15 mins. Samples were washed three times with 80% ethanol. Protein was eluted from SP3 beads using 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 containing trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) and Lys-C (Wako). Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with vigorous shaking. Acetonitrile was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 30%. Each sample was labelled, in the presence of SP3 beads, with ~250 g of TMTpro-16plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) (J. Li et al., 2020; Thompson et al., 2019) for 1 hour. Following confirmation of satisfactory labelling (>97%), excess TMTpro reagents were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. The full volume from each sample was pooled and acetonitrile was removed by vacuum centrifugation for one hour. The pooled sample was acidified using formic acid and peptides were de-salted using a Sep-Pak Vac 200 mg tC18 cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were enriched using a Hugh Select Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Flow through from the phosphopeptide enrichment column was collected for whole proteome analysis. The peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 5% acetonitrile and fractionated by basic pH reverse phase HPLC. In total 24 fractions were collected. The fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and desalted by stage-tip. Final peptides were eluted in, 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, dried, and finally resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. In the end, 8 fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Whole proteome peptides were separated using a 90-min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 30-cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in house. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectroscopy (FAIMS) was enabled during data acquisition with compensation voltages (CVs) set as −40 V, −60 V, and −80 V (Schweppe et al., 2019). MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4 × 105). Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required for sequencing, and a 60 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data dependent mode was set as cycle time (1 s). MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; 50,000 resolution; NCE 36%; maximum injection time 86 ms; AGC 1 × 105). Phosphopeptides were separated using a 120 min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 30-cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in house. The phosphopeptide enrichment was injected twice using two different FAIMS methods. For the first injection, the FAIMS CVs were set to -45 V and -65 V. For the second injection, the FAIMS CVs were set to -40 V, -60 V, and -80 V (Schweppe et al., 2019). For both methods, MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum ion injection time 50 ms, AGC 4x105). Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required for sequencing, and a 60 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data dependent mode was set as cycle time (1 s). MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; 50,000 resolution; NCE 36%; maximum injection time 250 ms; AGC 1 × 105). Phosphoproteomics data analysis  Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle (Rad et al., 2021). Searches were performed using the Comet search algorithm against a yeast database downloaded from Uniprot in June 2014. We used a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the ion trap and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the Orbitrap. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphorylated peptide analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias & Gygi, 2007). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: comet log expect, different sequence delta comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Each run was filtered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated at a data set level. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method (Savitski et al., 2015), proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using the AScore algorithm (Beausoleil et al., 2006). For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 160 or greater across all channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial membrane potential directly powers many critical functions of mitochondria, including ATP production, mitochondrial protein import, and metabolite transport. Its loss is a cardinal feature of aging and mitochondrial diseases, and cells closely monitor membrane potential as an indicator of mitochondrial health. Given its central importance, it is logical that cells would modulate mitochondrial membrane potential in response to demand and environmental cues, but there has been little exploration of this question. We report that loss of the Sit4 protein phosphatase in yeast increases mitochondrial membrane potential, both by inducing the electron transport chain and the phosphate starvation response. Indeed, a similarly elevated mitochondrial membrane potential is also elicited simply by phosphate starvation or by abrogation of the Pho85-dependent phosphate sensing pathway. This enhanced membrane potential is primarily driven by an unexpected activity of the ADP/ATP carrier. We also demonstrate that this connection between phosphate limitation and enhancement of mitochondrial membrane potential is observed in primary and immortalized mammalian cells as well as in <i>Drosophila</i>. These data suggest that mitochondrial membrane potential is subject to environmental stimuli and intracellular signaling regulation and raise the possibility for therapeutic enhancement of mitochondrial function even in defective mitochondria.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Phosphate

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Biochemistry, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Rutter
Department of Biochemistry, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA


