### Accession
PXD013772

### Title
ChIP-MS of GR and GR-DZn in mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
The Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) is both one of the most widely used clinical drug targets and a very potent metabolic regulator. GR belongs to the nuclear hormone receptor family of ligand-gated transcription factors that govern mammalian physiology. Upon ligand binding, GR enters the nucleus to regulate gene expression both positively and negatively. It is known to bind to consensus DNA sequences termed glucocorticoid response elements (GREs), but the mechanisms determining transcriptional activation versus repression remain an unresolved molecular paradox. Prevailing models suggest that tethering of GR to AP-1 or NF-κB via protein-protein interactions, rather than direct DNA binding, specifies negative regulation. However, here we show that the repression of inflammatory genes as well as all other glucocorticoid responses, require direct DNA binding of GR. Generating GR point mutant mice that retain the ability to tether via protein-protein interactions while unable to recognize DNA sequences, we demonstrate that response element recognition via the Zinc finger is absolutely required for both transcriptional activation and repression. We have used ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq in inflammatory and metabolic cells and tissues together with proteomics to reveal that DNA binding of GR is necessary for the assembly of a functional SWI/SNF coregulator complex. Generally, the desired anti-inflammatory actions of GR are attributed to the silencing of inflammatory genes, while its adverse effects are believed to result from the transcriptional upregulation of metabolic targets. Our findings not only challenge classical models and dogmas of GR mediated gene regulation, but will provide an important basis for the development of novel immunosuppressants with reduced side effect profiles.

### Sample Protocol
ChIP-MS was performed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from wild-type and GR-DZn mutant mice. Chromatin was sonicated to an average size of 200bp. After overnight immunoprecipitation with rabbit anti-GR (#24050-1-AP, Proteintech) antibody, or rabbit IgG (#2729, Cell Signaling), antibody-bait complexes were captured by Protein A coupled Sepharose beads (CL-4B, GE healthcare), washed three times with wash buffer A (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140mM NaCl, 1% Triton), once with wash buffer B (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 1% Triton), and twice with TBS. Beads were incubated for 30min with elution buffer 1 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2mM DTT, 20µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution with elution buffer 2 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10mM Chloroacetamide) for 5min. Both eluates were combined and further incubated at room temperature over night. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted with Stage Tips containing three layers of C18 reverse phase material and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on 50cm columns packed with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY‐nLC 1200 ultra‐high‐pressure system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated applying a non-linear gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 100min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan (60K resolution, 20ms max. injection time, AGC target 3e6) and 10 data‐dependent MS/MS scans (15K resolution, 60ms max. injection time, AGC target 1e5). Isolation window was set to 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 27. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.3.54). Peak lists were searched against the mouse UniprotFASTA database (2015_08 release) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.7 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
The glucocorticoid receptor is an important immunosuppressive drug target and metabolic regulator that acts as a ligand-gated transcription factor. Generally, GR's anti-inflammatory effects are attributed to the silencing of inflammatory genes, while its adverse effects are ascribed to the upregulation of metabolic targets. GR binding directly to DNA is proposed to activate, whereas GR tethering to pro-inflammatory transcription factors is thought to repress transcription. Using mice with a point mutation in GR's zinc finger, that still tether via protein-protein interactions while being unable to recognize DNA, we demonstrate that DNA binding is essential for both transcriptional activation and repression. Performing ChIP-Seq, RNA-Seq and proteomics under inflammatory conditions, we show that DNA recognition is required for the assembly of a functional co-regulator complex to mediate glucocorticoid responses. Our findings may contribute to the development of safer immunomodulators with fewer side effects.

### Keywords
Hormone, Steroid receptor, Chromatin, Coregulator

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


