### Accession
PXD014827

### Title
Class I HDAC inhibitors enhance YB-1 acetylation and oxidative stress to block sarcoma metastasis

### Description
Outcomes for metastatic bone sarcomas, Ewing sarcoma and osteosarcoma, are dismal and remain unchanged for decades. Oxidative stress attenuates melanoma metastasis, and melanoma cells must reduce oxidative stress to metastasize. To explore this in sarcomas, we screened libraries of approved compounds for agents sensitizing sarcoma cells to oxidative stress. This identified the class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275 as enhancing sensitivity to reactive oxygen species (ROS). Mechanistically, MS-275 inhibits YB-1 deacetylation, decreasing physical binding between YB-1 and the 5UTR of NFE2L2, thereby non-transcriptionally reducing translation and expression of the master antioxidant factor, NRF2, which reduces cellular ROS. Indeed, global acetylomics revealed that MS-275 promotes rapid acetylation of the YB-1 RNA binding protein at lysine-81, blocking RNA binding and translational activation of NFE2L2, encoding NRF2, as well as known YB-1 mRNA targets, HIF1A and the stress granule nucleator, G3BP1. MS-275 dramatically reduced sarcoma metastasis in vivo, but an MS-275-resistant YB-1 K81-to-alanine (K81A) mutant restored metastatic capacity and NRF2, HIF1α, and G3BP1 synthesis in MS-275 treated mice. These studies describe a novel function for MS-275 through enhanced YB-1 acetylation, thus inhibiting YB-1 translational control of key cytoprotective factors and its pro-metastatic activity.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were grown in custom DMEM depleted of lysine and arginine supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (dFBS) and 1x non-essential amino acids. For ‘light’ cultures (mock-treated, + NaASO2), the medium was supplemented with 100mg/L of [14N2 12C6]-Lys and 100mg/L of [14N4  12C6]-Arg. For ‘heavy’ cultures (+ MS-275, + NaASO2), the medium was supplemented with 100mg/L of [15N2, 13C6]-Lys and 100mg/L of [15N4, 13C6]-Arg. Then cells were harvested, washed twice with cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and lysed in 500 µl NP-40 lysis buffer containing 1× protease inhibitor and 5 mM DTT followed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. Protein concentrations of the pre-cleared lysates were detected using the Quick-start Bradford assay and equal amounts (1:1) of heavy and light labeled protein were mixed, and then incubated with 50 µl anti-acetyl-lysine antibody conjugated to agarose (50 µl/IP) overnight (O/N) at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Beads were then washed; four times with NP-40 buffer and two times with dH2O. Then, protein elution was conducted using 2x LDS Sample buffer non-reducing (lithium dodecyl sulfate sample loading buffer) (50 µl/ IP). For each sample, 800μL of lysis buffer (100mM HEPES pH 8) (CAT#H3375, Sigma), 4M guanidine hydrochloride (Cat # G4505, Sigma), 10mM TCEP (CAT#C4706, Sigma), 40mM CAA (CAT#C0267, Sigma), and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor – EDTA free (Cat # 4693159001, Sigma) was added. Lysis mixtures were passed through a 21-gauge needle mounted to a 1mL syringe (BD Biosciences) a total of 5 times, centrifuged at 20,000g for 2 minutes, and the supernatant recovered. Resultant lysates were heated at 90°C for 15 minutes, and chilled to room temperature for a further 15 minutes. For digestion, lysates were diluted 1:10 in 0.2M HEPES pH 8 containing a 1:50 (μg:μg) enzyme to protein amount of trypsin/rLysC mix (Promega, Cat #V5071). Mixtures were incubated for 14 hours at 37°C in a thermomixer with shaking at 1200 rpm. Resultant digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid, precipitate pelleted with 2 minutes at 20,000g, and filtered through an Amicon Ultra 10kDa unit (12,000g for 10 minutes). Filtered digests were cleaned up with a SepPak prior to MS analysis. Peptide analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS platform (Thermo Scientific). Samples were introduced using an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Columns used for trapping and separations were packed in-house. Trapping columns were packed in 100μm internal diameter capillaries to a length of 25mm with C18 beads (Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch, 3μm particle size). Trapping was carried out for a total volume of 10 μL at a pressure of 400 bar. After trapping, gradient elution of peptides was performed on a C18 (Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch, 1.9μm particle size) column packed in-house to a length of 15cm in 100μm internal diameter capillaries with a laser-pulled electrospray tip and heated to 45°C using AgileSLEEVE column ovens (Analytical Sales & Service). Elution was performed with a gradient of mobile phase A (water and 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) over 32 minutes, and to 40% B over 4 minutes, with final elution (80% B) and equilibration (5% B) using a further 4 minutes at a flow rate of 400nL/min. Data acquisition on the Orbitrap Fusion (control software version 2.1.1565.20) was carried out using a data-dependent method. Survey scans covering the mass range of 350 – 1500 were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with quadrupole isolation enabled, an S-Lens RF Level of 60%, a maximum fill time of 50 milliseconds, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e5. For MS2 scan triggering, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, charge state filtering was limited to 2 – 4, an intensity threshold of 5e3 was employed, and dynamic exclusion of previously selected masses was enabled for 60 seconds with a tolerance of 20 ppm. MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap in Rapid mode after HCD fragmentation with a maximum fill time of 150 milliseconds, quadrupole isolation, an isolation window of 1 m/z, collision energy of 35%, activation Q of 0.25, injection for all available parallelizable time turned OFF, and an AGC target value of 4e3. The total allowable cycle time was set to 4 seconds. MS1 scans were acquired in profile mode, and MS2 in centroid format.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer  suite (v2.1.1.21, Thermo Scientific). All SILAC pairs were quantified and MS/MS spectra were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database to identify corresponding proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation, N-acetyl protein and acetylation of lysine were chosen as variable modifications. The false-discovery rate (FDR) was fixed to a threshold of 1% FDR and all peptide identifications were filtered for length and mass error.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yb-1, Sarcoma, Ms275, Hdac

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg B. Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


