### Accession
PXD022718

### Title
Cellulomonas sp. B6 and C. fimi B-402 secretomes xylanases

### Description
We addressed the optimization of the xylanolytic activity in extracellular enzymatic extracts of Cellulomonas sp. B6 and C. fimi B-402 for their subsequent application in lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysis, by culture in several substrates.  As demonstrated by secretomic profiling, wheat bran and waste paper resulted to be suitable inducers for the secretion of xylanases of Cellulomonas sp. B6 and C. fimi B-402, respectively. Both strains showed high xylanolytic activity in culture supernatant although Cellulomonas sp. B6 was the most efficient xylanolytic strain.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, total proteins contained in cell-free supernatants were quantified by Bradford assay (Promega, Biodynamics, CABA, Argentina), precipitated with 10% w/w trichloroacetic acid and then resuspended in ultrapure water (resistivity of 18.2 MΩ*cm) to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL. Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analysis were performed at CEQUIBIEM (http://cequibiem.qb.fcen.uba.ar/). Proteins were reduced with dithiotreitol 10 mmol/L for 45 min at 56°C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mmol/L) for 45 min in the dark and digested with trypsin (PromegaV5111; Promega, Fitchburg, WI) overnight at 37°C. The digests were analysed by nano LC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer coupled with a nano HPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyser (ThermoFisher Scientific; Q-Exactive). XCALIBUR 3.0.63 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software was used for data acquisition and equipment configuration to allow peptides identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser. The scanned mass range was 400–2000 m/z, at a resolution of 70 000 at 400 m/z and the 12 most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyser. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Q-Exactive raw data were processed using PROTEOME DISCOVERER software (ver. 2.1.1.21; ThermoFisher Scientific) and searched against Cellulomonas sp. B6 or C. fimi protein sequences database with trypsin specificity and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide. Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Static modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of Cys, and dynamic modifications were set to oxidation of Met and N-terminal acetylation. Protein hits were filtered for high confidence peptide matches with a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% calculated by employing a reverse database strategy. For the estimation of relative abundance, we used the protein abundance index emPAI calculated by Sequest using protein identification data. The equation emPAI/Σ (emPAI) x100 was used to calculate the protein content in mol.% (emPAI%) (Ishihama et al. 2005; Shinoda et al. 2009).

### Publication Abstract
One of the main distinguishing features of bacteria belonging to the Cellulomonas genus is their ability to secrete multiple polysaccharide degrading enzymes. However, their application in biomass deconstruction still constitutes a challenge. We addressed the optimisation of the xylanolytic activities in extracellular enzymatic extracts of Cellulomonas sp. B6 and Cellulomonas fimi B-402 for their subsequent application in lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysis by culture in several substrates. As demonstrated by secretomic profiling, wheat bran and waste paper resulted to be suitable inducers for the secretion of xylanases of Cellulomonas sp. B6 and C. fimi B-402, respectively. Both strains showed high xylanolytic activity in culture supernatant although Cellulomonas sp. B6 was the most efficient xylanolytic strain. Upscaling from flasks to fermentation in a bench scale bioreactor resulted in equivalent production of extracellular xylanolytic enzymatic extracts and freeze drying was a successful method for concentration and conservation of the extracellular enzymes, retaining 80% activity. Moreover, enzymatic cocktails composed of combined extra and intracellular extracts effectively hydrolysed the hemicellulose fraction of extruded barley straw into xylose and xylooligosaccharides. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Secreted xylanase activity of Cellulomonas sp. B6 and C. fimi was maximised. &#x2022; Biomass-induced extracellular enzymes were identified by proteomic profiling. &#x2022; Combinations of extra and intracellular extracts were used for barley straw hydrolysis.

### Keywords
Cellulomonas, Lignocellulose, Lyophilisation, Enzymatic hydrolysis, Secretome analysis, Waste valorisation

### Affiliations
Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología Molecular (IABIMO), Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), De los Reseros y N. Repetto s/n, Hurlingham B1686IGC, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
University of Buenos Aires

### Submitter
Maria Pia Valacco

### Lab Head
Dr Eleonora Campos
Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología Molecular (IABIMO), Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), De los Reseros y N. Repetto s/n, Hurlingham B1686IGC, Buenos Aires, Argentina.


