### Accession
PXD003435

### Title
Synthetic yeast genome project

### Description
The experiment aimed to study the proteome variation in a yeast strain (YS031), which chromosome II was artificially synthezied, compared with the wild type strain (BY4741). Proteins were extracted from the yeast cells and digested with trypsin. The peptides were label with iTRAQ, separated with 2D LC (SCX and RP) and detected with a Q-Exactive MS. Proteome identification and quantification were performed with Mascot2.3 and iQuant3.0.

### Sample Protocol
BY4741 and SynIIv1.2 (strain ID: YS031) strains with 3 biological replicates were cultured overnight in 3 mL YPD medium at 30°C and re-inoculated in 10 mL fresh YPD medium for further incubation until the OD600 reached ~0.8. Proteins were extracted from the yeast cells and digested with trypsin. Peptide samples were labeled with the iTRAQ tags as follow: Sample BY4741-I-#1 (117 tags), Sample BY4741-II-#1 (115 tags) Sample BY4741-III-#1 (113 tags), Technical replicate BY4741-I-#1 (121 tags), Sample SynIIv1.2-I-#1 (119 tags) , Sample SynIIv1.2-II-#1 (116 tags), Sample SynIIv1.2-III-#1(114 tags), Technical replicate SynIIv1.2-I-#1(118 tags), separated with 2D LC (SCX and RP) and detected with a Q-Exactive MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome identification and quantification were performed with Mascot2.3 and iQuant3.0. result file were converted  to xml file using PRIDE Converter v2.5.7

### Publication Abstract
Here, we report the successful design, construction, and characterization of a 770-kilobase synthetic yeast chromosome II (synII). Our study incorporates characterization at multiple levels-including phenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, chromosome segregation, and replication analysis-to provide a thorough and comprehensive analysis of a synthetic chromosome. Our Trans-Omics analyses reveal a modest but potentially relevant pervasive up-regulation of translational machinery observed in synII, mainly caused by the deletion of 13 transfer RNAs. By both complementation assays and SCRaMbLE (synthetic chromosome rearrangement and modification by <i>loxP</i>-mediated evolution), we targeted and debugged the origin of a growth defect at 37&#xb0;C in glycerol medium, which is related to misregulation of the high-osmolarity glycerol response. Despite the subtle differences, the synII strain shows highly consistent biological processes comparable to the native strain.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
Baojin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Wen
BGI-Shenzhen


