### Accession
PXD032904

### Title
A proteomic roadmap of ribosome heterogeneity during human embryonic stem cell differentiation

### Description
Recent findings suggest that the ribosome itself modulates gene expression. However, whether ribosomes change composition across cell types to control cell fate remains unknown.  To determine the magnitude of ribosome heterogeneity and its functional contribution to cell fate specification, we measured ribosomal protein abundance in actively translating ribosomes by quantitative mass spectrometry on a day-by-day basis as human embryonic stem cells differentiate in a step-wise fashion down endoderm and mesoderm lineages. We identified numerous core ribosomal proteins (RPs) as changing significantly in abundance in actively translating ribosomes during cell fate specification, including progressive decreases in ribosome incorporation for several ribosomal proteins during mesoderm differentiation.  We further traced ribosome composition changes at the cytoplasmic, whole-cell, and mRNA transcript levels and identified multiple mechanisms regulating actively translating ribosome composition.  These findings reveal extensive ribosomal remodeling during differentiation, suggesting that individual ribosomal components may have cell type-specific specialized translation functions.

### Sample Protocol
For cytoplasmic extract and polysome samples, protein was denatured in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 5 mM DTT at 65℃ for 1hour followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature protected from light.  Samples were digested with a 50:1 protein to trypsin (Pierce) mass ratio at 37℃ overnight and desalted using OMIX C18 pipet tip columns (Agilent A57003100) according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried with a Speed Vac.  For whole cell lysates, reduction, alkylation, and digestion were performed using the Pierce Mass Spec Sample Kit for Cultured Cells following the manufacturer’s protocol.  Dried peptides were resuspended in 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 (AppliChem) and labeled with unique TMT labels from the TMT sixplex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.  Reactions were quenched and equal masses of each labeled sample were combined and acidified with heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) to a final concentration of 0.5% volume/volume and formic acid to a final concentration of 5% volume/volume.  Samples were desalted with OMIX C18 pipet tip columns, dried on a Speed Vac, and resuspended in 15 µl 5% acetonitrile + 0.1% volume/volume trifluoroacetic acid. 3 µl of each sample was loaded onto the HPLC (Waters) using a 20-25 cm HPLC column packed with 2.7 µm C18 resin (Halo), a flow rate of 0.3 µl/minute, and a 180 minute gradient from 95% A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) 5% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 60% A 40% B.  Acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot search engine, using only unique peptides for protein quantification and a high confidence filter of peptide FDR < 0.01.  The ratio of the abundance of each RP in the hESCs relative to the differentiated cell sample was normalized by the median relative abundance of all RPs within the respective subunit (40S or 60S) to account for any differences in TMT labeling efficiencies or differences in the total amount of ribosomal subunits in each cell type.  At least 5 whole cell lysate and at least 6 cytoplasmic extract and polysome replicates were performed for each differentiated cell type, and the values given in the manuscript are the medians of these replicates.  ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance of the relative abundance changes of each RP over the course of cell differentiation.

### Publication Abstract
Lithium carbonate plays a critical role in both lithium-carbon dioxide and lithium-air batteries as the main discharge product and a product of side reactions, respectively. Understanding the decomposition of lithium carbonate during electrochemical oxidation (during battery charging) is key for improving both chemistries, but the decomposition mechanisms and the role of the carbon substrate remain under debate. Here, we use an in-situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry-gas chromatography coupling system to quantify the gas evolution during the electrochemical oxidation of lithium carbonate on carbon substrates. Our results show that lithium carbonate decomposes to carbon dioxide and singlet oxygen mainly via an electrochemical process instead of via a chemical process in an electrolyte of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide in tetraglyme. Singlet oxygen attacks the carbon substrate and electrolyte to form both carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide-approximately 20% of the net gas evolved originates from these side reactions. Additionally, we show that cobalt(II,III) oxide, a typical oxygen evolution catalyst, stabilizes the precursor of singlet oxygen, thus inhibiting the formation of singlet oxygen and consequent side reactions.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cell, Ribosome, Tandem mass tags (tmt), Differentiation

### Affiliations
Stanford University

### Submitter
Naomi Genuth

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Barna
Stanford University


