### Accession
PXD020983

### Title
Dataset of the proteome profiles of sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) skin-scale exposed to estradiol and fluoxetine

### Description
Contamination of aquatic ecosystems with anthropogenic pollutants, including pharmaceutical drugs, is a major concern worldwide. Fish are particularly at risk of exposure to pollutants but their impacts on mineralized fish tissues, particularly the scales that form a barrier between the fish and the environment, are poorly understood.  The proteome data here presented support the findings reported in the associated research article “Disruption of the sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) skin-scale by estradiol and fluoxetine, an emerging pollutant”. Juvenile sea basses were exposed by intraperitoneal injections to: a) the antidepressant fluoxetine (FLX), a widely prescribed psychotropic drug and an emerging pollutant; b) the natural estrogen 17β-estradiol (E2) and c) coconut oil alone (control). The scale proteome profiles of fish exposed to these compounds for 5 days were analysed by the quantitative label-free proteomics technology SWATH-MS (Sequential Windowed data-independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution-Mass Spectra). LC-MS data from pooled protein extracts from the scales of all experimental groups were acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA), which allowed the identification of 1,254 proteins through searches against the sea bass genome database. 715 proteins were confidently quantified by SWATH acquisition, from which 213 proteins had modified levels (p<0.05) between E2- or FLX-exposed fish and control. The main biological processes and KEGG pathways affected by E2 or FLX treatments were identified using Cytoscape/ClueGO enrichment analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Animal maintenance and experimentation followed national (DL 113/2013) and international (EU Directive 2010/63/UE) guidelines. In order to assess the effect of estradiol (E2) or fluoxetine (FLX) on the skin-scale system proteome of sea bass, three experimental groups were established (with n=5 fish per tank and replicate tanks per group). The collected tissue was designated as the “skin-scale system” because the skin layers that cover the scales of the fish are not dissociated at the time that these scales are sampled by being plucked from the skin layers using forceps (done in a standardized way for all fish and treatments); however, for simplicity, this system will be hereafter referred only as “the scales”. The treatment groups received single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of coconut oil containing E2 or FLX hydrochloride (5 mg/kg body weight each treatment) or coconut oil alone (3 ml/kg body weight), in the case of control groups. After 5 days of the exposure period, the scales localized below the dorsal fin were collected from all fish (n=10 / group) using forceps and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ºC until protein extraction.  Total protein was extracted from the previously collected sea bass frozen scales for SWATH-MS quantitative proteomic analysis. In brief, frozen scales (30-60 mg of scales per fish) were resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold protein extraction buffer (50 mM Tris buffer at pH 6.8, 100 mM DTT, 1.7 % SDS) in 13 ml plastic tubes (SARSTEDT; Germany).  Samples were homogenised by mechanical disruption using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA, Germany) equipped with a dispersing element S25N-8G-ST (for fibrous tissues) at the maximum speed, using five cycles of 10 seconds of dispersion each with ice incubation in between cycles.  To increase protein solubilisation, the homogenates were boiled at 95 C during 10 minutes in a dry bath (with a vortex step at every 5 minutes) and allowed to cool at room temperature. Soluble protein fractions were separated by centrifugation, quantified and submitted to quality control analysis by visual inspection of their electrophoretic profiles. All the protein extracts from the independent biological replicates per treatment group (n=10) were evaluated for quality and quantity, and from these seven were chosen for subsequent quantitative proteomic analysis. Soluble protein scale extracts were subjected to in-gel digestion following the short-GeLC method as described in Anjo et al., 2015. In brief, the protein content of the scale extracts was assessed by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA) and 100 μg of each sample replicate, as well as a pooled sample per experimental group (Pool Control, Pool E2 and Pool FLX -corresponding to the mixture of 20 μg of each replicate of the group), were mixed with glycerol, bromophenol blue and the recombinant protein (Green fluorescent Protein and Maltose-binding periplasmic protein (malE-GFP) to serve as the internal standard. Thermally denatured protein samples (5 min at 95C) were partially fractionated in a precast gel (4-20 % Mini-Protean® TGXTM Gel, Bio-Rad) for 15 min at 110 V. Proteins were subsequently stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue staining, destained and the gel regions were excised (3 fractions) and processed for destaining, dehydration, rehydration with trypsin, overnight in-gel protein digestion, peptides gel extraction and solid-phase extraction with C18 sorbent (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies). Additionally, peptides were resuspended in the mobile phase (2 % ACN in 0.1 % FA).  Samples were analysed on a Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex®, Framingham, MA) through two operative phases: Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) of the pooled samples (Pool Control, Pool E2 and Pool FLX); and the subsequent SWATH acquisition of each individual replicate sample from the 3 experimental conditions (n=7 individual replicates per experimental condition). Peptide separation using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®, CA) and IDA experiments were performed following the same methodology as described in Anjos et al., 2019 with the exception of the LC gradient that was of 5% to 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA and that the mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®. The same chromatographic conditions used for IDA acquisitions were kept for SWATH-MS analysis. The SWATH setup used the same parameters as described in Anjos et al., 2019 with the exception that the survey scan acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration was of 250 ms in between the 350–1500 m/z precursor range. Reference of interest: Data Brief. 2019 Aug 29;26:104451. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.104451. eCollection 2019 Oct.

### Data Protocol
Two specific spectral libraries of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all the MS/MS spectra generated from the pooled peptide mixtures in the IDA experiments, the “pooled C_library” and the “pooled C, E2, FLX_library”, being the last used for subsequent SWATH processing after combining all the files obtained from the 3 independent pools. Peptide identification and library generation were carried out using the Protein Pilot software (v5.0, ABSciex®). Search parameters used were: i) comparison against the predicted proteins from the sea bass genome database (assembly dicLab v1.0c with annotation from July 2013 and protein prediction from May 2015; file diclab1_pep.faa.gz downloaded from http://seabass.mpipz.mpg.de/DOWNLOADS/ in March 2016; and using ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; iii) trypsin as digestion type (Paragon Algorithm). An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot software, was used to assess the quality of identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5 % local FDR.  Data processing was carried out using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®) as described in Anjo et al., 2015 with minor modifications. Peptides were selected automatically from the library of the pooled C, E2, FLX generated and using the same criteria as in Anjos et al., 2019. After retention time adjustment using the malE-GFP peptides, up to 15 peptides, with up to 5 fragments each, were automatically selected per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins from the library that were identified below 5% local FDR from Protein Pilot search. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least three of the 7 biological replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 minutes. The levels of the proteins were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein as described by Collins et al., 2013 and normalized to the total intensity of the sample.  In the proteomic data analysis, to compare the relative protein abundance modified by the treatments (E2 or FLX) the fold-changes in protein levels were calculated based on the medians between the treatments and the control groups. Statistical analysis was performed in SPSS (version 23, IBM) software using the Mann-Whitney (MW) pairwise test for comparison between treated and control groups. P-values below 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Contamination of aquatic ecosystems with anthropogenic pollutants, including pharmaceutical drugs, is a major concern worldwide. Aquatic organisms such as fish are particularly at risk of exposure to pollutants. The surface of fish is the first point of contact with pollutants, but few studies have considered the impact of pollutants on the skin-scale barrier. The present proteome data are the basis of the findings discussed in the associated research article "Proteomics of sea bass skin-scales exposed to the emerging pollutant fluoxetine compared to estradiol" [1]. Juvenile sea bass were exposed by intraperitoneal injections to: a) the antidepressant fluoxetine (FLX), a widely prescribed psychotropic drug and an emerging pollutant; b) the natural estrogen 17&#x3b2;-estradiol (E2) and c) the vehicle, coconut oil (control). The scale proteome of fish exposed to these compounds for 5 days was analysed using quantitative label-free proteomics technology SWATH-MS (sequential windowed data-independent acquisition of the total high-resolution-mass spectra). The proteome data generated was submitted to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020983. LC-MS data from pooled protein extracts from the scales of all experimental groups was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) and 1,254 proteins were identified by searching against the sea bass genome database. 715 proteins were quantified by SWATH acquisition, and 213 proteins had modified levels (p &lt; 0.05) between the E2- or FLX-exposed fish compared to the control. The main biological processes and KEGG pathways affected by E2 or FLX treatments were identified using Cytoscape/ClueGO enrichment analyses.

### Keywords
Swath-ms quantitative proteomics; fish scales; emerging pollutants; antidepressant; estrogen;

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of the University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of the University of Coimbra


