### Accession
PXD001091

### Title
Spike-in comparison -  Data processing has major impact on the outcome of quantitative label-free LC-MS analysis

### Description
Synthetic peptides were spiked in at different levels in a digested cell lysate from Streptococcus pyogenes

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic peptides was spiked in at different levels in a trypsin digested cell lysate.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was converted to MGF and mzML using Proteowizard. The MGF files were searched using Mascot and X!Tandem and the search results were combined in Proteios. The results were exported in PRIDE XML format from Proteios.

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput multiplexed protein quantification using mass spectrometry is steadily increasing in popularity, with the two major techniques being data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and targeted acquisition using selected reaction monitoring (SRM). However, both techniques involve extensive data processing, which can be performed by a multitude of different software solutions. Analysis of quantitative LC-MS/MS data is mainly performed in three major steps: processing of raw data, normalization, and statistical analysis. To evaluate the impact of data processing steps, we developed two new benchmark data sets, one each for DDA and SRM, with samples consisting of a long-range dilution series of synthetic peptides spiked in a total cell protein digest. The generated data were processed by eight different software workflows and three postprocessing steps. The results show that the choice of the raw data processing software and the postprocessing steps play an important role in the final outcome. Also, the linear dynamic range of the DDA data could be extended by an order of magnitude through feature alignment and a charge state merging algorithm proposed here. Furthermore, the benchmark data sets are made publicly available for further benchmarking and software developments.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics, Label-free

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Lund University


