### Accession
PXD011496

### Title
ADAPT identifies an ESCRT complex composition that discriminates VCaP from LNCaP prostate cancer cell exosomes

### Description
Libraries of single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ssODNs) can be enriched for sequences that specifically bind molecules on naïve complex biological samples like cells or tissues. Depending on the enrichment strategy, the ssODNs can identify molecules specifically associated with a defined biological condition, for example a pathological phenotype, and thus are potentially useful for biomarker discovery. We performed ADAPT, a variant of SELEX, on exosomes secreted by VCaP prostate cancer cells. A library of ~1011 ssODNs was enriched for those that bind to VCaP exosomes and discriminate them from exosomes derived from LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) identified the best discriminating ssODNs, nine of which were resynthesized and their discriminatory ability confirmed by qPCR. Affinity purification with one of the sequences (Sequence 7) combined with LC-MS/MS identified its molecular target complex, whereof most proteins are part of or associated with the multiprotein ESCRT complex participating in exosome biogenesis. Within this complex, YBX1 was identified as the directly bound target protein. ADAPT thus is able to differentiate exosomes from cancer cell subtypes from the same lineage. The composition of ESCRT complexes in exosomes from VCaP versus LNCaP cells might constitute a discriminatory element between these prostate cancer subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
The ssODN sequence, herein referred to as Sequence 7, and the reverse complement of Sequence 7 (Sequence 7RC) were synthesized with a biotin affinity tag and were immobilized to Dynabeads® MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) by incubation for 30 min at room temperature in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.3, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 M NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween-20. In addition, a no ssODN control was included in the experiment. Beads were then washed and equilibrated into sample binding buffer, 1X PBS, 3 mM MgCl2. VCaP exosomes were prepared as described for library selection and 200 μg of resuspended exosomes were incubated with 10 μL of prepared beads or no aptamer control beads for 30 min at room temperature with intermittent mixing. Captured exosomes were then lysed on the bead with 1X PBS, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100 and washed two times with lysis buffer followed by three additional washes with 1X PBS, 3 mM MgCl2. All incubation and washing steps were carried out using a MagMAX™ Express-96 Magnetic Particle Processor (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were eluted in 0.3% TFA, 6M Urea for 10 min at 37 °C. Eluted samples were run for 10 minutes on a NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4-12% gradient gel (Life Technologies) to remove any residual PEG. The entire lane (>10 kDa to the stack) was extracted and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin.  Samples containing tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled in-line to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The nano LC system included an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 5μm 100A 300μm×5mm trap column and an EASY-Spray C18 3 μm 100A 75μm×150mm analytical column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto the trap column and held for 5 minutes at a constant flow rate of 6 μL/min using running solvent A, where A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were then eluted using a linear gradient of 2% to 40% B in 35 minutes, where B consisted of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Blank samples consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water were injected between each sample and eluted with the same gradient profile as samples. The LC system was interfaced to the Q Exactive HF using an EASY-Spray electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) and the samples were analyzed using positive ion spray voltage set to 2.4 kV, S-lens RF level at 55, and heated capillary at 300 °C. The Q Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode selecting the top 10 most intense peaks for fragmentation. MS1 survey scans (m/z 375–1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, an accumulation target of 3×106, and maximum fill time of 50 ms. MS2 scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were collected using a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, an accumulation target of 1×105, and maximum fill time of 120 ms, with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27, and charged state recognition between 2 and 7. Dynamic exclusion was applied with exclusion duration of 5 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the Q Exactive HF were analyzed using Sequest HT in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21 suite and searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens fasta database (v2015-11-11, with 42084 entries). Precursor selection was set to use MS1 precursor ions with a signal to noise threshold of 1.5. The search parameters for Sequest HT included full tryptic specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Set dynamic modifications searched were oxidation (15.9949 Da) of methionine, lysine, and proline; carbamidomethyl (57.0214 Da) of histidine, lysine, and cysteine; acetylation (42.0105 Da) of lysine and N-terminus; phosphorylation of serine and threonine; and dimethylation (28.0532 Da) of arginine. Validation of peptide spectrum matches was performed using Percolator with a maximum delta Cn value of 0.05. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was performed using a decoy database from the reverse sequences of the target database with a FDR setting of 0.01 for high confidence peptide matches, and validation base on q-value. High confidence proteins were accepted as having a q-value of 0.01 or lower as determine using a 0.01 target FDR threshold. Proteins detected with a fold-change ratio of the average precursor ion area intensity of Sequence 7/Sequence 7RC, or Sequence 7/no ssODN bead control >2.5 were considered as proteins likely to be enriched by Sequence 7.

### Publication Abstract
Libraries of single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ssODNs) can be enriched for sequences that specifically bind molecules on na&#xef;ve complex biological samples like cells or tissues. Depending on the enrichment strategy, the ssODNs can identify molecules specifically associated with a defined biological condition, for example a pathological phenotype, and thus are potentially useful for biomarker discovery. We performed ADAPT, a variant of SELEX, on exosomes secreted by VCaP prostate cancer cells. A library of &#x223c;1011 ssODNs was enriched for those that bind to VCaP exosomes and discriminate them from exosomes derived from LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) identified the best discriminating ssODNs, nine of which were resynthesized and their discriminatory ability confirmed by qPCR. Affinity purification with one of the sequences (Sequence 7) combined with LC-MS/MS identified its molecular target complex, whereof most proteins are part of or associated with the multiprotein ESCRT complex participating in exosome biogenesis. Within this complex, YBX1 was identified as the directly-bound target protein. ADAPT thus is able to differentiate exosomes from cancer cell subtypes from the same lineage. The composition of ESCRT complexes in exosomes from VCaP versus LNCaP cells might constitute a discriminatory element between these prostate cancer subtypes.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer cells, Adapt, Escrt complex, Aptamers, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Caris Life Science
Caris Science Inc

### Submitter
Matthew Rosenow

### Lab Head
Dr David Spetzler
Caris Science Inc


