### Accession
PXD015611

### Title
Quantitative Rps2 BioID to monitor Asc1-dependent rearrangement at the head region of the 40S ribosome

### Description
In a previous study we applied a quantitative proximity-labeling technique called Biotin Identification (BioID, Roux et al., 2012) to analyze the microenvironment of the Gβ-like scaffold protein Asc1 (Opitz et al., 2017). The WD40-repeat protein Asc1 binds to the head region of the small 40S ribosomal (hr40S) subunit. In this study, we analyzed the hr40S from the perspective of Rps2, a ribosomal neighbor of Asc1. We intended to confirm proteins of the Asc1 proxiOME at the hr40S and to observe changes when Asc1 was absent.  References: Roux K.J., Kim D.I., Raida M., Burke B. 2012. A promiscuous biotin ligase fusion protein identifies proximal and interacting proteins in mammalian cells. J Cell Biol 196:801-810 Opitz N., Schmitt K., Hofer-Pretz V., Neumann B., Krebber H., Braus G.H., Valerius O. 2017. Capturing the Asc1p/RACK1 microenvironment at the head region of the 40S ribosome with quantitative BioID in yeast. Mol Cell Proteomics 16:2199-2218

### Sample Protocol
We expressed RPS2-birA* in ASC1 wildtype as well as in Asc1-deficient cells. To account for unspecific biotinylation, we also expressed free birA* in an ASC1 wildtype strain. We used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) for relative quantification of proteins. The three strains were cultivated in 200 ml yeast nitrogen base (YNB) medium in the presence of stable isotope labeled amino (13C6-L-arginine HCl, 13C6 15N4-L-arginine HCl, 4,4,5,5-D4-L-lysine HCl, 13C6-L-lysine HCl) and 10 μM D-biotin. The cells were harvested when the cultures reached an OD600 of 0.8. Cell pellets were washed and pooled in a 1:1:1 ratio followed by cell lysis under denaturing conditions (4% SDS). Biotinylated proteins were enriched using Strep-Tactin Sepharose gravity flow columns (IBA, 0.2 ml bed volume) as described in Opitz et al. (2017). Proteins of the elution fraction were precipitated and separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was divided into eight pieces and subjected to in-gel digest of proteins with trypsin (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were desalted with C18 stop and go extraction (stage) tips according to Rappsilber et al. (2003) and Rappsilber et al. (2007) and analyzed with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Strep-TactinXT spin columns (IBA, Göttingen) were used to enrich biotinylated peptides. Peptides were purified again using stage tips and subjected to LC-MS analysis. Three biological replicates were analyzed. For the peptide analysis, we used LC systems (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano) coupled to either an Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap or a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped and washed on an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (C18; 100 µm, 2 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analytical peptide separation by reverse-phase chromatography was performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18; 75 µm, 50 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were ionized online by nanoelectrospray ionization (nESI) and were continuously transferred into the mass spectrometer. The software XCalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for LC-MS method programming and data acquisition. References: Shevchenko A., Wilm M., Vorm O., Mann M. 1996. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68:850-858 Rappsilber J., Ishihama Y., Mann M. 2003. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75:663-670 Rappsilber J., Mann M., Ishihama Y. 2007. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2:1896-1906

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and SILAC-based quantification was performed using the MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and an S. cerevisiae-specific protein database (UniProt Proteome ID UP000002311). If not stated otherwise, the programs default parameters were used. The specific digestion mode with trypsin/P was used and the maximum number of missed cleavage sites was set to three. The multiplicity was set to three with Arg6, Arg10, Lys4, and Lys8 as the medium and heavy labels. A maximum of four labeled amino acids per peptide was considered. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and biotinylation of lysine were set as variable modifications. Re-quantification was enabled. MaxQuant output data were further evaluated using the Perseus software 1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016). References: Cox J. & Mann M. 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367-1372  Tyanova S., Temu T., Sinitcyn P., Carlson A., Hein M.Y., Geiger T., Mann M., Cox J. 2016. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13:731-740

### Publication Abstract
Diverse signals and stress factors regulate the activity and homeostasis of ribosomes in all cells. The <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> protein Asc1/yRACK1 occupies an exposed site at the head region of the 40S ribosomal subunit (<i>hr40S</i>) and represents a central hub for signaling pathways. Asc1 strongly affects protein phosphorylation and is involved in quality control pathways induced by translation elongation arrest. Therefore, it is important to understand the dynamics of protein formations in the Asc1 microenvironment at the <i>hr40S</i>. We made use of the in vivo protein-proximity labeling technique Biotin IDentification (BioID). Unbiased proxiOMICs from two adjacent perspectives identified nucleocytoplasmic shuttling mRNA-binding proteins, the deubiquitinase complex Ubp3-Bre5, as well as the ubiquitin E3 ligase Hel2 as neighbors of Asc1. We observed Asc1-dependency of <i>hr40S</i> localization of mRNA-binding proteins and the Ubp3 co-factor Bre5. Hel2 and Ubp3-Bre5 are described to balance the mono-ubiquitination of Rps3 (uS3) during ribosome quality control. Here, we show that the absence of Asc1 resulted in massive exposure and accessibility of the C-terminal tail of its ribosomal neighbor Rps3 (uS3). Asc1 and some of its direct neighbors together might form a ribosomal decision tree that is tightly connected to close-by signaling modules.

### Keywords
Stm1, Translation, Ribosome, Vps30, Def1, Sro9, Bioid, Rps3, Ubp3, Silac, Rps2, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Asc1, Bre5

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics


