### Accession
PXD035475

### Title
Molecular snapshots of translation and protein translocation at the ER membrane

### Description
The dynamic ribosome-translocon complex, which resides at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, produces a major fraction of the human proteome . It governs the synthesis, translocation, membrane insertion, N-glycosylation, folding and disulfide-bond formation of nascent proteins. While individual components of this machine have been studied at high resolution in isolation, insights into their interplay in the native membrane remain limited. Here, we use electron cryo-tomography (cryo-ET), extensive classification and molecular modeling to capture molecular resolution snapshots of mRNA translation and protein maturation at the ER membrane. Comprehensively recapitulating the translational elongation cycle, we identify a highly abundant classical pre-translocation (PRE) intermediate with eEF1a in an extended conformation following the decoding state, which indicates that eEF1a remains ribosome-associated after GTP-hydrolysis during proofreading. The complete atomic structure of the most abundant ER translocon variant comprising the protein-conducting channel Sec61, the translocon-associated protein complex (TRAP) and the oligosaccharyltransferase complex A (OSTA) reveals the molecular framework for signal peptide (SP) membrane insertion and protein N-glycosylation. Associated with OSTA we observe stoichiometric and sub-stoichiometric cofactors, likely including protein isomerases. Collectively, comprehensive analysis of ER-associated protein biogenesis ex vivo reveals numerous mechanistic insights advancing beyond the study of isolated components.

### Sample Protocol
The samples for Mass Spectrometry (MS) based proteomics characterization were prepared as described previously and approximately 50 µg of sample digested using a S-Trap micro spin column (Protifi) according to vendor’s protocol. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and dissolved in 2% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Mass Spectrometry data were acquired using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific). Three technical replicates of each sample were measured. Peptides are first trapped in a pre-column (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on the analytical column packed in-house (Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm), both columns were kept at 40 ˚C in the built-in oven. Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water), and the elution gradient profile was as follows: 0 – 10% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) over 5 min, 13 - 44% solvent B over 37 min, 44-100% solvent B over 4 min, and finally 100% B for 4 min before re-equilibration in 100% A for 8 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra were collected in a m/z range of 350 – 1300 Th in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. In-source fragmentation was activated and set to 15 eV. The cycle time for the acquisition of MS/MS fragmentation scans was set to 1 s. Dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1 and to an exclusion duration of 10 s. HCD fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed with a fixed normalized collision energy of 27% and the mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at 200 Th after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e5 with an isolation window of 1.4 Th.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software(Cox and Mann 2008) version 2.0.1.0 with standard settings applied. Briefly, the extracted peak lists were searched against the reviewed Human UniProtKB database (date 15-07-2021; 20353 entries), with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications (maximum 5 modifications per peptide allowed). Both LFQ quantification and “match between runs” were enabled. The iBAQ values in Supplementary Figure XXX are approximate absolute abundances of the identified proteins derived by the normalization of the summed peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides for a given protein (Schwanhäusser 2011).

### Publication Abstract
The dynamic ribosome-translocon complex, which resides at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, produces a major fraction of the human proteome<sup>1,2</sup>. It governs the synthesis, translocation, membrane insertion, N-glycosylation, folding and disulfide-bond formation of nascent proteins. Although individual components of this machinery have been studied at high resolution in isolation<sup>3-7</sup>, insights into their interplay in the native membrane remain limited. Here we use cryo-electron tomography, extensive classification and molecular modelling to capture snapshots of mRNA translation and protein maturation at the ER membrane at molecular resolution. We identify a highly abundant classical pre-translocation intermediate with eukaryotic elongation factor 1a (eEF1a) in an extended conformation, suggesting that eEF1a may remain associated with the ribosome after GTP hydrolysis during proofreading. At the ER membrane, distinct polysomes bind to different ER translocons specialized in the synthesis of proteins with signal peptides or multipass transmembrane proteins with the translocon-associated protein complex (TRAP) present in both. The near-complete atomic model of the most abundant ER translocon variant comprising the protein-conducting channel SEC61, TRAP and the oligosaccharyltransferase complex A (OSTA) reveals specific interactions of TRAP with other translocon components. We observe stoichiometric and sub-stoichiometric cofactors associated with OSTA, which are likely to include protein isomerases. In sum, we visualize ER-bound polysomes with their coordinated downstream machinery.

### Keywords
Er membrane, Ribosome, Elongation factor 1

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Utrecht University


