### Accession
PXD023903

### Title
Characterization of chromatin associated RNA-binding proteins by SPACE

### Description
Chromatin processes such as DNA replication, transcription and RNA processing are mediated by intermolecular transactions among proteins, RNAs and the genome. Although DNA-protein and RNA-protein interactions have been studied extensively, reliable and efficient identification of chromatin-associated RNA-binding proteins (caRBPs) has remained technically challenging; especially using limited sample material. Here, we present SPACE (Silica Particle Assisted Chromatin Enrichment), a stringent and straightforward chromatin-purification method, which works efficiently with as few as 100,000 cells. Using SPACE we have enriched 1825 chromatin-associated proteins in mES cells. Among many known and novel chromatin-associated proteins, we identified 743 RBPs. Considering protein counts RBPs consist 40% of the chromatin composition, while, weighted by their abundances they comprise ~70% of the chromatome. Furthermore, using a double tryptic digestion strategy (SPACE2) we have determined how the caRBPs bind to chromatin. By applying SPACE to mES cells in 2i and serum conditions, we have detected significant changes in the chromatome of the cells that are neglected in traditional full proteome analyses. Overall, SPACE and SPACE2 are sensitive and powerful methods for providing a global view of chromatin composition and RBP-chromatin interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Details of the SPACE protocol is available in the manuscript. Briefly, the mES cells were crosslinked by adding formaldehyde (final concentration 1%) in the medium of the cells (Heavy SILAC). As the negative control, the mES cells were not treated with formaldehyde. Then the cells were lyzed using lysis buffer and 2-propanol. The crosslinked and non-crosslinked samples were mixed, and magnetic DNA-binding beads were added to the lysate. Chromatin is separated by the magnetic beads, and is washed several times. Then chromatin is eluted, and treated with RNase A. After that, chromatin is separated once again using the magnetic beads. Finally the purified chromatin-associated proteins are treated with DTT to reduce the disulfide bonds, and IAA to alkylate them. Then they are digested on the beads using Trypsin/LysC. The peptides are cleaned up by ZipTips to be analyzed by a mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.6) using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Uniprot (Swissprot) database (Mus musculus and Homo sapiens) and database of contaminants. Trypsin/P and LysC were chosen as enzyme specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. Global false discovery rate for both protein and peptides was set to 1%. The match-from-and-to and re-quantify options were enabled, and Intensity-based quantification options (iBAQ) were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbp, Chromatin, Idr, Proteomics, Pluripotency, Dazl

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute,  1 Midland Road,  London NW1 1AT, UK.

### Submitter
Mahmoudreza Rafiee

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Luscombe
The Francis Crick Institute,  1 Midland Road,  London NW1 1AT, UK.


