### Accession
PXD038303

### Title
Fucosylation of HLA-DRB1 regulates CD4+T cell-mediated anti-melanoma immunity and enhances immunotherapy efficacy: Fucose Click Chemistry

### Description
Immunotherapy efficacy is limited in melanoma, and combinations of immunotherapies with other modalities have yielded limited improvements but also adverse events requiring cessation of treatment. In addition to ineffective patient stratification, efficacy is impaired by paucity of intratumoral immune cells (itICs)—thus, effective strategies to safely increase itICs are needed. We report that dietary administration of L-fucose induces fucosylation and cell surface enrichment of the MHC-II protein HLA-DRB1 in melanoma cells, triggering CD4+T cell-mediated increases in ItICs and anti-tumor immunity, enhancing immune checkpoint blockade responses. Melanoma fucosylation and fucosylated HLA-DRB1 associate with intratumoral T cell abundance and anti-PD1 responder status in patient melanoma specimens, suggesting the potential use of melanoma fucosylation as a strategy for stratifying patients for immunotherapies. Our findings demonstrate that fucosylation is a key mediator of anti-tumor immunity, and importantly, suggest that L-fucose is a powerful agent for safely increasing ItICs and immunotherapy efficacy in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
WM793 cells transduced stably with either pLenti-GFP-EV, or pLenti-FUK-GFP, or shFUK (B3) (for ~2-weeks in the presence of 1µg/ml puromycin) were grown in triplicate to ~30-40% confluence in 3 X 15 cm^3 plates each. The cells were labeled with 50µM L-fucose-alkyne (Click-It Fucose kit, C10264; Invitrogen). After 72 h of labeling, The cells (~80-90% confluence) were harvested by scraping into 4ml (per condition) 1.5% DDM/20mM HEPES pH 7.4/prot+ppt inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were sonicated (level 3…viral core micro tip sonicator…2 X 15 sec) on ice and cleared by centrifugation at full speed for 5 minutes at 4C. Lysates were acetone precipitated overnight. The pelleted proteins were resuspended according to steps 7.1 (Click-it labeling protocol) and subjected to click-chemistry labeling with biotin-azide as per Invitrogen protocol…(see in folder). For negative control, pLenti-GFP-EV cells were not labeled with L-fucose-alkyne but were lysed, pelleted, and labeled with biotin-azide. All biotin-azide samples were pulled down using neutravidin beads that were pre-blocked with 2% IgG-free BSA.  Samples were submitted to SBMRI proteomics facility for on-bead digest; supernatants from on-bead digest were analyzed by LC/MS/MS.  A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph and nanoelectrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (Easy nLC and Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo) were used for LC-MS/MS.  The sample was loaded onto a pre-column  and washed for 5 minutes with 6% solvent B.  Trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column .  A 180-minute gradient was programmed as: 94% solvent A   for 5 minutes, solvent B from 6% to 16% in 125 minutes, then solvent B from 16% to 28% B in 22 minutes, 28% to 38% in 8 minutes, 38% to 85% in 4 minutes and held at 85% for 15 minutes. The flow rate was 300 nl/min. Spray voltage was 2500 V. Capillary temperature was 275 °C. S lens RF level was set at 65. Top 10 tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner. Mass range for MS1 was 350-1600. The resolution for MS was set at 60,000. CID normalized collision energy was 35. Precursor isolation window was 2. Dynamic exclusion was 30 seconds for previously sampled peaks.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) using Mascot as the search engine.  MaxQuant  software (version 1.6.2.10) was used to identify and quantify the interacting proteins.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation were allowed as post-translational modifications.  Trypsin enzymatic specificity was selected with up to 2 missed cleavages.  Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Fucosylation, Melanoma, Hla-drb1

### Affiliations
Tumor Biology Department Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Lau, PhD
Tumor Biology Department Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


