### Accession
PXD032398

### Title
For origin melting Rep nucleoprotein complex accommodates both dsDNA and ssDNA of DUE

### Description
The replication initiation proteins interact dsDNA located at replication origin and ssDNA of DNA unwinding element (DUE), formed as a result of the destabilization of the double-stranded helix of AT-rich origin region. It is a critical step in the DNA replication initiation; however, the structure of nucleoprotein complex involving initiator protein, dsDNA and/or ssDNA is still elusive and different models are proposed. In this work, based on crosslinking combined with mass spectrometry (MS), structural and bioinformatic analysis, we defined amino acid residues in plasmid Rep proteins, TrfA and RepE, that are essential for interaction with ssDNA. The study of Rep mutant proteins containing single amino acid substitutions affecting DNA interaction reveals the importance of Rep-ssDNA complexes formation for a dsDNA melting at DUE. Furthermore, the crystal structures obtained for complex of RepE protein with DUE ssDNA, and, RepE complexed with both DUE ssDNA and dsDNA containing RepE specific binding site (iteron) revealed that the plasmid initiator can not only bind iterons and ssDNA DUE separately but also can form a tripartite nucleoprotein complex bringing together specific sequences of replication origin. The presented data strongly supports the loop-back model in which a replication initiator molecule interacts with dsDNA and ssDNA.

### Sample Protocol
The UV crosslinking reactions were essentially performed as described previously (20). The reaction mixtures contained 1 µM ssDNA with the internal modification 5 Br dU (5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (Metabion), 10 µM RepE or 56 µM TrfA protein, 40 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM ATP, and 10 mM magnesium acetate. The mixtures were assembled on ice, followed by incubation at 32°C for 20 min. UV irradiation was performed at 120000 µJ/cm2 in a crosslinker (CL-1000 UV crosslinker, UVP, USA; 302 nm lamp). For RepE protein, the reaction mixtures were separated in 10% SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. For TrfA protein, the reaction mixtures after UV crosslinking were not separated in SDS-PAGE but directly precipitated with ethanol. For RepE-ssDNA, TrfA-ssDNA and TrfA-ssDNA, the samples were mixed with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid matrix (DHB, 10 mg/ml) dissolved in 50% ACN with 0.1% TFA and analyzed by 5800 MALDITOF/TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA), with detection in the linear middle mass  in range from 5000 to 20 000 Da, positive ion mode for a total of 1000 laser shots with a 1 kHz OptiBeam laser (YAG, 349 nm). Laser intensity was corrected for all tested samples. Registered MS spectra were examined with Data Explorer software (AB Sciex). All MALDI‐TOF MS spectra registered in this study were averages of six replicated measurements (2 independent measurements each containing 3 technical repetitions) per analyzed sample.

### Data Protocol
Peptide masses were compared with those predicted (FindPept and PeptideMass) for tryptic digestion of RepE and TrfA, allowing for missed cleavages. Orphan peaks were classified as potential crosslinked peptide pairs. These peaks were identified by comparing their experimental masses with those calculated for any pair of tryptic peptides, including at least one internal undigested Lys residue plus 98.1 Da (the mass of the reacted DSG bridge) (23).

### Publication Abstract
For DNA replication initiation in Bacteria, replication initiation proteins bind to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and interact with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) at the replication origin. The structural-functional relationship of the nucleoprotein complex involving initiator proteins is still elusive and different models are proposed. In this work, based on crosslinking combined with mass spectrometry (MS), the analysis of mutant proteins and crystal structures, we defined amino acid residues essential for the interaction between plasmid Rep proteins, TrfA and RepE, and ssDNA. This interaction and Rep binding to dsDNA could not be provided in trans, and both are important for dsDNA melting at DNA unwinding element (DUE). We solved two crystal structures of RepE: one in a complex with ssDNA DUE, and another with both ssDNA DUE and dsDNA containing RepE-specific binding sites (iterons). The amino acid residues involved in interaction with ssDNA are located in the WH1 domain in stand &#x3b2;1, helices &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;2 and in the WH2 domain in loops preceding strands &#x3b2;1' and &#x3b2;2' and in these strands. It is on the opposite side compared to RepE dsDNA-recognition interface. Our data provide evidence for a loop-back mechanism through which the plasmid replication initiator molecule accommodates together dsDNA and ssDNA.

### Keywords
Origin opening, Protein-dna interaction, Rep proteins, Dna replication, Replication initiators

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry


