### Accession
PXD034154

### Title
Src Family Kinases as potential therapeutic targets for chemotherapy-resistant triple negative breast cancer

### Description
Here we quantified tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) mediated signaling networks in chemotherapy sensitive (CS) and resistant (CR) TNBC patient derived xenografts (PDX) to gain novel therapeutic insights. We identified Src Family Kinases (SFKs) as potential therapeutic targets in CR TNBC PDXs. Additionally, we performed pTyr analysis on tumor specimens derived from TNBC patients and observed lower prevalence of SFK driven tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tumors were homogenized in ice-cold 8M urea. Protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 56 °C followed by alkylation of thiols with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour in dark. Samples were diluted > 4-fold with 100mM ammonium acetate (pH 8.9). Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature at 50:1 protein to trypsin ratio. Samples were acidified with acetic acid before desalting on a C18 Sep-Pak Plus cartridges. Eluates were concentrated in speed-vac centrifuge, aliquoted to 400 µg of starting protein (~150 µg tryptic peptides), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C. FFPE samples were processed as described previously. For tandem mass tag (TMT) based quantitative analysis, peptides were labeled with TMT10plex or TMTpro16plex reagents, pooled and dried in speed-vac. Phosphotyrosine containing peptides were enriched using immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). Phosphopeptides were directly loaded onto in-house packed capillary column. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Agilent 1260 LC coupled with a Q Exactive Plus or HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) on a 140 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and search against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). The search parameters included a minimum peptide length of six amino acids; maximum of two missed cleavages; fixed modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT labeled lysine and TMT labeled peptide N-termini; variable modifications for oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) remains the cornerstone of the treatment for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), with the goal of complete eradication of disease. However, for patients with residual disease after NAC, recurrence and mortality rates are high and the identification of novel therapeutic targets is urgently needed. We quantified tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr)-mediated signaling networks in chemotherapy sensitive (CS) and resistant (CR) TNBC patient-derived xenografts (PDX), to gain novel therapeutic insights. The antitumor activity of SFK inhibition was examined in vivo. Treated tumors were further subjected to phosphoproteomic and RNAseq analysis, to identify the mechanism of actions of the drug. We identified Src Family Kinases (SFKs) as potential therapeutic targets in CR TNBC PDXs. Treatment with dasatinib, an FDA approved SFK inhibitor, led to inhibition of tumor growth in vivo. Further analysis of post-treatment PDXs revealed multiple mechanisms of actions of the drug, confirming the multi-target inhibition of dasatinib. Analysis of pTyr in tumor specimens suggested a low prevalence of SFK-driven tumors, which may provide insight into prior clinical trial results demonstrating a lack of dasatinib antitumor activity in unselected breast cancer patients. Taken together, these results underscore the importance of pTyr characterization of tumors, in identifying new targets, as well as stratifying patients based on their activated signaling networks for therapeutic options. Our data provide a strong rationale for studying SFK inhibitors in biomarker-selected SFK-driven TNBC.

### Keywords
Chemotherapy resistance, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphotyrosine, Breast cancer, Tnbc

### Affiliations
 Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Ishwar Kohale

### Lab Head
Dr Forest M. White
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA


