### Accession
PXD010496

### Title
Human plasma proteins detected by HPLC-MS/MS after blood incubation with E. coli treated/not treated with  mucin

### Description
Whole human blood incubated with E. coli isolate with or without bound mucin. Plasma was obtained and the effect of mucin bound to E. coli on plasma proteins content was analysed by HPLC-MS-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples list  (each sample type was performed in 2 biological repeats, each repeat consisted of 3 parts (3 PAGE gel fractions)) Sample name                         HPLC-MS-MS sample numbers                  plasma from [blood + SharL1-mucin] a466-468 (a466, a467, a468) plasma from [blood + SharL1-mucin] a469-471 (a469, a470, a471) plasma from [blood + SharL1]   a472-474 (a472, a473, a474) plasma from [blood + SharL1]   a478-480 (a478, a479, a480) plasma from [blood + mucin]   a484-486 (a484, a485, a486) plasma from [blood + mucin]   a487-489 (a487, a488, a489) plasma from [blood + NaCl]   a490-492 (a490, a491, a492) plasma from [blood + NaCl]   a493-495 (a493, a492, a495)  Samples processing E. coli strains isolation and cultivation. In this study we used clinical isolate achieved from liquid ileal content of Crohn’s disease patient during diagnostic endoscopy at Central Scientific Institute of Gastroenterology (Moscow Clinical Research Centre, Moscow). Material collection was approved by local Ethics Committee, patient has given written informed conscent for research and publication of data. Isolate SharL1, used in this study,  belonged to phylogroup B2, demonstrated adhesion (not invasion) to CaCo cells, and mobility.  Isolate was cultivated in LB at 37oC (200 RPM) for 14 h. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation (3 500 g, 15 min) and pellet was washed twice with PBS. Bacterial suspensions used in experiments, were normalized by absorbance at 540 nm (OD 540). 1 OD unit in 1 ml cuvette was equal to 0.2 mg/ml of dry weight of bacteria (DW) and contained 8∙108 CFU/ml. Mucin binding by bacteria.  Suspension of E.coli isolate SharL1 in 0.15 M NaCl was added to 1ml of 0.1 mg/ml mucin solution in 0.15 M NaCl, so that final concentration of bacteria was 0.09 mg DW (air-dry weight)/ml. The probes were incubated for 1h at 25oC, centrifuged (20 min, 900 g). Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.15 M NaCl for further analyses. Mucin-treated cells were marked  as SharL1-muc. Blood collection.  Blood was obtained from median cubital vein of healthy volunteer (female, 56 years) by venipuncture using sodium citrate vacutainers.  Blood collection was approved by local Ethics Committee, donor has given written informed consent for research and publication of data. The assay was conducted within 4 h from blood collection. Activation of whole blood by bacteria.   Blood samples were incubated with bacterial suspensions or reference solutions. 400 µl of blood was mixed with 100 µl of suspension of SharL1 or SharL1-muc  (finally 30 µg(DW)/ml). In reference probes blood was mixed with 100 µl of 0.15M NaCl or 100µl of 0.1mg/ml mucin in 0.15M NaCl. Probes were incubated for 5 m at 25oC. Then samples was centrifuged (10m, 400g) and plasma was separated and frozen at -80oC plasma proteins assay. Trypsinolysis of plasma samples. plasma samples (10 ul) were diluted 50 times and proteins were precipitated by 10% TCA. After incubation at -20o C for 1 h samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 16 000 g. Pellet was washed twice with cold acetone, dried and diluted in Laemmli buffer (BioRad) by 5 min heating at 95oC. After centrifugation for 5 min at 16 000 g, protein concentration was measured in supernatant by Bradford assay (Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay, BioRad). Samples (50 ug of protein per lane) were loaded onto 7.5% SDS-PAGE. Gel was stained with Coomassie G-250 and destained with 10% acetic acid. Lane was divided into three parts and the major protein spot of albumin was cut out to increase the number of identified proteins. Trypsinolysis of proteins in gel was performed as described in [Matyushkina  2017]. Peptides extracts were dried at SpeedVac (Labconco) and dissolved in 15 ul of LC-MS-MS sample buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid. HPLC-MS-MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was carried out using Ultimate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a maXis qTOF after HDC-cell upgrade (Bruker) with a nano-electrospray source. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a C-18 reversed phase column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 150 mm x 75 um, particle diameter 3.5 um, Agilent). Gradient parameters were as follows: 5-35% acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, column flow 0.3 ul/min. Gradient duration was 60 min (plasma samples) or 5 min (proteins from nitrocellulose filters). Positive MS and MS/MS spectra were aquired using AutoMSMS mode (capillary voltage 1700, curtain gas flow and temperature 4 l and 170o C, spectra rate 4 Hz, 20 precursors, m/z range 200-1500, active exclusion after 2 spectra, release after 0.5 min).  Refs. Matyushkina DS, Butenko IO, Pobeguts OV, Fisunov GY, Govorun VM. ПProteomic response of bacteria during the interaction with a host cell in a model of Mycoplasma gallisepticum. Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry, 2017,  43 (5). 507–517

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative analysis. Lists of compounds (mgf files) were generated after lockmass calibration with Compass DataAnalysis (Bruker). One sample consisted of three injections, therefore generated compound lists were united into one.  Protein identification was performed by peptide search with Mascot Data Search with the following parameters: Peptide Mass Tolerance 0,05 Da, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0,1 Da, variable modifications were Propionamide (C) and Oxidation (M)), cutting enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage per peptide was allowed. Peptide search for protein identification was made versus swisspot database (taxonomy Homo_sapiens).  Protein abundance was evaluated by label-free method using emPAI (Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index) determined by Mascot Data Search for each identified protein [Shinoda 2010]. For plasma samples mean value (MV) of emPaI indexes were calculated for two biological repeats. emPAI of each protein was normalized to total emPAI of the sample. Ratios of normalized mean emPAIs show fold change in protein abundances.  Refs. Shinoda K, Tomita M, Ishihama Y. emPAI Calc–for the estimation of protein abundance from large-scale identification data by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics. 2010;26:576–7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp700

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria colonizing human intestine adhere to the gut mucosa and avoid the innate immune system. We previously demonstrated that Escherichia&#xa0;coli isolates can adsorb mucin from a diluted solution in&#xa0;vitro. Here, we evaluated the effect of mucin adsorption by E.&#xa0;coli cells on neutrophil activation in&#xa0;vitro. Activation was evaluated based on the detection of reactive oxygen species production by a chemiluminescent reaction (ChL), observation of morphological alterations in neutrophils and detection of exocytosis of myeloperoxidase and lactoferrin. We report that mucin adsorbed by cells of SharL1 isolate from Crohn's disease patient's inflamed ileum suppressed the potential for the activation of neutrophils in whole blood. Also, the binding of plasma complement proteins and immunoglobulins to the bacteria was reduced. Desialylated mucin, despite having the same adsorption efficiency to bacteria, had no effect on the blood ChL response. The effect of mucin suggests that it shields epitopes that interact with neutrophils and plasma proteins on the bacterial outer membrane. Potential candidates for these epitopes were identified among the proteins within the bacterial outer membrane fraction by 2D-PAGE, fluorescent mucin binding on a blot and HPLC-MS/MS. In&#xa0;vitro, the following proteins demonstrated mucin adsorption: outer membrane porins (OmpA, OmpC, OmpD and OmpF), adhesin OmpX, the membrane assembly factor OmpW, cobalamine transporter, ferrum uptake protein and the elongation factor Ef Tu-1. In addition to their other functions, these proteins are known to be bacterial surface antigens. Therefore, the shielding of epitopes by mucin may affect the dynamics and intensity of an immune response.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mucin, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia
Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Daria Rakitina

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Yurievich Fisunov
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia


