### Accession
PXD027477

### Title
NEDD8 S65 phosphorylation under different stress conditions

### Description
In this project we present the identification of NEDD8 S65 phosphorylation under mitochondrial and DNA double strand break (DSB) stress conditions. Relative comparison revealed elevated levels of pNEDD8 under mitochondrial stress and reduced levels of pNEDD8 under DSB stress.

### Sample Protocol
MS using overexpressed HA-His-NEDD8/HA-His-NEDD8 S65A in HEK293T cells. Enriched NEDD8 and neddylated proteins were eluted, following in-gel tryptic digest and targeted LC-MS/MS measurement. Data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer and Mascot. For the mitochondrial stress the MS samples were prepared in biological quintuplicates and measured in technical duplicates for replicate 1&2 and triplicates for replicate 3-5. For the etoposide treatment the MS samples were prepared in biological duplicates and each of these was measured with technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were analyzed using Protein Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo). The fragmentation spectra were searched against the Swissprot database with the MASCOT search engine. For further data processing Graph Pad Prism 6 was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Nedd8, Stress

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz
Scheffner Group, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Katrin  Stuber

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin Scheffner
Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz


