### Accession
PXD041879

### Title
Rapid, One-step Sample Processing for Label-Free Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
Sample preparation for single-cell proteomics is generally performed in a one-pot workflow with multiple dispensing and incubation steps. These hours-long workflows can be labor intensive and lead to long sample-to-answer times. Here we report a sample processing method that achieves cell lysis, protein denaturation and digestion in one hour with a single reagent dispensing step using commercially available high-temperature-stabilized proteases. Four different one-step reagent compositions were evaluated, and the mixture providing greatest proteome coverage was compared to the previously employed multi-step workflow. The one-step preparation increases proteome coverage relative to the multi-step workflow while minimizing labor input and the possibility of human error. We also compared sample recovery between previously used microfabricated glass nanowell chips and injection-molded polypropylene substrates, and found the polypropylene provided improved proteome coverage. Combined, the one-step sample preparation and the polypropylene substrates enabled identification of an average of nearly 2,400 proteins per cell using a standard data-dependent workflow with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer. As such, these advances significantly simplify sample preparation for single-cell proteomics and broaden accessibility with no compromise in terms of proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
After determining the reagent mixture that provided greatest proteome coverage, all subsequent single cell samples were prepared with a one-step reagent containing 0.05% DDM and the proteases trypsin and lys-C. All one-step solutions were dispensed in 200 nL volumes using the cellenONE X1 with the stage cooled to 12 °C. After dispensing, samples were incubated at 70 °C for 1 h. The nanowell chips were covered with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-coated microscope slide and kept in a humid chamber to minimize evaporation as described previously32. Following preparation, the samples were dried under vacuum and then stored at -80 °C.  The standard nanoPOTS preparation was performed following the previously described method on glass nanowell chips. In brief, a solution containing 0.2% DDM and 5 mM DTT was dispensed into nanowells containing single cells and incubated at 70 °C for 1 h to lyse the cells and reduce proteins. The nanowell slides were covered with a PDMS-coated microscope and kept in a humid chamber as described above during each incubation. The nanowell chip was then cooled to room temperature, after which 50 nL of 30 mM IAA was added and incubated in the dark for 30 min at 25 °C for alkylation. Next, 0.2 ng of lys-C was added and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, followed by the addition of 0.2 ng of trypsin and incubation for 10 h at 37 °C for proteolysis. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 0.1% TFA and incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. The samples were then dried under vacuum and then stored at -80°C.  NanoLC separations were carried out using a modified Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system as described previously.39 The flow rate was ~30 nL/min and the active gradient was ~50 min. The percentage of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) was increased from 1% to 8% in 2 min, from 8% to 25% in 52 min, and from 25% to 35% in 4 min. Column washing and regeneration were performed in 20 min by ramping the percentage of mobile phase B from 35% to 75% and then back to 2%. An Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) was used to compare reagent compositions for the one-step preparation. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 200 °C, and the RF lens was set at 30%. The MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a scan range from m/z 375–1575, the AGC target was 300%, and the maximum injection time was 118 ms. Precursors were selected for fragmentation based on a minimum intensity of 5.0×103 and a charge state of 2-4. MS2 spectra were obtained using the orbitrap with the resolution set to 60,000, 200% AGC target, HCD collision energy of 30%, maximum injection time of 118 ms, dynamic exclusion of 30 s, and cycle time of 1.5 s. An Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) was used to compare one-step and multistep sample preparations and to compare different nanowell substrates. The MS settings were the same as above, with the exception that the RF lens was at 50%.

### Data Protocol
Fragpipe software version 19.1 with MSFragger version 3.7, IonQuant version 1.8.10, and Philosopher version 4.8.1 were used for analysis. The protein sequence database UP000005640, including reviewed sequences, decoys, and contaminants was downloaded from UniProt on September 27, 2022. We used a precursor mass tolerance of 20 u and strict trypsin enzymatic digestion with a peptide length of 7-50 and mass range of 500-5,000 u, allowing for a maximum of two missed cleavages. The variable modifications included N-terminal acetylation (42.0106 u), methionine oxidation (15.9949 u), and cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (57.02146 u) to account for alkylation and potential post-translational modifications. The results were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM and protein levels. For match-between-runs (MBR), we employed a retention time tolerance of 0.4 minutes, m/z tolerance of 10 ppm, and an FDR of 0.05.  For quantifiable proteins, all protein data were imported into the R programming language from the “combined_peptide.tsv” or “combined_protein.tsv” files exported from FragPipe. The raw abundances were filtered for a maximum of 33% missing values and normalized to the median intensity for further processing. Coefficients of variation (CV’s) were calculated as the  standard deviation over the mean for all quantifiable proteins, and the mean intensity of each of the quantifiable proteins in each group was used for plotting the Pearson correlation curve. The Grand Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY) scores for each peptide were calculated using the Peptides hydrophobicity package.

### Publication Abstract
Sample preparation for single-cell proteomics is generally performed in a one-pot workflow with multiple dispensing and incubation steps. These hours-long processes can be labor intensive and lead to long sample-to-answer times. Here we report a sample preparation method that achieves cell lysis, protein denaturation, and digestion in 1 h using commercially available high-temperature-stabilized proteases with a single reagent dispensing step. Four different one-step reagent compositions were evaluated, and the mixture providing the highest proteome coverage was compared to the previously employed multistep workflow. The one-step preparation increases proteome coverage relative to the previous multistep workflow while minimizing labor input and the possibility of human error. We also compared sample recovery between previously used microfabricated glass nanowell chips and injection-molded polypropylene chips and found the polypropylene provided improved proteome coverage. Combined, the one-step sample preparation and the polypropylene substrates enabled the identification of an average of nearly 2400 proteins per cell using a standard data-dependent workflow with Orbitrap mass spectrometers. These advances greatly simplify sample preparation for single-cell proteomics and broaden accessibility with no compromise in terms of proteome coverage.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Sample preparation, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ryan T. Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University


