### Accession
PXD032347

### Title
Acclimatization of Methylocystis to inhibitory NH4+ levels  by multiple proteomic and metabolic response mechanisms

### Description
High NH4+ load is known to competitively inhibit bacterial methane oxidation. This is due to a competition between CH4 and NH4+/NH3 for the active site of particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO), which converts CH4 to CH3OH. Here, we combined growth experiments with global proteomics to elucidate the capability of the methanotroph Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 in acclimatizing to increased NH4+ levels. Our experimental approach also involved amino acid profiling and measurement of NOx compounds. Relative to 1 mM NH4+, high (50 mM and 75 mM) NH4+ load under CH4 replete conditions significantly increased lag phase duration required for proteome adjustment. The proteomic and metabolic responses to increasing ionic and osmotic stress involved significant upregulation of stress-responsive proteins, K+ “salt in” strategy, synthesis of compatible solutes (glutamate and proline), and induction of the glutathione metabolism pathway. A significant increase in the apparent Km value for CH4 oxidation during the growth phase was indicative of increased pMMO-based oxidation of NH4+/NH3 to toxic hydroxylamine. The detoxifying activity of hydroxlyamine oxidoreductase (HAO) led to a significant accumulation of NO2- and, upon decreasing O2 tension, N2O. Putative free intermediate of HAO activity was NO, with NO reductase and hybrid cluster proteins (Hcps) being the candidate enzymes for the reduction of NO to N2O. In summary, strain SC2 has the capacity to precisely rebalance enzymes and osmolyte composition, but the need to simultaneously combat both ionic-osmotic stress and the toxic effects of hydroxylamine may be the reason why its acclimatization capacity is limited to 75 mM NH4+.

### Sample Protocol
The extraction of total proteins was done as described previously (Hakobyan et al., 2018). Briefly, the frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 400 ul of 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis buffer. Samples were incubated for 30 min at 95 °C, followed by sonication for 1× 20 sec using VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasound Technology, Germany). After adding 10 μl TCEP (tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine), samples were incubated for additional 30 min at 95 °C. Subsequently, the protein samples were allowed to cool down, followed by the addition of 10 μl of freshly prepared iodacetamide solution (IAA) and incubation for 30 minutes at 25 °C in the dark. The protein concentration in each sample was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A sample aliquot (50 μg) of total solubilized protein was used for protein digestion. LysC (0.5 μg, Wako Chemicals GmbH) was added directly to the protein extract and incubated for 4 h at 30 °C, followed by trypsin (1 μg, Promega) digestion overnight at 30 °C. Subsequently, 200 μl HPLC water was added to each digested protein extract. Prior to LC–MS analysis, traces of SDC were precipitated using 1% trifluoroacetic acid. The precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation for 10-15 minutes at maximum speed. The protein digests were desalted using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using the Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house packed C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were first loaded onto a C18 precolumn (preconcentration set-up) and then eluted in backflush mode using a gradient from 96% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 115 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200) with a scanning range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS acquisition, the charged state screening modus was activated to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (both MS and MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106 for MS survey scans and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans (for details see (Hakobyan et al., 2018)).

### Data Protocol
Discovery-LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0) as described before (for details see (Hakobyan et al., 2018)). Next, the data obtained from Progenesis were evaluated using SafeQuant R package, version 2.2.2 (Glatter et al., 2012). Hereby, a 1% identification and quantification false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated. Differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) with log2-fold change ≥ 1 (upregulated) or ≤ -1 (downregulated), q-value ≤ 0.01 were submitted to database of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for enrichment function analysis.

### Publication Abstract
A high NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> load is known to inhibit bacterial methane oxidation. This is due to a competition between CH<sub>4</sub> and NH<sub>3</sub> for the active site of particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO), which converts CH<sub>4</sub> to CH<sub>3</sub>OH. Here, we combined global proteomics with amino acid profiling and nitrogen oxides measurements to elucidate the cellular acclimatization response of <i>Methylocystis</i> sp. strain SC2 to high NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> levels. Relative to 1&#x2009;mM NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>, a high (50&#x2009;mM and 75&#x2009;mM) NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> load under CH<sub>4</sub>-replete conditions significantly increased the lag phase duration required for proteome adjustment. The number of differentially regulated proteins was highly significantly correlated with an increasing NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> load. The cellular responses to increasing ionic and osmotic stress involved a significant upregulation of stress-responsive proteins, the K<sup>+</sup> "salt-in" strategy, the synthesis of compatible solutes (glutamate and proline), and the induction of the glutathione metabolism pathway. A significant increase in the apparent <i>K<sub>m</sub></i> value for CH<sub>4</sub> oxidation during the growth phase was indicative of increased pMMO-based oxidation of NH<sub>3</sub> to toxic hydroxylamine. The detoxifying activity of hydroxlyamine oxidoreductase (HAO) led to a significant accumulation of NO<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup> and, upon decreasing O<sub>2</sub> tension, N<sub>2</sub>O. Nitric oxide reductase and hybrid cluster proteins (Hcps) were the candidate enzymes for the production of N<sub>2</sub>O. In summary, strain SC2 has the capacity to precisely rebalance enzymes and osmolyte composition in response to increasing NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> exposure, but the need to simultaneously combat both ionic-osmotic stress and the toxic effects of hydroxylamine may be the reason why its acclimatization capacity is limited to 75&#x2009;mM NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> In addition to reducing CH<sub>4</sub> emissions from wetlands and landfills, the activity of alphaproteobacterial methane oxidizers of the genus <i>Methylocystis</i> contributes to the sink capacity of forest and grassland soils for atmospheric methane. The methane-oxidizing activity of <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. is, however, sensitive to high NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> concentrations. This is due to the competition of CH<sub>4</sub> and NH<sub>3</sub> for the active site of particulate methane monooxygenase, thereby resulting in the production of toxic hydroxylamine with an increasing NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> load. An understanding of the physiological and molecular response mechanisms of <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. is therefore of great importance. Here, we combined global proteomics with amino acid profiling and NOx measurements to disentangle the cellular mechanisms underlying the acclimatization of <i>Methylocystis</i> sp. strain SC2 to an increasing NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> load.

### Keywords
Methylocystis sp. strain sc2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


