### Accession
PXD020428

### Title
Glutathionylation decreases methyltransferase activity of PRMT5 and inhibits cell proliferation

### Description
Glutathionylation is an important posttranslational modification that protects proteins from further oxidative damage as well as influencing protein structure and activity. In the present study, we demonstrate that the cysteine-42 residue in protein arginine N-methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) is glutathionylated in aged mice or in cells that have been exposed to oxidative stress. Deglutathionylation of this protein is catalyzed by glutaredoxin-1 (Grx1). Using mutagenesis and subsequent biochemical analyses, we show that glutathionylation decreased the binding affinity of PRMT5 with methylosome protein-50 (MEP50) and reduced the methyltransferase activity of PRMT5. Furthermore, overexpression of PRMT5-C42A mutant caused a significant increase in histone methylation in HEK293T and A549 cells and promoted cell growth, whereas overexpression of the PRMT5-C42D mutant, a mimic of glutathionylated PRMT5, inhibited cell proliferation. Taken together, our results demonstrate a new mechanism of regulation of PRMT5 methyltransferases activity and suggest that PRMT5 glutathionylation is partly responsible for reactive oxygen species-mediated cell growth inhibition

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (200 μg) were extracted from cells in which PRMT5 and its mutants were overexpressed with a buffer containing 8 M urea/PBS and 1% protease inhibitor. The proteins were reduced by adding 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 10 min and then alkylated by incubating with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After the urea concentration was diluted below 1.5 M with PBS, protein samples were digested with the sequencing-grade trypsin for 16 h at 37 °C at a substrate/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w:w). The resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters, 186004619) followed by vacuum drying, and labeled with Tandem Mass Tag reagent (TMT, Thermo, Waltham, MA). TMT-labeling peptides were separately pooled and were fractionated using the high-pH reversed phase chromatography.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software and the generated MS/MS spectra were searched against homo sapiens database (downloaded from Uniprot, released on October 25, 2017, containing 20,168 entries). The following parameters were used for database searching: fixed modifications of TMT 6-plex on lysine or peptide N-terminus and carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modification of oxidation on methionine; two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted; the tolerances of precursor and fragment mass were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da; at least two unique peptides for identification of proteins; and 1% FDR (false discovery rate) at peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level

### Publication Abstract
Glutathionylation is an important posttranslational modification that protects proteins from further oxidative damage as well as influencing protein structure and activity. In the present study, we demonstrate that the cysteine-42 residue in protein arginine N-methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) is glutathionylated in aged mice or in cells that have been exposed to oxidative stress. Deglutathionylation of this protein is catalyzed by glutaredoxin-1 (Grx1). Using mutagenesis and subsequent biochemical analyses, we show that glutathionylation decreased the binding affinity of PRMT5 with methylosome protein-50 (MEP50) and reduced the methyltransferase activity of PRMT5. Furthermore, overexpression of PRMT5-C42A mutant caused a significant increase in histone methylation in HEK293T and A549 cells and promoted cell growth, whereas overexpression of the PRMT5-C42D mutant, a mimic of glutathionylated PRMT5, inhibited cell proliferation. Taken together, our results demonstrate a new mechanism of regulation of PRMT5 methyltransferases activity and suggest that PRMT5 glutathionylation is partly responsible for reactive oxygen species-mediated cell growth inhibition.

### Keywords
Protein arginine n-methyltransferase 5 (prmt5), Reactive oxygen species (ros), Glutathionylation, Binding affinity, Methyltransferase activity

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Meiqi Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
Tsinghua University


