### Accession
PXD010794

### Title
Multiomics resolution of molecular events during a day in the life of Chlamydomonas

### Description
Transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic expression pattern analysis of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii's three genomes in cells grown under light-dark cycles

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MS-GF+ and abundances inferred using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular green alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> displays metabolic flexibility in response to a changing environment. We analyzed expression patterns of its three genomes in cells grown under light-dark cycles. Nearly 85% of transcribed genes show differential expression, with different sets of transcripts being up-regulated over the course of the day to coordinate cellular growth before undergoing cell division. Parallel measurements of select metabolites and pigments, physiological parameters, and a subset of proteins allow us to infer metabolic events and to evaluate the impact of the transcriptome on the proteome. Among the findings are the observations that <i>Chlamydomonas</i> exhibits lower respiratory activity at night compared with the day; multiple fermentation pathways, some oxygen-sensitive, are expressed at night in aerated cultures; we propose that the ferredoxin, FDX9, is potentially the electron donor to hydrogenases. The light stress-responsive genes <i>PSBS</i>, <i>LHCSR1</i>, and <i>LHCSR3</i> show an acute response to lights-on at dawn under abrupt dark-to-light transitions, while <i>LHCSR3</i> genes also exhibit a later, second burst in expression in the middle of the day dependent on light intensity. Each response to light (acute and sustained) can be selectively activated under specific conditions. Our expression dataset, complemented with coexpression networks and metabolite profiling, should constitute an excellent resource for the algal and plant communities.

### Keywords
Histone expression, Systems biology, Photo-bioreactor, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
University of California Los Angeles
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Sabeeha Merchant
University of California Los Angeles


