### Accession
PXD000950

### Title
Human hippocampus LC-MSMS

### Description
Large-scale analysis of post-translational modification in the hippocampus of patients with Alzheimer's disease using pI shift and label free quantification without enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
cellular fraction (membrane and cytoplasm), peptide seperation (OFFGel), LC-MSMS, Mascot search

### Data Protocol
Search engine: Mascot Precursor mass tolerence: 10ppm Product mass tolerence: 0.5 Da threshold cut-offL protein score > 40 and peptide score > 22

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational modifications modulate protein function in cells. Global analysis of multiple posttranslational modifications can provide insight into physiology and disease, but presents formidable challenges. In the present study, we used a technique that does not require target enrichment to analyze alterations in the phosphorylation and ubiquitination of proteins from patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Guided by our previous findings, we applied three strategies to further our understanding of the dysregulation of posttranslationally modified proteins. We first identified phosphorylation sites by determining peptide pI shifts using OFFGEL. Second, using tandem mass spectrometry, we determined the ubiquitination status of the proteins using an assay for a trypsin digestion remnant of ubiquitination (Gly-Gly). Third, for large-scale discovery, we quantified the global differences in protein expression. Of the proteins expressed in AD tissue at levels of 2.0 or greater compared with controls, 60 were phosphorylated and 56 were ubiquitinated. Of the proteins expressed at levels of 0.5 or lower compared with controls, 81 were phosphorylated and 56 were ubiquitinated. Approximately 98&#xa0;% of the phosphopeptides exhibited a pI shift. We identified 112 new phosphorylation sites (51.38&#xa0;%), and 92 new ubiquitination sites (96.84&#xa0;%). Taken together, our findings suggest that analysis of the alterations in posttranslationally modified proteins may contribute to understanding the pathogenesis of AD and other diseases.

### Keywords
Human brain hippocampus lc-msms

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute, Republic of Korea Graduated School of Analytical Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
KBSI

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Taewook Kang
Korea Basic Science Institute, Republic of Korea Graduated School of Analytical Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


