### Accession
PXD008247

### Title
High-resolution cryo-EM structure of the respiratory alternative complex III from Rhodothermus marinus

### Description
Electron transfer in respiratory chains generates the electrochemical potential that serves as the energy source for ATP synthesis, solute transport and motility. In eukaryotes and many bacteria, the respiratory chain consists of four electron transport complexes, known as complex I to IV. Respiratory chains of some prokaryotes differ in composition and organization. They can use a wide range of electron donors and acceptors and may have complexes performing the same catalytic reaction. The diversity and apparent redundancy of prokaryotic respiratory chains reflects the versatility and robustness of the organisms. Many of these alternative respiratory chain complexes are either unknown or their structures and mechanisms remain elusive. In this work we describe a 3.9 A cryo-EM structure of the alternative complex III (ACIII) from Rhodothermus marinus, which we demonstrated takes over the role of canonical respiratory complex III (bc1 complex), even though it is structurally unrelated. Our structure reveals that ACIII is an integral membrane protein complex of at least 7 subunits (ActABCDEFH). The periplasmic domain, with ActA, B, E and H, harbours four iron-sulphur clusters and six C-type hemes. The cofactors form two electron wires that converge on the putative quinol-binding site in subunit ActC. The two homologous subunits, ActC and ActF, each have two four-helix bundles in the membrane, with several conserved polar residues that delineate putative proton channels. ACIII meets all requirements for an energy-transducing machine that couples electron transfer from quinol to the oxygen reductase, to translocation of protons across the membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of SDS-PAGE-separated proteins or protein solutions was performed using previously published protocols (Buschmann et al., 2010). In brief, denatured, reduced and alkylated proteins were digested using single and combinatorial digests of multiple proteases (Chymotrypsin, Lys-C and Trypsin) and desalted using c18-ZipTips. Proteolytic digests were loaded using a nano-HPLC (Bruker nanoElute) on reverse phase columns (trapping cartridge: particle size 5 µm, C18, L=5mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen); analytical column: particle size 1.9 µm, C18, L=40cm (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen), and eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 0.1 % formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Typically, gradients were ramped from 2 % to 35 % B in 180 min at flowrates of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Bruker CaptiveSpray ESI-source and analysed in a Bruker Impact-II mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 150-2200 m/z, and sequence information was acquired by a computer-controlled, data-dependent, dynamic method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s and intensity-dependent acquisition speed for MS/MS-spectra between 8 and 20 Hz of the candidate ions. For sequential calibration 1µl of calibrant (5mM sodium formate in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of H2O and acetonitrile) was injected for 2 min at the end of each chromatographic run.

### Data Protocol
Each data file was recalibrated using the average spectrum from this time segment by Data Analysis (Bruker) and then exported in the mgf-format. The mgf files were processed using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software package. The derived mass lists were matched against the Rhodothermus marinus Uniprot-database (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org in 07/2017) and proteins were identified based on a 1 % FDR using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). The following search parameters were used: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment spectra; a total of two missed cleavages permitted for semi-tryptic peptides; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine. PSM-validation was performed by Percolator. Identified proteins were validated using the Mascot and MaxQuant software packages.

### Publication Abstract
Electron transfer in respiratory chains generates the electrochemical potential that serves as energy source for the cell. Prokaryotes can use a wide range of electron donors and acceptors and may have alternative complexes performing the same catalytic reactions as the mitochondrial complexes. This is the case for&#xa0;the alternative complex III (ACIII), a quinol:cytochrome c/HiPIP oxidoreductase. In order to understand the catalytic mechanism of this respiratory enzyme, we determined the structure of ACIII from Rhodothermus marinus at 3.9&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy. ACIII presents a so-far unique structure, for which we establish the arrangement of the cofactors (four iron-sulfur clusters and six c-type hemes) and propose the location of the quinol-binding site and the presence of two putative proton pathways in the membrane. Altogether, this structure provides insights into a mechanism for energy transduction and introduces ACIII as a redox-driven proton pump.

### Keywords
Cryo-em, Complex iii, Proteomics

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research


