### Accession
PXD024871

### Title
Immunopeptidomics-guided warehouse design for peptide-based immunotherapy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
In recent years the clinical success of T cell-based immunotherapy approaches has revolutionized treatment of solid tumors and hematological malignancies. However, still some patients do not respond to available therapies at all, others for limited time only. A promising low side-effect approach is peptide-based immunotherapy, which relies on specific immune recognition of tumor-associated human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-presented peptides. In this study, we developed a workflow for the immunopeptidome-guided design of off-the shelf warehouses for personalized peptide vaccines using the example of chronic lymphocyte leukemia (CLL). The so defined warehouses could provide the basis for different T cell-based immunotherapy approaches such as TCR-engineered T cell transfer or multi-peptide vaccinations. The warehouse approach enables a fast and cost-effective way to provide a personalized T cell-based immunotherapeutic approach. The here defined peptide warehouse is already utilized for a personalized multi-peptide vaccine trial (iVAC-XS15-CLL01, NCT04688385).

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and II molecules were isolated from 61 primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) samples by standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously (PMID: 23329485). Pan-HLA class I-specific antibody W6/32 was employed for HLA class I isolation and pan-HLA class II antibody Tü-39 as well as HLA-DR-specific antibody L243 were used for HLA class II isolation. In total, we performed 402 MS measurements of purified peptides by LC-MS/MS analysis using two state-of-the-art mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was carried out using Proteome discoverer. Peak lists were searched against the human proteome as comprised in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using the SEQUEST HT search engine. Mass tolerance for processing was 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap fragment ions and 0.02 Da for orbitrap fragment ions. No cleavage specificity was selected and the only dynamic modification allowed was oxidized methionine. Peptide confidence was determined using percolator algorithm with a target value of q ≤ 0.05 (5% FDR) for HLA class I and q ≤ 0.01 (1% FDR) for HLA class II. Additional post processing filters were search engine rank = 1 and peptide length of 8-12 amino acids for HLA class I ligands and 8-25 amino acids for HLA class II peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Antigen-specific immunotherapies, in particular peptide vaccines, depend on the recognition of naturally presented antigens derived from mutated and unmutated gene products on human leukocyte antigens, and represent a promising low-side-effect concept for cancer treatment. So far, the broad application of peptide vaccines in cancer patients is hampered by challenges of time- and cost-intensive personalized vaccine design, and the lack of neoepitopes from tumor-specific mutations, especially in low-mutational burden malignancies. In this study, we developed an immunopeptidome-guided workflow for the design of tumor-associated off-the-shelf peptide warehouses for broadly applicable personalized therapeutics. Comparative mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidome analyses of primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) samples, as representative example of low-mutational burden tumor entities, and a dataset of benign tissue samples enabled the identification of high-frequent non-mutated CLL-associated antigens. These antigens were further shown to be recognized by pre-existing and <i>de novo</i> induced T cells in CLL patients and healthy volunteers, and were evaluated as pre-manufactured warehouse for the construction of personalized multi-peptide vaccines in a first clinical trial for CLL (NCT04688385). This workflow for the design of peptide warehouses is easily transferable to other tumor entities and can provide the foundation for the development of broad personalized T&#xa0;cell-based immunotherapy approaches.

### Keywords
Cll, Immunopeptidome, Hla, Peptide warehouse

### Affiliations
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Nelde

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane S. Walz
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


