### Accession
PXD018113

### Title
Antibody RING-Mediated Destruction (ARMeD) of endogenous proteins

### Description
To understand the cellular function of a gene the encoding DNA or mRNA transcript can be manipulated and the consequences observed. However, these approaches do not have a direct effect on the protein product of the gene, which is either permanently abrogated or depleted at a rate defined by the half-life of the protein. Therefore, complete gene deletions and RNA interference of proteins with a very long half-life risk obscuring the direct consequences via compensatory or secondary cellular responses. We therefore sought to develop a single-component system that could induce the rapid degradation of the specific endogenous protein itself. A genetically introduced inducible construct of the RING domain of the ubiquitin E3 ligase RNF4 with a protein-specific camelid nanobody mediates destruction of the target by the ubiquitin proteasome system, a process we describe as Antibody RING-Mediated Destruction (ARMeD). The technique is acutely specific as we observed no off-target protein destruction. Furthermore, bacterially produced nanobody-RING fusion proteins electroporated into cells induce degradation of target within minutes. With the increasing availability of protein-specific nanobodies this method will allow the rapid and specific degradation of a wide range of endogenous proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Two cultures of HeLa Flp-in/T-REX NNb2-1xRING cells were grown in either ‘Light’ or ‘Heavy’ SILAC medium as described (Ong and Mann, 2007). After full label incorporation, two 100mm dishes of each labelled form of the cells were used for the SILAC comparisons. By this design, a so-called ‘label swap’ experiment involving two parallel comparisons differing only by the SILAC labels could be used to monitor the effect of Dox treatment on the cellular proteome. After treatment with Dox or not, cells were washed twice with PBS and individual whole cell extracts were made by addition of 1.2x LDS sample buffer containing reducing agent (Invitrogen) followed by sonication and heating to 70ºC for 5 minutes. 40g total protein was prepared for each SILAC mixture by mixing 1:1 (w:w) and the two mixes were fractionated by 4-12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels – MOPS buffer). Each lane of the Coomassie-stained gel was excised into 16 equally sized slices and subjected to in gel tryptic digestion (Shevchenko et al., 2006), employing both reduction with DTT and alkylation with chloroacetamide prior to digestion. Extracted peptides were dried down under vacuum and resuspended in 35µL 0.1% TFA 0.5% acetic acid.  Peptide samples were analysed twice. Firstly, 18µL each peptide sample was analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) over a 240 minute gradient. For all runs precursor ion full scan spectra were acquired over (m/z 300 to 1,800) with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 (target value of 1,000,000 ions, maximum injection time 20 ms). Up to fifteen data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400 (target value of 500,000 ions, maximum injection time 120 ms). Ions with unassigned charge state, and singly or highly (>8) charged ions were rejected. Intensity threshold was set to 2.1 x 104 units. Peptide match was set to preferred, and dynamic exclusion option was enabled (exclusion duration 20 s). The second MS runs used 90minute fractionation gradients with a top 10 method, 40s dynamic exclusion period and loaded 16 µL peptide solution per slice. All other parameters were the same as the first run. For both runs samples of recombinant NEDP1 tryptic peptides were also analysed at the end of each run batch. This was in an attempt to identify peptides in the SILAC samples using spectral matching in MaxQuant, although this was unsuccessful.

### Data Protocol
The 66 raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008), and searched against UniProtKB human proteome (canonical and isoform sequences; downloaded in April 2019), plus a fasta file containing the sequence of the induced RING-NEDP1-nanobody construct. Most settings were left at default but briefly: The appropriate SILAC labels were selected and enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin (three missed cleavages). Importantly the re-quantify option was selected, without which peptides with missing SILAC counterpart peptides are not quantified and so proteins with large changes among conditions are not reported. This was necessary to obtain ratios for the nanobody construct itself. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Second peptide data was requested. The ‘match between runs’ option was selected to maximise the numbers of common identifications between the two SILAC mixes in identical or adjacent gel bands. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. A false discovery rate of 1 % was set as a threshold at both protein and peptide level, and a mass deviation of 6 parts per million was set for main search and 0.5 Da for MS2 peaks. For the first MS run files slices were numbered 1 to 16 in the “Fraction” column of the experimental design template file, and from 101-116 for the second run, so spectral matching did not occur between MS runs. All slices from the same SILAC mix across both MS runs were given the same ‘Experiment’ name to separate the ratio data into the two mixes (A & B) and aggregate data from both MS runs.

### Publication Abstract
To understand gene function, the encoding DNA or mRNA transcript can be manipulated and the consequences observed. However, these approaches do not have a direct effect on the protein product of the gene, which is either permanently abrogated or depleted at a rate defined by the half-life of the protein. We therefore developed a single-component system that could induce the rapid degradation of the specific endogenous protein itself. A construct combining the RING domain of ubiquitin E3 ligase RNF4 with a protein-specific camelid nanobody mediates target destruction by the ubiquitin proteasome system, a process we describe as antibody RING-mediated destruction (ARMeD). The technique is highly specific because we observed no off-target protein destruction. Furthermore, bacterially produced nanobody-RING fusion proteins electroporated into cells induce degradation of target within minutes. With increasing availability of protein-specific nanobodies, this method will allow rapid and specific degradation of a wide range of endogenous proteins.

### Keywords
Ring ubiquitin nanobody endogenous degradation

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
University of Dundee


