### Accession
PXD038106

### Title
Qualitative proteomic analysis of Extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from oviductal epithelial cells

### Description
Proteomic profiling of EVs derived from oviductal epilthelial cell conditioned media to confirm the presence of EVs markers.

### Sample Protocol
The bovine oviductal epithelial cells were cultured in serum depleted media.Afterwards the EVs were isolated using size exclusion chromatography and the enriched EVs elute was sublected to Mass spectrometry to confirm the presence of EV markers.  1 µg of protein was injected to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was eluted at 250 nl/min from the trap to a 75 µm ID x 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch). The separating gradient was 2-35% B 60 min and 40-100% B 5 min (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were sprayed to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV (applied through liquid-junction). The MS was operated with a top-5 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=70 000 at 200 m/z was followed by five higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 5 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R=17 500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 5e4 with 50 ms injection time. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (versions 1.6.15.0 and 2.0.3.0). Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was enabled with LFQ and protein minimum ratio count set to 1. Search was performed against Homo sapiens, Bos taurus reference proteomes, using the tryptic digestion rule. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
The oviduct provides optimum physiological and biochemical milieu essential for successful fertilization, early embryo development and facilitates functional maturation of spermatozoa. A study has revealed that spermatozoa alters the gene expression in bovine oviductal epithelial cells (BOECs) remotely via bio-active particles, thus acting as a cue to the oviduct prior to their arrival. However, very little attention has been paid to the question of whether spermatozoa could alter the cargo of extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from BOECs. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the alterations in small non-coding RNAs in EVs cargo derived from BOECs when incubated with spermatozoa in contact and non-contact co-culture models. After 4&#xa0;h of incubation the EVs were isolated from the conditioned media, followed by small non-coding sequencing of the BOEC derived EVs. Our results revealed that EVs from both co-culture models contained distinct cargo in form of miRNA, fragmented mRNA versus control. The pathway enrichment analysis revealed that EV miRNA from direct co-culture were involved in the biological processes associated with phagocytosis, macroautophagy, placenta development, cellular responses to TNF and FGF. The mRNA fragments also varied within the different groups and mapped to the exonic regions of the transcriptome providing vital insights regarding the changes in cellular transcriptome on the arrival of spermatozoa. The findings of this study suggest that spermatozoa, in contact as well as remotely, alter the EV cargo of female reproductive tract epithelial cells which might be playing an essential role in pre and post-fertilization events.

### Keywords
Evs, Bovine, Oviduct

### Affiliations
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Kreutzwaldi 62, 51006 Tartu, Estonia.
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Qurat Ul Ain Reshi

### Lab Head
Dr Alireza Fazeli
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Kreutzwaldi 62, 51006 Tartu, Estonia.


