### Accession
PXD006704

### Title
Can half-marathon affect overall health? The yin-yang of sport

### Description
Physical activity improves overall health and counteracts metabolic pathologies. Adipose tissue and bone are important key targets of exercise; the prevalence of diseases associated with suboptimal physical activity levels has increased in recent times as a result of lifestyle changes. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiation in either osteogenic or adipogenic lineage is regulated by many factors. Particularly, the expression of master genes such as RUNX2 and PPARγ2 is essential for MSC commitment to osteogenic or adipogenic differentiation, respectively. Besides various positive effects on health, some authors have reported stressful outcomes as a consequence of endurance in physical activity. We looked for further clues about MSCs differentiation and serum proteins modulation studying the effects of half marathon in runners by means of gene expression analyses and a proteomic approach. Our results demonstrated an increase in osteogenic commitment and a reduction in adipogenic commitment of MSCs. In addition, for the first time we have analyzed the proteomic profile changes in runners after half-marathon activity in order to survey the related systemic adjustments. Interestingly, proteomic data showed the activation of both inflammatory response and detoxification process. Moreover, the involvement of pathways associated to immune response, lipid transport and coagulation, was elicited. Notably, positive and negative effects may be strictly linked.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples, obtained by venipuncture, were collected before the run and immediately after. Sera, obtained from 10 ml of fresh blood by centrifugation at 400×g., were harvested and frozen in aliquots at −80°C until use. Twelve μL of sera were depleted of high abundant proteins using the Seppro IgY14 spin column kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The sample was transferred into an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL 3 kDa centrifugal filter (Millipore) following the manufacturer protocol, to collect the high molecular weight proteins. The sample was subjected to trypsin digestion and then desalted. After the desalting, the sample was vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μL of 0.05% formic acid in water. The sera proteins were analyzed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent Technologies) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5-50 µL, interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes the samples were subjected to a data dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). For the label-free quantification the samples were subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (Sciex). The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science). Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both the software. For Mascot we used 2 missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%. The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex).  Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test. The identified proteins were classified with PANTHER Classification System. The regulated proteins were analyzed by using STRING. For functional annotation clustering and network analysis of proteins, the Cytoscape 3.1.0 plug-ins ClueGO v2.0.8 was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma proteomics, Half marathon, Pparg, Runx2

### Affiliations
Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy


