### Accession
PXD001552

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Metarhizium robertsii Lipid Droplets

### Description
Metarhizium robertsii is one of the model fungus species widely used studying insect-fungus interactions. Our previous studies have shown the accumulation of lipid droplets (LDs) play an essential role in generation of cellular turgor pressure to assist fungal penetration of insect cuticles, and autophagy-related proteins are connected with LD biogenesis and cellular accumulation in M. robertsii. However, full proteomes of LDs are unclear in terms of the species of proteins involved in lipid biosynthesis and degradation. We performed experiments by growing the fungi in different nutrient conditions, isolated the LDs and extracted the LD proteins from the cultures after being grown in a nutrient-rich medium (i.e. Sabouraud dextrose broth, SDB), a minimum medium without nitrogen source (MM-N) and MM-N supplemented with oleate. The protein samples were then subject to LC-MS/MS proteome profilings for identifying and postulating the proteins/pathways involved in lipid metabolisms.

### Sample Protocol
Fungal strains and growth conditions The wild-type strain of M. robertsii ARSEF 2575 were cultured on potato dextrose agar (PDA, Difco) at 25 °C. For liquid incubation, conidia were collected and cultivated in SDB (Difco) for three days on a rotary shaker at 200 rpm. The cultures were harvested, washed with sterile water, and 1) re-inoculated into fresh SDB medium for 16 h; 2) into a MM-N medium for 16 h. For oleate treatment, the mycelia harvested from the 16h MM-N medium were washed and then transferred into fresh MM-N medium amended with 200 μM oleate for one day. Mycelial samples of these three treatments were then used for LD isolation and LD proteomic analyses. Lipid droplets isolation Mycelia harvested from different conditions were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), suspended in the buffer containing 20 mM tricine and 250 mM sucrose (pH 7.8) plus 0.2 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Samples were homogenized with a high-pressure cell disruption systems at 35 kpsi (Constant Systems Ltd, Northants, UK). Cell lysates were then centrifuged at 3,000g for 10 min at 4 °C and the post-nuclear supernatant (PNS) fraction was used to float and collect the LDs after ultracentrifugation at 182,000g for 1 h at 4 °C. The resultant LDs were delipidated with 1.5 ml of cold acetone overnight at -20 °C and the pellet was extracted to separate the proteins. The protein samples were reconstituted in a SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M dithiothreitol) and concentrated by centrifugal filtration devices with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa. Proteins were quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method. Peptide digestion  LD proteins (150 μg) of each treatment were diluted in the SDT buffer to a concentration of 100 mM by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT). Samples were boiled for 5 min and cooled to room temperature, mixed with 200 μl of UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min. The pellet was carboxamide-methylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min. The resultant concentrate was diluted with 100 μl of UA buffer and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice. The pellet was washed twice with 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min. The concentrate was diluted in 40μl trypsin buffer (2 μg Trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3). After digestion at 37 °C for 17 h, the peptide mixture was passed through the ultrafilter unit with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa, quantified (OD280) and used for mass spectrum analysis. Three parallel MS runs were performed consecutively for each sample (2 μg). LC-MS/MS analysis: The peptides were separated using an ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry system (LC-MS/MS, EASY-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA). Conditions are as follows:  Mobile Phase A: 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% of formic acid; mobile Phase B: 84% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% of formic acid. A gradient program was used with a flow rate of 400 nL/min starting at 100% of mobile phase A (0% B) at injection time, gradually changing to 55% A (45% B) over 100 min, and then shifted to 0% A (100% B) until 108 min after injection. This mobile phase composition was kept for 12 min.  The LC was coupled with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Josse, CA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive electrospray ionization mode (ESI+). The whole duration is 120 min with positive mode. The precursor ions scan range is from 300 to 1800 m/z, and the fragment ions are acquired 20 times with HCD after each full scan. MS1 resolution is 70,000 at m/z 200, MS2 resolution is 17,500 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative proteomics: The MS data were analyzed using the software MaxQuant (ver. 1.3.0.5) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and the Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm enabled. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against the protein database of M. robertsii ARSEF 2575. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. All peptide matches were filtered by a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) index less than 1%. Absolute protein copy numbers were inferred from mass spectrometry data employing iBAQ method. The iBAQ intensities of different samples were compared using t-test in Perseus (MaxQuant package). Two identical peptides with a significant intensity ratio (i.e, >2 or <0.5) between two samples were considered to express differentially. Protein distribution and function analysis: The identified proteins were subjected to InterProScan analysis (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan/) for functional classification. Functional annotation of significantly differentially expressed proteins was performed using the database FunCat. Heat mapping analysis and reliability of technical repeats were conducted using the program R (ver. 3.1.2, http://www.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen starvation can induce cellular triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulation in different organisms with an unclear mechanism. In this study, we performed nutrient starvation and lipid droplet (LD) proteomics analyses of the filamentous fungus Metarhizium robertsii. Our results indicated that nitrogen starvation activated cell autophagic activity but inhibited the internalization of LDs into vacuoles for degradation. LD proteomic analyses identified an array of differentially accumulated proteins including autophagy-related (ATG) proteins, heat shock proteins, TAG metabolic and phospholipid biosynthetic enzymes when the fungus was grown in different nutrient conditions. In contrast to the highly activated MrATG8, the ATG proteins involved in vacuolar LD internalization were down-regulated after nitrogen starvation. Cellular TAG contents were increased in different ATG-gene null mutants of M.&#xa0;robertsii. In addition, TAG increase could be due to the up-regulation of TAG biogenesis along with the down-regulation of TAG catabolic enzymes in fungal cells after nitrogen deprivation. The data of this study benefit our understanding of the mechanism of nitrogen starvation induced TAG increase in different cells.

### Keywords
Lipid droplets, Lc-ms/ms, Metarhizium robertsii

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, CAS

### Submitter
Chengshu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chengshu Wang
Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China


