### Accession
PXD011132

### Title
Apple SWATH-MS - Apple is one of the most popular fruit crops world-wide and its skin color is an important quality consideration essential for commercial value

### Description
Apple is one of the most popular fruit crops world-wide and its skin color is an important quality consideration essential for commercial value. However, the strategy on genetic breeding for red skin apple and the genetic basis of skin color differentiation is very limited and still largely unknown. Here, we reported a bud sport mutant of Fuji apple with red skin color and enhanced anthocyanins accumulation. Quantitative SWATH-MS (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry) proteomics investigations revealed proteome changes in the apple red skin bud mutation and a total of 411 differentially expressed proteins were identified in apple skin. The mutant showed significantly increased expression levels of photosynthesis-related proteins, stress-related proteins as well as anthocyanins biosynthesis pathway. On the other hand, substanial downregulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase 4 (MAPK4) and mevalonate kinase (MVK) were detected. We also hypothesize that a post-transcriptional regulation of the skin color formation occurs in the mutant through the advanced SWATH-MS analysis. Overall, our work provide important information on the application of proteomic methods for analysing proteomes changes in Fuji apple and highlights a clade of regulatory proteins potentially contributed to the fruit skin color formation.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1g of apple skin was grind in a mortar by liquid nitrogen. The tissues were homogenized with the 10X vol of solution A (10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/ acetone) and then centrifuged at 16000g for 5 mins. After removed the supernatants, the pellets were washed by the 10X vol of solution B (80% MeOH/0.1M NH4OAc) and then centrifuged again and followed by the 10X vol of washing solution C (80% acetone). After centrifugation and the supernatants removing, the pellets were dissolved into the 8ml SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M MOPS/Cl, pH 8.0). Thereafter, the dissolved samples were incubated at 95oC for 10mins and cooled on ice immediately for 5mins. After centrifugation twice again, the final supernatants were obtained with the addition of 4X vol of chilled 80% acetone for protein precipitation overnight at -20oC. At the end, the protein pellets were dissolved into 1-2ml urea buffer (6M urea in 200mM MOPS-Cl/ 4mM CaCl2, pH 8.0) according to the size of pellet. The protein concentration was determined based on the Bradford method (Bio-Rad). Each protein sample (100μg) was reduced by 10mM DTT at 50oC for 40mins and then alkylated by 40mM IAA (iodoacetamide) in the dark at room temperature for 30mins. Subsequently, each sample was further diluted by distilled water for decreasing urea concentration below 2M and sample peptides were acquired by a trypsin digestion (enzyme/protein, 1:50 w/w) at 37oC overnight. These peptides were acidified by 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and further desalted by SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters). Moreover, the desalted peptide samples were speed-dried in vacuum concentrator and directly dissolved into the water with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Peptides samples were analyzed by a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA) coupling with an Eksigent NanoLC-2D plus system. In the Trap-Elute mode, each sample (2μg) was entranced into a nanaoFlexcHiPLC trap (3μm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 0.5 mm × 200μm) under the 95% solvent A (water with 0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (acetonitrlile with 0.1% formic acid) at a stable flow rate of 500 nL/min for 15 mins, then separated through a linear gradient from 5% to 35% of solvent B at 300 nL/min for 120 mins. The positive ion mode with an ion spray voltage of 2300V was used in the Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer. The spectral ion library based on SWATH-MS was firstly generated by using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). In the DDA mode, the complete MS1 spectra was collected by a survey scan of 250ms in the range of 350-1250 m/z. The top 40 precursor ions were selected for further MS2 fragmentation and MS/MS spectra was acquired in the range of 100-1800 m/z. In the SWATH analysis, the same peptide samples were analyzed using the cyclic DIA (Data-Independent Acquisition) mode under the similar methods as above described. All precursor ions in the range of 400-1250Da were collected for further fragmentation. All of DDA data files were used to set up a reference spectral library by the software ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex) against the searching from the UniProt Swiss-Prot Malus domestica protein database (28797 proteins, July 2015 release). The parameters including the digestion, alkylation, biological modification and ID search were set up during the database search and a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% was accepted as the criteria for the peptides assignments and protein identification. Subsequently, all DIA data and spectral library were loaded into the software PeakView v.1.2 (Sciex) under restricted criteria and settings such as eight peptides, six transitions, 99% peptide confidence and ion library mass tolerance (50 ppm). The output of quantified proteins and corresponding peptides by the MarkerView (Sciex) was generated three quantitative files including the extracted peak area for individual fragment ion, sum of fragment ion areas for each as well as the sum of peptide areas for each protein. The exported raw peak intensity data of proteins was normalized and analyzed using z-transformation as described in (Cheadle et al., 2003; Haverland et al., 2014). Protein differential expression between Fuji_Apple and Fuji_M was expressed in z value as >2 or < -2 with p value < 0.05 to be up-regulation or down-regulation respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apple, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Nanjing Forestry University
College of life Science

### Submitter
Chuan-Qi Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Fuyuan Zhu
Nanjing Forestry University


