### Accession
PXD011444

### Title
Integrative MHC-I peptidome quantitation with isobaric tagging mass spectrometry

### Description
Despite the appreciation of CD8+ T cell anti-tumor immune responses towards improvement patient outcomes, the MHC-I peptides that facilitate the response are poorly described. Alternatively, whether cancer therapies alter the MHC-I peptide repertoire has not been fully assessed due to the lack of quantitative strategies. In this regard, anthracyclines and ionizing radiation both increase the infiltration of CD8+ T cells into tumors but whether they do so by altering the MHC-I peptidome repertoire is not known. To investigate this, we developed a platform for screening therapy-induced MHC-I peptides by quantitative, multiplexed measurement of MHC-I peptides with tandem mass tags (TMT). We show that both ionizing radiation and the anthracycline doxorubicin induce MHC-I peptides that are largely derived from mitotic progression and cell cycle proteins. Our approach enables further strategies to understand how small molecules and other therapies alter MHC-I peptide presentation that may be harnessed for CD8+ T cell-based immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
These data are the proteome portion of the immunopeptidome publication. For cell culture experiments, cells were scraped into 2 mL of lysis buffer: 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 5 mM DTT, and 1 tablet of protease inhibitor (Sigma #11836170001). Lysates were disrupted using an Omni homogenizer (Omni #TH115) with 3 cycles of 12 secs, with cooling on ice between cycles. Samples were incubated at 56°C for 30 min, cooled, then cysteines were alkylated using 14 mM iodoacetamide, followed by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Proteins were resolubilized in 1.5 mL of 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.8 and total protein content was measured using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher #23227). An aliquot of 100 µg of protein was diluted to 1.5 M urea, digested for 4 hr with trypsin (Promega #V5111) then again overnight at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin:protein at 37°C. The pH of the digest was adjusted to < 3 using formic acid and peptides were desalted using 60 mg solid phase Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters #WAT054955) then lyophilized. Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of 100 mM HEPES, 30% acetonitrile and 10 µL of TMT10 reagents (Thermo Fisher #90110) pre-aliquoted at a concentration of 20 µg/mL in anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (Sigma #159417), mixed equally, desalted using a 60 mg solid phase Oasis HLB extraction cartridge (Waters #WAT054955), and lyophilized. Peptides were fractionated using an Onyx monolithic 100 × 4.6 mm C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The flow rate was 800 μL/min, and a gradient of 5−40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied over 60 min using an Agilent 1100 pump (Agilent) from which 12 fractions were collected. Fractions were then desalted using home-made Stage-tips packed with Empore C18 extraction material (Sigma #66883-U) as previously described (Juri Rappsilber et al., 2003), then lyophilized and subjected to LC-SPS-MS3.  LC-SPS-MS3.  Labelled peptides were separated by online nLC similarly to the MHC-I peptides. SPS-MS3 was performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. MS1 scans were acquired over an m/z range of 400–1400, 120K resolution, AGC target of 2e5, maximum injection time of 100 msec. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–6 using an isolation window of 0.5 Th, CID activation with a collision energy of 35%, rapid scan rate, AGC target of 4000, dynamic exclusion for 30 s, and maximum injection time of 150 msec. MS3 scans were acquired using SPS of 10 isolation notches, m/z range of 100–1000, 60K resolution, AGC target of 5e4, HCD activation at 55%, and maximum injection time of 250 msec.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded August, 2011) using Sequest (Ver28)(Eng et al., 1994) with TMT as a fixed modification (+229.162932) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation (15.99492) as a fixed modification on cysteine. The allowable precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance was 1 Da. False positive rates were controlled using the target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007) with a concatenated reversed database employing linear discriminant analysis to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications based on XCorr, ΔCN, peptide length, and charge state. Peptides were grouped into proteins and their multiplied linear discriminant analysis probabilities were used to sort proteins and filter to a 1% maximum false discovery rate. The sum of all reporter ion summed signal to noise (S/N) values for peptides matching each protein was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
MHC-I peptides are intracellular-cleaved peptides, usually 8-11 amino acids in length, which are presented on the cell surface and facilitate CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses. Despite the appreciation of CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell antitumor immune responses toward improvement in patient outcomes, the MHC-I peptide ligands that facilitate the response are poorly described. Along these same lines, although many therapies have been recognized for their ability to reinvigorate antitumor CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell responses, whether these therapies alter the MHC-I peptide repertoire has not been fully assessed due to the lack of quantitative strategies. We develop a multiplexing platform for screening therapy-induced MHC-I ligands by employing tandem mass tags (TMTs). We applied this approach to measuring responses to doxorubicin, which is known to promote antitumor CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell responses during its therapeutic administration in cancer patients. Using both in vitro and in vivo systems, we show successful relative quantitation of MHC-I ligands using TMT-based multiplexing and demonstrate that doxorubicin induces MHC-I peptide ligands that are largely derived from mitotic progression and cell-cycle proteins. This high-throughput MHC-I ligand discovery approach may enable further explorations to understand how small molecules and other therapies alter MHC-I ligand presentation that may be harnessed for CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell-based immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Mhc-i peptides, Source proteins

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University


