### Accession
PXD025700

### Title
A hierarchical transcriptional network controls appressorium-1 mediated plant 2 infection by the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae

### Description
Rice blast is a pervasive and devastating disease that threatens rice production across the world. In spite of its importance to global food security, however, the underlying biology of plant infection by the blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae remains poorly understood. In particular, it is unclear how the fungus elaborates a specialised infection cell, the appressorium, in response to surface signals from the rice leaf. Here, we report the identification of a network of temporally co-regulated transcription factors that act downstream of the Pmk1 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway to regulate gene expression during appressorium-mediated plant infection. We have functionally characterised this network of transcription factors and demonstrated the operation of a hierarchical transcriptional control system. We show that this tiered regulatory mechanism involves Pmk1-dependent phosphorylation of the Hox7 homeobox transcription factor, which represses hyphal-associated gene expression and simultaneously induces major physiological changes required for appressorium development, including cell cycle arrest, autophagic cell death, turgor generation and melanin biosynthesis. Mst12 then regulates gene functions involved in septin-dependent cytoskeletal re-organisation, polarised exocytosis and effector gene expression necessary for plant tissue invasion.4929

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase assay were performed with recombinant kinases and substrates and samples processed by in gel digestions. Extracted peptides were analysed in DDA mode on a Fusion Orbtrap (Thermo) as described in associated manuscript

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were peak picked with MS Convert software and searched using Mascot against the Uniprot E.coli proteome and and inhouse contructs data base. Mascot searches were imported into Scaffold 5.0 and data inspected and filtered. Filtered data was exported to Excell to build final data tables

### Publication Abstract
Rice blast is a devastating disease caused by the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae that threatens rice production around the world. The fungus produces a specialized infection cell, called the appressorium, that enables penetration through the plant cell wall in response to surface signals from the rice leaf. The underlying biology of plant infection, including the regulation of appressorium formation, is not completely understood. Here we report the identification of a network of temporally coregulated transcription factors that act downstream of the Pmk1 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway to regulate gene expression during appressorium-mediated plant infection. We show that this tiered regulatory mechanism involves Pmk1-dependent phosphorylation of the Hox7 homeobox transcription factor, which regulates genes associated with induction of major physiological changes required for appressorium development-including cell-cycle control, autophagic cell death, turgor generation and melanin biosynthesis-as well as controlling a additional set of virulence-associated transcription factor-encoding genes. Pmk1-dependent phosphorylation of Mst12 then regulates gene functions involved in septin-dependent cytoskeletal re-organization, polarized exocytosis and effector gene expression, which are necessary for plant tissue invasion. Identification of this regulatory cascade provides new potential targets for disease intervention.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Transcription, Rice blast, Map kinase, Magnaporthe oryzae, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
frank.menke@tsl.ac.uk
the Sainsbury laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Menke
frank.menke@tsl.ac.uk


