### Accession
PXD029583

### Title
Quantitative acetylome analysis of Fusarium oxysporum

### Description
Quantitative proteome and acetylome analyses were conducted by comparing the acetylation levels of the SM to those of the NM. The collected cellular proteins were extracted, digested, and labeled by different TMTs. For acetylation profiling, the pan acetyl-lysine antibody was employed to enrich the acetylated peptides, which were then submitted into mass spectrometer (MS) for LC–MS/MS analysis. For proteome profiling, the peptide fractions were submitted into MS directly.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and trypsin Digestion The NM or SM with three biological replicates were harvested after growth in YPD medium with shaking at 25 ℃for 9 h or 16h, 150 rpm. The protein extraction was performed as previously described. Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 g at 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃ for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was re-dissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (pH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion, Labeling and Affinity Enrichment The trypsin digestion reaction was performed with a previously described experimental approach, briefly, the trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio at the first time overnight and added again at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 hours. The peptides were resuspended in 0.5 M TEAB and tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling was performed to quantify the global proteome according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The labeled peptides were then fractionated by using an HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μM particles, 4.6 mm ID, and 250 mm length. For Kac peptides enrichment, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and then separated into several fractions. Each fraction was incubated with pan anti-Kac antibody (PTM Biolabs) conjugated agarose beads overnight at 4 ℃ with gentle shaking. Then the peptides bound with beads were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid after washing with NETN buffer and then the acquired peptides were cleaned with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.    LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed at Micrometer Biotech (Hangzhou, China). The peptide samples for proteome or acetylome analyses were separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, Thermo Scientific) on UPLC system. The gradient was composed of an increase from 2% formic acid (0.1%) to 10% formic acid (0.1% in 98% acetonitrile) for 6 min, 10% to 20% for 45 min, 20% climbing to 80% in 7 min and then holding at 80% at least for 4 min, all maintaining a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The peptides were subjected by to ESI/NSI sources followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to UPLC. The Orbitrap was used to detect whole peptides and ion fragments at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively, with NCE set at 30. The electrospray voltage was set at 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to avoid ion trap overfilling. The m/z range was from 350 to 1800 for MS scans. The MS fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search MaxQuant and Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.1.8) were used to analyze the raw data of MS/MS (Cox and Mann, 2008;Cox et al., 2009). The tandem mass spectra collected were searched against F. oxysporum database from UniProt. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor were set as 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavage, 5 charges and 5 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine was specified as fixed modification and crotonylation on lysine was fixed as variable modification. The minimal peptide was set to seven, and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for modification sites and peptides were set as 1%. The Kac site localization probability of <0.75 was exclude. Bioinformatics Analysis Gene ontology (GO) of crotonylation proteome was performed from the UniProt-GOA database based on three categories: cellular component, molecular function, and biological process according to(). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was employed to annotate protein pathway description. The soft WoLF PSORT was used to predict the subcellular localization of the crotonylated protein. Proteins secondary structures (β-strand, α-helix, coil) were analyzed by the online tool NetSurfP. Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analyze the sequences model of acetylated proteins composed of amino acids in distinct positions of modify-21-mers in all protein sequences. Cytoscape software was used to analyze the protein-protein interactions which was obtained from the STRING database. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to verify the enrichment of lysine acetylated proteins against all database proteins. All projects with a corrected p-valve <0.05 is considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium oxysporum is one of the most abundant and diverse fungal species found in soils and includes nonpathogenic, endophytic, and pathogenic strains affecting a broad range of plant and animal hosts. Conidiation is the major mode of reproduction in many filamentous fungi, but the regulation of this process is largely unknown. Lysine acetylation (Kac) is an evolutionarily conserved and widespread posttranslational modification implicated in regulation of multiple metabolic processes. A total of 62 upregulated and 49 downregulated Kac proteins were identified in sporulating mycelia versus nonsporulating mycelia of F.&#xa0;oxysporum. Diverse cellular proteins, including glycolytic enzymes, ribosomal proteins, and endoplasmic reticulum-resident molecular chaperones, were differentially acetylated in the sporulation process. Altered Kac levels of three endoplasmic reticulum-resident molecular chaperones, PDI<sup>K70</sup>, HSP70<sup>K604</sup>, and HSP40<sup>K32</sup> were identified that with important roles in F.&#xa0;oxysporum conidiation. Specifically, K70 acetylation (K70ac) was found to be crucial for maintaining stability and activity of protein disulphide isomerase and the K604ac of HSP70 and K32ac of HSP40 suppressed the detoxification ability of these heat shock proteins, resulting in higher levels of protein aggregation. During conidial formation, an increased level of PDI<sup>K70ac</sup> and decreased levels of HSP70<sup>K604ac</sup> and HSP40<sup>K32ac</sup> contributed to the proper processing of unfolded proteins and eliminated protein aggregation, which is beneficial for dramatic cell biological remodeling during conidiation in F.&#xa0;oxysporum.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation; f. oxysporum; endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Qingdao Agriculture University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Zhang
Qingdao Agriculture University


