### Accession
PXD040760

### Title
Perinuclear Vimentin-RNF26 contacts integrate ER and endosomal responses to ER stress

### Description
Compartmentalization of organelles in space and time affects their functional state and enables higher order regulation of essential cellular processes. How organellar residence is maintained in a defined area of the cell remains poorly understood. In this study, we uncover a new role for intermediate filaments in the maintenance of organellar architecture and dynamics, which is executed through a direct connection between Vimentin and the ER-embedded ubiquitin ligase ring finger protein 26 (RNF26). While the ubiquitin ligase function of RNF26 promotes perinuclear positioning of endolysosomes through binding endosomal adapters, catalytically inactive RNF26 preferentially binds Vimentin through a C-terminal motif. Loss of either RNF26 or Vimentin redistributes endolysosomes and ER membranes from the perinuclear ER towards the periphery. Furthermore, RNF26 and Vimentin control changes in ER morphology and invoke organelle compartmentalization during ER stress with consequences for stress-associated ER-phagy. Collectively, we define a new function for Vimentin-containing intermediate filaments as anchors of a dynamic interplay between the ER and endosomes, critical to the integrity of the perinuclear ER and corresponding perinuclear endosomal cloud during homeostatic and stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Selected bands (and the same region in the GST control lane as negative controls) were cut from the silver stained gel and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Selected bands (and the same region in the GST control lane as negative controls) were cut from the silver stained gel and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitril/formic acid and subsequently analyzed by on‐line nanoHPLC MS/MS using an 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies), as previously described (Meiring et al., 2002). Peptides were trapped at 10 μl/min on a 15‐mm column (100‐μm ID; ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted to a 200 mm column (50‐μm ID; ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ, 3 μm) at 150 nl/min. All columns were packed in house. The column was developed with a 30‐min gradient from 0 to 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The end of the nanoLC column was drawn to a tip (5-μm ID), from which the eluent was sprayed into a 7‐tesla LTQ‐FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the FT‐ICR with a resolution of 25,000 at a target value of 3,000,000. The two most intense ions were then isolated for accurate mass measurements by a selected ion-monitoring scan in FT‐ICR with a resolution of 50,000 at a target accumulation value of 50,000. Selected ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision‐induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000. In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Bioworks Browser software v3.2 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Swissprot database version 51.6 (257,964 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 2 ppm and 0.8 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme. Protein was finally sorted and compared using Scaffold software version 3.0.1 (www. proteomesoftware.com).

### Publication Abstract
Proteotoxic stress causes profound endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane remodeling into a perinuclear quality control compartment (ERQC) for the degradation of misfolded proteins. Subsequent return to homeostasis involves clearance of the ERQC by endolysosomes. However, the factors that control perinuclear ER integrity and dynamics remain unclear. Here, we identify vimentin intermediate filaments as perinuclear anchors for the ER and endolysosomes. We show that perinuclear vimentin filaments engage the ER-embedded RING finger protein 26 (RNF26) at the C-terminus of its RING domain. This restricts RNF26 to perinuclear ER subdomains and enables the corresponding spatial retention of endolysosomes through RNF26-mediated membrane contact sites (MCS). We find that both RNF26 and vimentin are required for the perinuclear coalescence of the ERQC and its juxtaposition with proteolytic compartments, which facilitates efficient recovery from ER stress via the Sec62-mediated ER-phagy pathway. Collectively, our findings reveal a scaffolding mechanism that underpins the spatiotemporal integration of organelles during cellular proteostasis.

### Keywords
Vimentin, Er stress, Intermediate filaments, Rnf26, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Head Proteomics Group, Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group, Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands


