### Accession
PXD030319

### Title
Adrenaline-mediated activation of antibiotic production in Streptomyces highlights catechol as elicitor of specialized metabolism

### Description
Actinobacteria are a rich source of bioactive molecules, and genome sequencing has shown that the vast majority of their biosynthetic potential has yet to be explored. However, many of their biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are poorly expressed in the laboratory, which prevents discovery of their cognate natural products. To exploit their full biosynthetic potential, better understanding of the signals that promote the expression of BGCs is needed. Here, we show that the human stress hormone epinephrine (adrenaline) elicits antibiotic production by Actinobacteria. Catechol was established as the likely eliciting moiety, since similar responses were seen for catechol and for the catechol-containing molecules dopamine and catechin but not for related molecules. Exploration of the catechol-responsive strain Streptomyces sp. MBT84 using mass spectral networking revealed elicitation of a BGC that produces the angucycline glycosides aquayamycin, urdamycinone B and galtamycin C. Heterologous expression of the catechol-cleaving enzymes catechol 1,2-dioxygenase or catechol 2,3 dioxygenase counteracted the eliciting effect of catechol. Thus, for the first time we show the activation of natural product biosynthesis by a human hormone, leading to the identification of the ubiquitous catechol moiety as elicitor of BGCs for siderophores and antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
MM agar plates with and without 101 μM catechol were covered with cellophane. MBT84 spores were spread on the plates using glass beads and incubated for five days at 30 °C.  Biomass was scraped off and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lysed in a precooled TissueLyser adaptor (Qiagen, The Netherlands) and proteins extracted using lysis buffer [4% SDS, 100 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 50 mM EDTA]. The final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng·μL-1 using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis.  For the analysis of the expression of biosynthetic enzymes in response to catechol, we applied natural product proteomining34. Samples were prepared from Streptomyces surface-grown cultures grown with or without catechol. Desalted peptide solutions were injected into Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system equipped with a Waters HSS T3 C18 (1.8 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm X 250 mm). A gradient from 1% to 40% acetonitrile in water (with added 0.1% FA) over 110 min was applied. Online MS/MS analysis was done using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer with a UDMSE method set up as described previously 51. [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B was used as a lock mass compound and sampled every 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from all samples were first analysed using the vender software ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, version 3.0.3, 21 waters, USA). The resulting dataset was imported in ISOQuant version 1.8 51 for label-free quantification. TOP3 quantification was filtered to remove identifications that had an average value of less than 4000, in all replicates. This led to the removal of 152 protein quantification results. Log2 fold changes were calculated and proteins were considered significantly altered in expression when FDR-adjusted p < 0.1 were obtained. Volcano plots were made from filtered data, with the biosynthetic gene clusters color-coded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mbt84, Streptomyces, Bgcs, Catechol, Antibacteria

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr. G.P. van Wezel
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University


