### Accession
PXD037722

### Title
A Novel Approach to Interrogating the Effects of Chemical Warfare Agent Exposure Using Organ-on-a-Chip Technology and Multiomic Analysis

### Description
Organ-on-a-chip platforms are utilized in global bioanalytical and toxicological studies as a way to reduce materials and increase throughput as compared to in vivo based experiments. These platforms bridge the infrastructure and regulatory gaps between in vivo animal work and human systems, with models that exemplify active biological pathways. In conjunction with the advent of increased capabilities associated with next generation sequencing and mass spectrometry based ‘-omic’ technologies, organ-on-a-chip platforms provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the global changes at multiple biological levels, including the transcriptome, proteome and metabolome. When investigated concurrently, a complete profile of cellular and regulatory perturbations can be characterized following treatment with specific agonists. In this study, global effects were observed and analyzed following liver chip exposure to the chemical warfare agent, VX. Even though the primary mechanism of action of VX (i.e. acetylcholinesterase inhibition) is well characterized, recent in vivo studies suggest additional protein binding partners that are implicated in metabolism and cellular energetic pathways. Also, secondary toxicity associated with peripheral organ systems, especially in human tissues, is not well defined. Our results demonstrate the efficacy of utilizing an organ-on-a-chip platform as a surrogate system to traditional in vivo studies. This is realized by specifically indicating significant dysregulation of a number of cellular processes in response to VX exposure including but not limited to amino acid synthesis, drug metabolism, and energetics pathways.

### Sample Protocol
350 µL lysis buffer (4.57% SDS + 57.14 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to each sample for a final concentration of 4% SDS and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and final volume of 400 µL. Samples were lysed using a Branson probe sonicator at 50% power, with 4 pulses of 5 sec each, with 5 sec of rest between pulses. Samples were then boiled in a heat block at 95 °C for 5 min at 600 rpm, cooled to room temperature, then spun in a microcentrifuge for 10 min, 4 °C, at maximum speed. A Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher) was used to determine protein concentrations of the clarified lysates.  Protein pellets remaining from the metabolomics crash were combined with the lysate of each corresponding sample to supplement the low protein yield. Probe sonication/boiling was then repeated as described above. In order to determine a suitable amount of trypsin to use for each sample, protein concentration was roughly estimated to be twice the amount determined in the BCA assay. Samples were then dried in a speed-vac, reconstituted in 200 µL MS-grade water, and ran on an AssayMap Bravo using the in-  solution digest application. 80.5 µL denaturant mixture (9.3 M urea + 68.3 mM dithiothreitol) was added to each sample, followed by a 30 min incubation at 56 °C. 10.2 µL of 1 M iodoacetamide was then added to each sample, followed by a 30 min incubation at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) was then added to each sample at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were then incubated for 60 min at 56°C.  Digests were desalted on the AssayMap Bravo using the peptide cleanup application and AssayMAP C18 5 µL cartridges (Agilent). Priming and syringe wash buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile) was used to prime and wash the syringes; equilibration buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in MS-grade water) was used to equilibrate the C18 cartridges. Samples were eluted in 20 µL elution buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid + 70% acetonitrile + 30% MS-grade water). Elutions were dried in a speed-vac, then resuspended to 0.5 µg/µL in 5% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, vortexed by hand for 2 min, centrifuged at max speed in a tabletop centrifuge for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred into an autosampler vial for analysis.  Samples were analyzed on a Thermo Eclipse mass spectrometer with FAIMS interface, coupled to an Ultimate3000 HPLC. 6 µL (3 µg total) injections were loaded onto a PepMap 100, 75 μm id × 2 cm C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 μL/min for 10 min with 2% acetonitrile (v/v) and 0.05% formic acid (v/v) followed by separation on an Easy-Spray 75 μm id × 75 cm length, 2 μm, 100 Å C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C. Samples were resolved using a 200 min gradient that began with an increase from 5% to 10% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid in water) over the course of 10 minutes, followed by a gradual incline up to 90% mobile phase B at 161 minutes; this was held for an additional 10 minutes before decreasing gradually back down to 5% mobile phase B over the course of 10 minutes. All these gradients were run at a flow rate  of 300 nL/min. The Thermo Eclipse was operated in positive polarity and data dependent mode (topN, 3 s cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 5 ppm error). FAIMS CVs were set to -50V, -65V, and -85V, with the 3 s cycle time split between each CV. MS1 scan resolution using the Orbitrap was set at 240,000 and the mass range was set to 350 to 2000 m/z. Normalized AGC target was set to 250%, with maximum injection time set to auto. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and in intensity threshold of 5 x 10^3 was used for precursor selection. Data-dependent MS2 fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 28% with quadrupole isolation at 1 m/z width. Ion trap scan rate was set to turbo, with a maximum injection time of 35 msec.

### Data Protocol
Untargeted proteomics data analysis was performed with Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (ver.2.5). Database search was performed with Sequest against the human canonical and isoform fasta, downloaded from Uniprot (March 06, 2020) with an MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 0.6 Da28,29. A variable protein N-terminal acetylation was also included in the search along with oxidation on methionines and a static carbamidomethylation on cystines. FDR control was achieved utilizing the Percolator node30. PTM localization was performed with IMP-ptmRS31. Label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detection node. Identified proteins from the analysis were then filtered by requiring at least 1 unique peptide, more than 1 PSM and Protein FDR confidence being assigned the level high (0.01 FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Organ-on-a-chip platforms are utilized in global bioanalytical and toxicological studies as a way to reduce materials and increase throughput as compared to in vivo based experiments. These platforms bridge the infrastructure and regulatory gaps between in vivo animal work and human systems, with models that exemplify active biological pathways. In conjunction with the advent of increased capabilities associated with next generation sequencing and mass spectrometry based '-omic' technologies, organ-on-a-chip platforms provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the global changes at multiple biological levels, including the transcriptome, proteome and metabolome. When investigated concurrently, a complete profile of cellular and regulatory perturbations can be characterized following treatment with specific agonists. In this study, global effects were observed and analyzed following liver chip exposure to the chemical warfare agent, VX. Even though the primary mechanism of action of VX (i.e. acetylcholinesterase inhibition) is well characterized, recent in vivo studies suggest additional protein binding partners that are implicated in metabolism and cellular energetic pathways. In addition, secondary toxicity associated with peripheral organ systems, especially in human tissues, is not well defined. Our results demonstrate the potential of utilizing an organ-on-a-chip platform as a surrogate system to traditional in vivo studies. This is realized by specifically indicating significant dysregulation of several cellular processes in response to VX exposure including but not limited to amino acid synthesis, drug metabolism, and energetics pathways.

### Keywords
Organophosphate, Liver, Multiomics, Lcms, Organ on a chip

### Affiliations
US Army DEVCOM CBC
U.S. Army DEVCOM CBC

### Submitter
Conor Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Conor C Jenkins
U.S. Army DEVCOM CBC


