### Accession
PXD035029

### Title
The regulatory landscape of the yeast phosphoproteome – ultra-deep reference phosphoproteomic DDA data

### Description
We systematically exposed the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to a wide array of 101 perturbations and generated a quantitative mass spectrometry-based atlas of early phosphoproteomic responses. Perturbations covered broad classes of environmental, chemical, and drug perturbations and systematically targeted diverse aspects of yeast cell biology. Importantly, most perturbations focused on capturing early signaling responses (5 min treatments). An ultra-deep yeast phosphoproteome was generated from a pooled sample of all 5 min perturbations by multi protease digestion, deep offline fractionations using two different peptide separation methods, and data-dependent acquisition (DDA). This submission includes 120 DDA-MS raw files that were used to generate a deep yeast phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
For the deep phosphoproteome profiling a pooled sample (only 5 min treatments) was created by combining equal amounts of lysates from each sample. In-solution digestion were performed on lysates containing 5 mg of protein using either Trypsin (Promega), Chymotrypsin (Promega), Glu-C (Promega) or Lys-C (Wako chemicals) according to manufacturer protocols. Peptides were desalted on C18 SepPak cartridges. Phosphopeptides were enriched using R2-P2.  Offline pentafluorophenyl reverse-phase (PFP) chromatography was performed on phosphopeptides derived from the different digests individually using a XSelect HSS PFP 200 × 3.0 mm; 3.5 μm column (Waters) as described in (Grassetti et al., 2017), 48 fractions were combined into 12 pooled fractions and lyophilized. Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was performed on tryptic digest using a polysulfoethyl A, 200 × 4.6mm; 5μm, 300A column (PolyLC) and two buffers: (A)10mM Ammonium formate, 0.05% formic acid, 25% ACN and (B) 500mM Ammonium formate, 0.05% formic acid in 25% ACN. Peptides were fractionated with a gradient ranging from 5% Buffer B to 100% Buffer B, 12 fractions were collected, lyophilized and phosphopeptides enriched with R2-P2 (Villén and Gygi, 10/2008).  Lyophilized peptide and phosphopeptide samples were dissolved in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS. Peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 35 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and housed into a column heater set at 50°C. DDA-MS measurements were either acquired on an Orbitrap Exploris 480, an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid or a Q Excative mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The  S. cerevisiae S288C reference protein fasta database containing the translations of all 6713 systematically named ORFs, except "Dubious" ORFs and pseudogenes created on 05/11/2015 by SGD (https://www.yeastgenome.org/) was used for all searches.  DDA data was searched with Comet (2019.01.2) (Eng et al., 2013). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.994914 Da) were used for all searches, and additional variable modification of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation (79.966331 Da) was used for phosphopeptide samples. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM level using Percolator (Käll et al., 2007). Phosphorylation sites were localized using an in-house implementation of the Ascore algorithm (Beausoleil et al., 2006). Phosphorylation sites with an Ascore >13 (p-value < 0.05) were considered confidently localized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Phosphorylation, Fractionation, Orbitrap exploris 480, Budding yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Ptm, Phosphatase, Signaling, R2-p2, Kinase, Orbitrap eclipse, Stress response, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

### Submitter
Mario Leutert

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villén
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA


