### Accession
PXD023161

### Title
Proteome of paediatric burn wound fluid collected via negative pressure wound therapy

### Description
Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) has been used to promote wound healing in a variety of settings, including as an adjunct to silver-impregnated dressings in the acute management of paediatric burns. Fluid aspirated by the NPWT system represents a potentially insightful research matrix for understanding the burn wound microenvironment and the biochemical mechanisms of action of NPWT. The aim of this study was to characterise the proteome of wound fluid collected using NPWT from children with small-area thermal burns. Samples were obtained as part of a randomised controlled trial investigating the clinical efficacy of adjunctive NPWT. They were compared with blister fluid specimens from paediatric burn patients matched according to demographic and injury characteristics. Protein identification and quantification were performed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) data-independent acquisition. Proteins and biological pathways which were unique or enriched in negative pressure fluid samples were evaluated using principal components, partial least squares-discriminant, and gene ontology enrichment analyses. Eight viable samples of NPWT fluid were collected and analysed with eight matched blister fluid samples. A total of 502 proteins were quantitatively profiled in the NPWT fluid, of which 444 (88.4%) were shared with blister fluid. Several proteins exhibited significant abundance differences between fluid types, with NPWT fluid showing a higher abundance of proteases matrix metalloprotease-9 and arginase-1, immune cell surface molecule low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor III-A, actin-binding protein filamin-A, plasma protein alpha-2-macroglobulin, and haemoglobin subunit alpha. The results lend support to the hypothesis that NPWT augments wound healing through the modulation of factors involved in the inflammatory response, granulation tissue synthesis, and extracellular matrix maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Wound fluid samples were collected from paediatric patients presenting with burns covering less than 5% of their total body surface area (TBSA) within seven days of injury. For the negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) fluid samples, the children were randomised to either standard silver-impregnated dressings consisting of Acticoat™ (Smith & Nephew, Hull, UK) with Mepitel™ (Mölnlycke Healthcare, Mikkeli, Finland), or standard dressings in conjunction with NPWT. A continuous subatmospheric pressure of 80mmHg or 40mmHg was delivered via RENASYS TOUCH™ (Smith & Nephew, Hull, UK) vacuum pumps. At dressing changes conducted every 3-5 days, fluid samples visually present within the NPWT apparatus tubing were collected using a syringe and drained into LoBind tubes. Blister fluid samples were collected, as previously described, during routine blister de-roofing procedures. Briefly, the blisters were punctured by a needle or scissors and the fluid was collected in LoBind tubes or urine specimen pots. The NPWT and blister fluid was samples were centrifuged at 855 × g to remove cellular debris prior to storage of aliquots at -80 °C in LoBind Micro tubes (Eppendorf, North Ryde, New South Wales, Australia). Individual samples were processed using the FASP digestion method. In brief, an aliquot containing 50 µg of total protein from each sample was diluted with urea buffer (8 M urea (Sigma, U5128) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 0.025 M DTT) to 30 µl and transferred into separate Microcon YM-30, 30 kDa NMWCO centrifugal filter devices (Merck Millipore, Bayswater, Victoria, Australia). The centrifugal filter devices were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. The rinse buffer was then replaced by 0.05 M TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich, Castle Hill, New South Wales, Australia) buffer and trypsin was added in a ratio with total protein of 1:100 (w/w) overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using custom-made Stage-Tips prepared as described elsewhere. A liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system consisting of an Eksigent 400 nanoLC system and a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Mt Waverley, Victoria, Australia), was used to perform both data dependent and independent acquisitions (DDA and DIA, respectively). Samples were first loaded into trap columns, Trajan Protecol trap (120 Å, 3 µm, 10 mm × 300 µm) from an autosampler and flushed for 3 min at 10 µl/min (0.1% formic acid). The peptides in each sample were separated by a 87 minute gradient method using a C18 nano-LC resolving column (Eksigent ChromXP C18 3 µm 120 Å (3C18-CL-120, 3 µm, 120 Å, 0.3 x 150 mm) with a flow rate of 5 µL/minute.

### Data Protocol
Peptide ion library generation and SWATH-MS data analysis was performed using the cloud toolkit OneOmics (SCIEX). The database was created based on a SwissProt human database (generated on February 12, 2019) with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and indexed Retention Time (iRT) peptide sequences included. The peptide spectral ion library was developed using the DDA results in our previous publications. In the Merge of the peptide ion library, both protein and peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold were set to 10% Global, modified peptides were excluded, the number of peptides per protein was set to 15, and the number of transitions per peptide was set to 6. The Extraction step employed Auto-calibration for RT calibration, a 50 ppm extracted ion chromatogram extraction width, and an 8 min XIC extraction window. The exported protein area quantitative data were used for the following statistical analysis. The statistical analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 (http://www.metaboanalyst.ca/), Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/) and R studio (https://www.R-project.org/). The gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using Cytoscape 3.8.0 (https://cytoscape.org/) with the app BiNGO (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/bingo).

### Publication Abstract
Negative pressure wound therapy has been used to promote wound healing in a variety of settings, including as an adjunct to silver-impregnated dressings in the acute management of paediatric burns. Fluid aspirated by the negative pressure wound therapy system represents a potentially insightful research matrix for understanding the burn wound microenvironment and the intervention's biochemical mechanisms of action. The aim of this study was to characterize the proteome of wound fluid collected using negative pressure wound therapy from children with small-area thermal burns. Samples were obtained as part of a randomized controlled trial investigating the clinical efficacy of adjunctive negative pressure wound therapy. They were compared with blister fluid specimens from paediatric burn patients matched according to demographic and injury characteristics. Protein identification and quantification were performed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra data-independent acquisition. Proteins and biological pathways that were unique to or enriched in negative pressure wound therapy fluid samples were evaluated using principal components, partial least squares-discriminant, and gene ontology enrichment analyses. Eight viable samples of negative pressure wound therapy fluid were collected and analyzed with eight matched blister fluid samples. A total of 502 proteins were quantitatively profiled in the negative pressure wound therapy fluid, of which 444 (88.4%) were shared with blister fluid. Several proteins exhibited significant abundance differences between fluid types, with negative pressure wound therapy fluid showing a higher abundance of matrix metalloproteinase-9, arginase-1, low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor III-A, filamin-A, alpha-2-macroglobulin, and hemoglobin subunit alpha. The results lend support to the hypothesis that negative pressure wound therapy augments wound healing through the modulation of factors involved in the inflammatory response, granulation tissue synthesis, and extracellular matrix maintenance. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023168.

### Keywords
Burn, Paediatric, Oedema fluid, Exudate, Proteomics, Swath, Blister fluid, Lc-ms/ms, Npwt, Effluent

### Affiliations
Burns and Trauma Research,School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology
Queensland University of Technology

### Submitter
Tuo Zang

### Lab Head
Dr Leila Cuttle
Burns and Trauma Research,School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology


