### Accession
PXD002185

### Title
Schistosoma japonicum cercaria and schistosomula

### Description
Schistosomiasis is a parasitic zoonosis which caused by schistosomes and poses great threat to the health of human and other mammals. Schistosome cercaria must penetrate skin as an initial step to successfully infect the final host. Proteolytic enzymes secreted from the acetabular glands of cercaria contribute significantly to the invasion process. In this study, we designed a new cercaria transformation experiment to get the penetrated cercaria (schistosomula), then a gel-free shotgun proteomic analysis were performed to compare the proteomes of cercaria and schistosomula. 1894 and 1002 proteins were identified respectively, 924 proteins were common in both of two samples, almost take up 92% of the total proteins of schistosomula. The identified proteins were closely associated with nine main biological processes through Gene Ontology (GO) categorical analysis. The identification of the proteins potentially related to skin penetration offer a global overview of changes during cercaria skin invasion, providing clues into how they involve in the penetration process. Various proteases and peptidases were detected, and were differentially existed before and after cercaria transformation, suggesting proteases-specific roles and complexity mechanism during invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Chinese mainland strain of S. japonicum was used in the experiment. Infected Oncomelania hupensis snails were obtained from the vector biology laboratory of the National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Diseases Control and Prevention. Specific pathogen-free C57 female mice were purchased from the Shanghai Experimental Animal Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China). CE were shed from host snails, and the free-swimming S. japonicum CE were transferred to a 50 mL falcon tube and chilled on ice for 30 min. The cercarial bodies were harvested by centrifugation at 150×g for 20 min and transferred to an Eppendorf tube, then washed twice with PBS. For schistosoluma (SS) preparation, C57 mice skin was used as CE penetration mimic material. Briefly, mouse skin sections were removed from C57 mouse in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at UCSF. Skin samples were firstly washed by RPMI 1640, removed the subcutaneous fat. Cercarial infection was carried out by placing skin sections over warm RPMI-filled wells containing 0.1% Pen Strep (Life technologies, Inr) and placing the infective CE over the skin. Make sure the skin always keep in touch with the RPMI. After infection with CE, the plates covered with mouse skin were transferred into 37 °C overnight and harvest the SS like CE preparation as described above. The samples were lysed in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris pH 7.5. Tissues were homogenized and sonicated in lysis buffer. The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay and equal amounts of protein from each donor was pooled for further fractionation. Proteins from SDS lysates were separated on SDS–PAGE and in-gel digestion was carried out as described earlier.11 Briefly, the protein bands were destained, reduced and alkylated and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin. The peptides were extracted, vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until further analysis. The samples (~ 450 μg proteins) were reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin overnight at 37°C. Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptide samples from in-soultion digestion were subjected to analysis by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron, Bermen, Germany) interfaced with EASY-nLCII nanoflow liquid chromatography systems (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark). The peptide from each sample were reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a trap column (75 μm ×25 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) (5 μm particle size, pore size 100) at flow rate of 5 μL/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 mm，310 cm) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using a linear gradient of 7 - 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 60 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data dependent manner with full scans (350–2,800 m/z) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z. The eight most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) analysis in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 p.p.m. mass window. The automatic gain control for full FT MS was set to 1 million ions and for FT MS/MS was set to 0.05 million ions with a maximum ion injection times of 100 ms. Internal calibration was carried out using lock mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS raw data were searched against S. japonicum protein V4 database (LSBI-Sjr, 12657 sequences; 4929382 residues) download from the Chinese National Genome Center at Shanghai (http://lifecenter.sgst.cn/schistosoma/) using the in-house Mascot search engine (version 2.4) through Proteome Discoverer 1.3 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine and alkylated cysteine were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. Peptides were considered to be identified if a Mascot individual ion score was higher than 20 for searching V4 database. The mass error was set to 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot Percolator package to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. Peptides were considered identified at a q value < 0.05. Peptides were assembled into proteins, and proteins were further filtered to ensure a protein-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. In all differential analyses, data from three biological replicates were analyzed, and proteins with at least two peptide matches across the data from all sample groups containing replicates in a differential analysis were defined as identified proteins. For quantification, only unique peptides were included, and the total cumulative abundance was calculated by summing the individual abundances of all peptides assigned to each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomiasis is a parasitic zoonosis posing great threat to human health. The infection is acquired by larval cercariae penetrating host skin and transforming into juveniles, schistosomula. Proteolytic enzymes secreted from the cercarial acetabular glands are known to aid to the skin penetration, but molecular mechanisms remain largely unclear. To profile the protein composition and identify potential invasive proteases, we developed a new method for simulating cercarial transformation and collecting schistosomula, and for the first time, we compared the proteomes of Schistosoma japonicum cercariae and schistosomula by using in-gel shotgun proteomic analysis. Totally, 1972 proteins were identified in association with ten main biological processes based on Gene Ontology analysis; 46 proteases were detected in cercariae, and among them, 25 proteases disappeared after penetrated. Notably, leishmanolysins and serine and cysteine proteases were found abundant but differentially expressed. Recombinant serine protease SjCE2b and cysteine protease SjCB2 were produced and used for validation of native proteins. Immunofluorescence and Western blotting assays detected SjCE2b and SjCB2 in cercariae but not in schistosomula, suggesting the two enzymes might be consumed upon skin migration. Our data comprehensively chart the proteomic changes during cercarial invasion, revealing the potential proteases involved, providing a platform for the development of molecular anti-infection strategy.

### Keywords
Cercaria, Proteome, Schistosomula, Schistosoma japonicum

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Microbial Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
Fudan university

### Submitter
Mu Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Mu Liu
Department of Microbiology and Microbial Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China


