### Accession
PXD011565

### Title
TACO LEAF, a putative transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis, is a target of the protein kinase CK2

### Description
During the growth of multicellular organisms, spatial and temporal patterns of gene expression are strictly regulated to ensure that developmental programs are invoked at the appropriate stage. In this work, we describe a putative transcriptional regulator in Arabidopsis, TACO LEAF (TCO), whose overexpression results in the ectopic activation of reproductive genes during vegetative growth. Isolated as an activation-tagged allele, tco-1D displays gene misexpression patterns and phenotypic abnormalities, such as curled leaves and early flowering, that resemble chromatin regulatory mutants. A role for TCO in this mode of transcriptional regulation is further supported by the subnuclear accumulation patterns of TCO protein and the genetic interactions between tco-1D and mutants of chromatin modifiers. The endogenous expression pattern of TCO and the gene misregulation displayed by tco loss-of-function mutants suggest that this factor is involved in seed development. We also demonstrate that specific serine residues of TCO protein are targeted by the ubiquitous kinase CK2. Collectively, these results identify TCO as a novel regulator of gene expression whose activity is likely influenced by phosphorylation, as is the case with many chromatin regulators

### Sample Protocol
Eluted GST-TCO samples were prepared by diluting in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) and digested with 1 µg/µL chymotrypsin at 37°C overnight. Samples were then acidified by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2 and desalted in C18 stage tips. The peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile, and approximately 2 µL of the 15 µL sample were loaded onto a 75 µm ID column packed with 25 cm of Reprosil C18 1.9 µm, 120 Å particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher), using a gradient from 5% to 29% acetonitrile over 53 min. All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection (70K resolution

### Data Protocol
). All data were searched simultaneously against the wild-type and mutant TCO protein sequences, as well as the yeast protein database (downloaded January 13, 2015) using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptide, protein and phosphorylation sites identification were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate. Spectra were annotated using Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
As multicellular organisms grow, spatial and temporal patterns of gene expression are strictly regulated to ensure that developmental programs are invoked at appropriate stages. In this work, we describe a putative transcriptional regulator in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, TACO LEAF (TCO), whose overexpression results in the ectopic activation of reproductive genes during vegetative growth. Isolated as an activation-tagged allele, <i>tco-1D</i> displays gene misexpression and phenotypic abnormalities, such as curled leaves and early flowering, characteristic of chromatin regulatory mutants. A role for TCO in this mode of transcriptional regulation is further supported by the subnuclear accumulation patterns of TCO protein and genetic interactions between <i>tco-1D</i> and chromatin modifier mutants. The endogenous expression pattern of <i>TCO</i> and gene misregulation in <i>tco</i> loss-of-function mutants indicate that this factor is involved in seed development. We also demonstrate that specific serine residues of TCO protein are targeted by the ubiquitous kinase CK2. Collectively, these results identify TCO as a novel regulator of gene expression whose activity is likely influenced by phosphorylation, as is the case with many chromatin regulators.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Phosphoryation, Lc-ms/ms, Ck2

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


