### Accession
PXD023760

### Title
Tropism of SARS-CoV-2 in commonly used laboratory cell-lines and their proteomic landscape during infection

### Description
The present pandemic by Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is driving increased research activities in order to understand the basic biology of the virus and determining effective therapeutic strategies. The commonly used laboratory cell-lines of human origin are the first line of experimental models to study the pathogenicity and performing antiviral assays. Thus, to find a suitable cell model to study SARS-CoV-2, we assessed the tropism and cytopathogenicity of the first Swedish isolate of SARS-CoV-2 in six different cell-lines of human origin and compared their growth characteristics to other globally isolated strains. Overall, majority of the strains showed high to moderate level of susceptibility in Caco2, Huh7, Calu 3 and 293FT cell-lines and in Caco2 cells the virus can achieve high titers in absence of any prominent cytopathic effect. The protein expression profile during SARS-CoV-2 infection revealed cell-type specific regulation of cellular pathways. Type-I interferon signaling was identified as the common dysregulated cellular response in Caco2, Calu-3 and Huh7 cells. Overall, cell-type specific variability was noted with respect to cytopathogenicity, susceptibility and cellular response to SARS-CoV-2. This study provides important clues regarding SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and can represent as a guide for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, proteins were extracted with SDS-based buffer, digestion was performed on S-Trap micro columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY) and resulting peptides were labeled with isobaric TMTpro™ reagents. Labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase chromatography and concatenated to a total of 12 fractions, each fraction was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) in a 120 min linear gradient. Data were acquired on a Orbitrap™ Q-Exactive HF-X™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, isolating the top 20 most intense precursors with 120,000 mass resolution in the mass range of 375 – 1400 m/z, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 30 s; precursor isolation width of 0.7 Th with high collision energy (HCD) of 34%, resolution of 45,000 and maximum IT of 86 ms in MS2 event.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against both SwissProt human and SARS-CoV2 databases using the search engine Mascot Server v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd, UK) in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software environment allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMTpro modification of lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications; while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Cytopathogenicity, Cell-lines, Type-i intereferon, Proteomics, Ace-2, Tmprss2, Cellular tropism

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.


