### Accession
PXD003233

### Title
SILAC analysis of ptp-3 knockout in C. elegans

### Description
A ptp-3 mutant and wildtype C. elegans were SILAC labeled and subjected to whole proteome analysis and phosphotyrosine enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
For whole proteome experiments, 250 ug from wildtype and ptp-3 lysates were combined for a total of 500 ug. The lysate was then alkylated with 5 mM of iodoacetamide and reduced with 5 mM of dithiothreitol. Following this, the lysate was diluted to a final urea concentration of 3M and digested with Lys-c for 4 hours at room temperature. After digestion with Lys-c, the lysate was diluted again to a final urea concentration of 1.5M and digested overnight with trypsin. After confirming digestion efficiency, the sample was acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 2000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was then loaded onto a Sep-pak cleanup C18 column (Waters, Cat#WAT051910) equilabrated with 0.1% TFA. Columns were washed with 12 mL of 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted with 6 ml of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were then lyophilized and subjected to basic reverse phase liquid chromatography.  For phosphotyrsine enrichments, the lysate was alkylated and reduced similarly to the whole proteome experiments. Following this, the lysate was diluted to a final concentration of 1.5M and digested with trypsin overnight. After digestion, the sames were subjected to the same treatment as the whole proteome experiments.  Immunoaffinity purification (IAP) of phosphopeptides was carried out as previously described (Rush et al., 2005). Briefly, after lyophilization, 50 mg of peptide mixture was dissolved in 1.4 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and subjected to centrifugation at 2000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. Before IAP, P-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology) were washed with IAP buffer twice at 4 °C and the pH of the supernatant containing peptides was adjusted to 7.2 by adding 1 M Tris Base. For IAP, the supernatant was incubated with P-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology) at 4 °C for 30 min and the beads were washed three times with IAP buffer and then twice with water. Peptides were eluted twice from beads by incubating the beads with 0.1% TFA at room temperature.  Peptide samples from basic RPLC fractionation were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography systems (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark). The peptide digests from each fraction were reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a trap column (75 µm × 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) (5 µm particle size, pore size 100 Å) at a flow rate of 5 µl min−1 with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 µm × 20 cm) at a flow rate of 350 nl min−1 using a linear gradient of 7–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 60 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data dependent manner with full scans (350–1,800m/z) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyser at a mass resolution of 120,000 in Elite at 400 m/z. The twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle and detected at a mass resolution of 15,000 at a m/z of 400 in Orbitrap analyser. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 p.p.m. mass window. The automatic gain control for full FT MS was set to 1 million ions and for FT MS/MS was set to 0.05 million ions with a maximum ion injection times of 100 ms and 200 ms, respectively. Internal calibration was carried out using lock-mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) (Perkins et al., 1999) and SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) search algorithms against a C. elegans WormBase (Harris et al., 2010) database (version 248) through the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.0, Thermo Scientific). For both algorithms, the search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling at 13C6-15N2 lysine and 13C6-15N4  arginine as variable modifications. MS data was acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, the monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated by the PhosphoRS node in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
The leukocyte antigen related (LAR) family of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases has three members in humans - PTPRF, PTPRD and PTPRS - that have been implicated in diverse processes including embryonic development, inhibition of cell growth and axonal guidance. Mutations in the LAR family are associated with developmental defects such as cleft palate as well as various cancers including breast, neck, lung, colon and brain. Although this family of tyrosine phosphatases is important for many developmental processes, little is known of their substrates. This is partially due to functional redundancy within the LAR family, as deletion of a single gene in the LAR family does not have an appreciable phenotype, but a dual knockout is embryonically lethal in mouse models. To circumvent the inability to knockout multiple members of the LAR family in mouse models, we used a knockout of ptp-3, which is the only known ortholog of the LAR family in Caenorhabditis elegans and allows for the study of the LAR family at the organismal level. Using SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics, we identified 255 putative substrates of ptp-3, which included four of the nine known annotated substrates of the LAR family. A motif analysis of the identified phosphopeptides allowed for the determination of sequences that appear to be preferentially dephosphorylated. Finally, we discovered that kinases were overrepresented in the list of identified putative substrates and tyrosine residues whose phosphorylation is known to increase kinase activity were dephosphorylated by ptp-3. These data are suggestive of ptp-3 as a potential negative regulator of several kinase families, such as the mitogen activated kinases (MAPKs), and multiple tyrosine kinases including FER, MET, and NTRK2.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Phosoproteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick Nathans Institute of Genetics and Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick Nathans Institute of Genetics and Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205


