### Accession
PXD012438

### Title
Stress-induced changes in the lipid microenvironment of β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase cause clinically important echinocandin resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Aspergillus species are a leading cause of invasive fungal infections. As resistance to first-line therapy involving triazole antifungal agents is rising, second-line therapy with echinocandins is expanding. Resistance to echinocandins is well-established to result from amino acid substitutions in the echinocandin drug target β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase encoded by the fks1 gene. Recently, we identified several high MIC clinical isolates of A. fumigatus from patients failing echinocandin therapy that did not contain any mutation in the fks1 gene, indicating that echinocandin resistance in these isolates results from an undefined mechanism. To explore possible new mechanisms of resistance, we used a lab-derived strain, RG101, with a nearly identical susceptibility phenotype, as a model system. This strain does not contain fks1 mutations but showed prominent resistance to the echinocandin class drug caspofungin (CAS), while remaining sensitive to other echinocandins, azoles and polyenes. Glucan synthase isolated from RG101 was fully sensitive to drug. Yet, exposure to CAS during its growth yielded a modified enzyme that was insensitive (4-log orders) in kinetic inhibition assays to CAS, as well as other echinocandins. This induction of cross-resistance by CAS was also observed in clinical isolates. To determine the nature of a presumptive posttranslational modification (PTM) of the enzyme, we analyzed whole enzyme PTMs, including the known hot-spot regions, for methylation, acetylation and phosphorylation. While we did not identify any PTMs linked to resistance, analysis of the lipid microenvironment of CAS-induced resistant enzyme revealed a prominent increase in the abundance of dihydrosphingosine (DhSph) and phytosphingosine (PhSph). Exogenous addition of DhSph and PhSph to sensitive enzyme in in vitro kinetic inhibition assays recapitulated the CAS insensitivity of the cellular-derived enzyme.  To further examine induction of drug-induced resistance, we used an in vitro assay to demonstrate that CAS, but not other echinocandin class drugs, prominently induced the production of mitochondrial-derived Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) in A. fumigatus. RNASeq evaluation of whole cells confirmed a ROS signature in cells treated with CAS. Dampening the formation of ROS by antimycin A or thiourea eliminated the induction of drug resistance by CAS.  We conclude that CAS-induced formation of ROS promotes a cellular stress response that alters the composition of plasma membrane lipids surrounding glucan synthase, changing its enzymatic properties to make it insensitive to echinocandins. This stress-induced response constitutes a novel mechanism of echinocandin resistance in Aspergillus, with implications for drug resistance and/or tolerance mechanisms in other fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Aspergillus fumigatus RG101 does not contain fks1 mutations but shows prominent resistance to the echinocandin class drug caspofungin (CAS). To explore the undefined mechanism of resistance, we compared sensitive and resistant strains in terms of the post-translational modification profile. We purified the glucan synthase Fks1 of A. fumigatus (ultracentrifugation 1h at 100,000 x g, SDS-PAGE, cut out the bands >180 kDa). For mass spectrometry analysis, an in-gel digestion using either trypsin-LysC, chymotrypsin or GluC (all Promega, Madison, WI) was performed according to the protocol of Shevchenko et al. 2006 (DOI:10.1038/nprot.2006.468).   LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched online using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. Further peptide separation on an analytical column was performed on an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 μm, 2μm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of eluent (A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and eluent (B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN/H2O (90%/ 10%, v/v). Gradient elution was performed as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15 % B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B.  A stainless-steel emitter in the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to generate positively charged ions at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500 at a resolution of 120k FWHM using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. HCD fragmentation at 30% normalised collision energy (NCE) generated MS2 ions, which were scanned at 15k FWHM using a maximum ITmax of 120 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (2018/01/24; https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002530) of Neosartorya fumigata (Aspergillus fumigatus) Af293, using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4 Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the proteolytic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications of amino acid residues were oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), acetylation (K, S, T, Y, protein N-term), methylation (D, E, K, R), and dimethylation (K, R). Static modification was carbamidomethylation (C). At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using the replicate based resampling method.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is a leading cause of invasive fungal infections. Resistance to first-line triazole antifungals has led to therapy with echinocandin drugs. Recently, we identified several high-minimum-effective-concentration (MEC) <i>A. fumigatus</i> clinical isolates from patients failing echinocandin therapy. Echinocandin resistance is known to arise from amino acid substitutions in &#x3b2;-(1,3)-d-glucan synthase encoded by the <i>fks1</i> gene. Yet these clinical isolates did not contain mutations in <i>fks1</i>, indicating an undefined resistance mechanism. To explore this new mechanism, we used a laboratory-derived strain, RG101, with a nearly identical caspofungin (CAS) susceptibility phenotype that also does not contain <i>fks1</i> mutations. Glucan synthase isolated from RG101 was fully sensitive to echinocandins. Yet exposure of RG101 to CAS during growth yielded a modified enzyme that was drug insensitive (4 log orders) in kinetic inhibition assays, and this insensitivity was also observed for enzymes isolated from clinical isolates. To understand this alteration, we analyzed whole-enzyme posttranslational modifications (PTMs) but found none linked to resistance. However, analysis of the lipid microenvironment of the enzyme with resistance induced by CAS revealed a prominent increase in the abundances of dihydrosphingosine (DhSph) and phytosphingosine (PhSph). Exogenous addition of DhSph and PhSph to the sensitive enzyme recapitulated the drug insensitivity of the CAS-derived enzyme. Further analysis demonstrated that CAS induces mitochondrion-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) and that dampening ROS formation by antimycin A or thiourea eliminated drug-induced resistance. We conclude that CAS induces cellular stress, promoting formation of ROS and triggering an alteration in the composition of plasma membrane lipids surrounding glucan synthase, rendering it insensitive to echinocandins.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Resistance to first-line triazole antifungal agents among <i>Aspergillus</i> species has prompted the use of second-line therapy with echinocandins. As the number of <i>Aspergillus</i>-infected patients treated with echinocandins is rising, clinical observations of drug resistance are also increasing, indicating an emerging global health threat. Our knowledge regarding the development of clinical echinocandin resistance is largely derived from <i>Candida</i> spp., while little is known about resistance in <i>Aspergillus.</i> Therefore, it is important to understand the specific cellular responses raised by <i>A. fumigatus</i> against echinocandins. We discovered a new mechanism of resistance in <i>A. fumigatus</i> that is independent of the well-characterized <i>FKS</i> mutation mechanism observed in <i>Candida</i> This study identified an off-target effect of CAS, i.e., ROS production, and integrated oxidative stress and sphingolipid alterations into a novel mechanism of resistance. This stress-induced response has implications for drug resistance and/or tolerance mechanisms in other fungal pathogens.

### Keywords
Echinocandin resistance, Posttranslational modifications, Caspofungin, Lc-ms/ms, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


