### Accession
PXD035973

### Title
ELTD1 is present in extracellular vesicles derived from endothelial cells as a cleaved extracellular domain which induces in vivo angiogenesis

### Description
ELTD1/ADGRL4 is an adhesion GPCR with an important role in angiogenesis. We recently identified a role for ELTD1 in wound repair and inflammation. Activation of ELTD1 in endothelial cells results in a type II EMT to myofibroblast-like cells that have enhanced angiogenic ability. Furthermore, expression of Eltd1 in murine breast cancer cells increases tumour growth by increasing blood vessel size and perfusion and by creating an immunosuppressive microenvironment. We thereforeAs extracellular vesicles (EVs) are known to be involved in vascular development, growth and maturation we investigated the composition and functional effects of the extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from ELTD1 expressexpressing cells to elucidate their role in these processes. A highly glycosylated form of the extracellular domain of ELTD1 is readily incorporated into EVs. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics we identified proteins that are enriched in ELTD1-EVs and are involved in haemostasis and immune responses. ELTD1 enriched EVs were pro-angiogenic in vivo and in vitro and the presence of the extracellular domain alone induced endothelial sprouting. In endothelial cells experiencing laminar flow, ELTD1 levels were reduced in the EVs when compared to quiescent cells, showing a relationship between ELTD1 and the activation state of the endothelium. Using FACS, we detected a significant increase in vesicular ELTD1 in the plasma of patients with preeclampsia, a condition characterized by endothelial dysfunction. These data confirm a role for ELTD1 in wound repair and inflammation and reveal its potential as a biomarker of vessel dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were precipitated and desalted with chloroform/methanol(26). Samples were resuspended in buffer that contained 6M urea and 100mM Tris pH 7.8, followed by reduction, alkylation, and in-solution trypsin digestion as described previously(27). Trypsin-digested protein material was analysed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry with an UltiMate (LC Packings, Dionex) high-performance liquid chromatography system coupled online to a 3-dimensional high-capacity ion trap (HCTplus, Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometer as described previously(27).

### Data Protocol
Prism 8 (Graphpad Software) was used to analyse the results and data are shown as mean +/- standard deviation (SD). Student's t-test was used to compare two unpaired groups. Significance is denoted as: * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wound repair, Angiogenesis, Eltd1, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology University of Oxford
Nuffield Department of Medicine

### Submitter
Svenja Hester

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian L. Harris1
Department of Oncology University of Oxford


