### Accession
PXD033595

### Title
Proteomics, phosphoproteomics and miRNA analysis of circulating extracellular vesicles through automated and high-throughput isolation

### Description
Here, we introduce a magnetic bead-based EV enrichment approach (EVrich) for automated and high-throughput processing of urine samples. Parallel enrichments can be performed in 96-well plates for downstream cargo analysis, including EV characterization, miRNA, proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis. We applied the instrument to a cohort of clinical urine samples to achieve reproducible identification of over 47,562 unique EV peptides and 4,327 EV proteins in each one-ml urine sample. Quantitative phosphoproteomicsrevealed 186 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 77 proteins that were significantly elevated in prostate cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
First, EVs captured by UC, manualEVtrap or EVrich methodswere solubilized in the lysis solution containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium lauroylsarcosinate, 10 mMTris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail in 50 mMTris•HCl (pH 8.5). Then, they were boiled in 95 °C water bath for 10 min and diluted five-fold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. 2.5% of the solution was taken out for BCA assay to determine the total protein content and then the rest was digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:100 (w/w) for 3 h at 37 °C. Afterward, the mixtures were incubated with trypsin at 1:50 (w/w) overnight in 37 °C water bath to further digest the peptides. Then, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to acidify the sample to a final concentration of 1% TFA and ethyl acetate was added to the above mixture to dilute it two-fold. The resulting solution was vortexed for 2 min and centrifuged at 15000 xg for 3 min. The top layer of organic phase was removed, and the bottom aqueous phase was collected to freeze-dry in a vacuum freeze centrifuge (LaconcoCentriVap). The desalting process was performed using 8 mm Capture Disk (3M Empore 2240-SDB-XC) according to manufacturer’s instructions. We took out 2% of each sample for direct proteomic experiments, the remaining 98% of each sample was used for phosphopeptide enrichment by PolyMACPhosphopeptide Enrichment kit (Tymora Analytical)according to manufacturer’s intructionsand analyzed by a 60 min LC−MS run. All samples were freeze-dried in a vacuum freeze centrifuge and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using PEAKS Studio X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search was performed against the human UniProt database version downloaded May 2020 with no redundant entries. Enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification while oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications. The variable modifications of phosphorylation (S/T/Y) were also selected for the phosphopeptide sample search. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of proteins, peptides, and phosphopeptides were all set to 1% (-10lgP≥20≥1 unique peptide for proteins).  For the data processing of both proteomic and phosphoproteomic quantification, the intensities of peptides and phosphopeptides were extracted with initial precursor mass tolerance set at 20 ppm and PSM confidence FDR of 1%. All of the data were normalized using Total Ion Current (TIC) signals. The individual protein intensity was calculated by top three peptides with the highest abundance. For calculation of fold changes between the groups of proteins, a label-free quantitative method was used to compare phosphoproteome differential expression, EV markers, and free urine proteins within different samples. Based on these results, the differential expression analysis of phosphopeptides in clinical samples was conducted using Perseus software for missing value replacement, normalization, and z-score normalization.  The volcano plots and heatmaps (p-value <0.05, log2(Fold change) >1 was regarded as differential proteins or phosphopeptides) were generated with R (version 4.0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play an important role in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases because of their rich molecular contents involved in intercellular communication, regulation, and other functions. With increasing efforts to move the field of EVs to clinical applications, the lack of a practical EV isolation method from circulating biofluids with high throughput and good reproducibility has become one of the biggest barriers. Here, we introduce a magnetic bead-based EV enrichment approach (EVrich) for automated and high-throughput processing of urine samples. Parallel enrichments can be performed in 96-well plates for downstream cargo analysis, including EV characterization, miRNA, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics analysis. We applied the instrument to a cohort of clinical urine samples to achieve reproducible identification of an average of 17,000 unique EV peptides and an average of 2800 EV proteins in each 1 mL urine sample. Quantitative phosphoproteomics revealed 186 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 48 proteins that were significantly elevated in prostate cancer patients. Among them, multiple phosphoproteins were previously reported to associate with prostate cancer. Together, EVrich represents a universal, scalable, and simple platform for EV isolation, enabling downstream EV cargo analyses for a broad range of research and clinical applications.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mirna, Extracellular vesicles, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Southeast University
State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, National Demonstration Center for Experimental Biomedical Engineering Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China

### Submitter
Hao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy Tao
State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, National Demonstration Center for Experimental Biomedical Engineering Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China


