### Accession
PXD004116

### Title
In-depth proteomic mapping of skin mucus of gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). Surrogate markers of chronic stress in fish farming

### Description
The skin mucus of gilthead sea bream was mapped by 1-DE followed by liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer. More than 2000 proteins were identified with a protein score filter of 30. The identified proteins were represented in 418 canonical pathways of the Ingenuity Pathway software. After filtering by canonical pathway overlapping, the retained proteins were clustered in three groups. The mitochondrial cluster contained 59 proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial dysfunction. The second cluster contained 79 proteins related to antigen presentation and protein ubiquitination pathways. The third cluster contained 257 proteins where proteins related to protein synthesis, cellular assembly, and epithelial integrity were over-represented. The latter group also included acute phase response signaling. In parallel, 2-DE methodology identified six proteins spots of different protein abundance when comparing unstressed fish with chronically stressed fish in an experimental model that mimicked

### Sample Protocol
Animals and mucus collection Two-year old gilthead sea bream (average body weight of 320 g) coming from the study of Bermejo-Nogales et al. [34] comprised a control unstressed group (CTRL) and a group of fish exposed to a fast series of automated stressors (multiple sensorial stressed fish, M-ST): tank shaking, sounds, moving objects into water, water reverse flow and light flashes in random order for 30 min three times a day (9:30 hours, 14:30 hours and 18:30 hours) for a period of 21 days. At the end of experimental period, eight fish per 7 group were randomly sampled and anesthetized with 100 mg/L MS-222 (Sigma). Mucus was gently scraped off the normal skin surface with sterile microslides, avoiding collection of blood, urine, and feces along with mucus. Skin mucus was then transferred into Eppendorf tubes and immediately frozen at -80ºC until analysed. All procedures were performed according to the Norwegian National Ethics Board for experimentation with animals (ID No. 4007) and EU legislation (2010/63/EU) on the handling of experimental animals. Two-dimensional electrophoresis Individual samples of CTRL and M-ST fish (n = 8 for each group) were precipitated by means of the 2-D Clean-Up kit (GE Healthcare), and then solubilized in labelling buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 20 mM Tris). The N-hydroxysuccinimide ester dyes Cy2/3/5 were used for minimal labeling following the mixed internal standard methodology of Alban et al. [50] according to the manufacturer’s protocol (GE Healthcare). Briefly, 50 μg of each experimental sample were individually labeled with 400 pmol of either Cy3 or Cy5. In parallel, a mixed internal standard was generated by combining equal amounts of each experimental sample, which were then labeled with 8 400 pmol of Cy2. Labeling was performed for 60 min on ice in the dark after which the reaction was quenched by adding 10 nM lysine for 10 min. About 150 μg of protein (incubated in 65 mM DTT and 1% ampholytes) were loaded into Immobiline DryStrips (pH 3-11 NL, 24 cm), rehydrated overnight in 8 M urea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 12 μL/mL DeStreak reagent, 1% ampholytes. After focusing at 32 kVh at 20ºC, strips were equilibrated first for 15 min in reducing solution (6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30% v/v glycerol, 2% w/v SDS, 2% w/v DTT) and then in alkylating solution (6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 30% v/v glycerol, 2% w/v SDS, 2.5% w/v iodoacetamide) for 15 min. The second dimension (12.5% polyacrylamide, 25 x 21 cm) was run at 20ºC at a constant power of 2 W for 60 min followed by 15 W until the bromophenol blue tracking front had run off the end of the gel (6 hours). Fluorescence images were obtained on a Typhoon 9400 scanner (GE Healthcare). Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5 images were scanned at excitation/emission wavelengths of 488/520 nm, 532/580 nm, and 633/670 nm, respectively, at a resolution of 100 μm. Proteins of interest were manually excised from analytical gels and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Both image analysis and statistical quantification of relative protein levels were performed using DeCyder v.6.5 software (GE Healthcare). 2.4 Mass spectrometry Samples from 1-DE and 2-DE (5 μL) were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer (qQTOF). Briefly, samples were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 350 μm x 0.5 mm, Nikkyo) desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 μL/min for 10 min. Peptide mixtures were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 75 μm x 12 cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic 9 acid. Separation was carried out with a linear gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed in a high resolution nanoESI (qQ)TOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The (qQ)TOF was operated in information‐dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-seconds TOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05 seconds product-ion scans from 100-1500 m/z on the 50 most intensely 2-5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
peak list directly from 5600 TripleTOF wiff files. Mascot was used to search the Expasy protein database or the IATS-CSIC gilthead sea bream database (www.nutrigroup-iats.org/seabreamdb) according to the following parameters: trypsin specificity, carbamidomethyl C to fix modification, deamidated (NQ), Gln‐>pyro‐Glu (N‐term Q), Glu‐>pyro‐Glu (N‐term E), oxidation (M) to variable modification, 75 ppm as peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da as fragment mass tolerance. Proteins with a ProteinPilot score higher than 1.3 were identified with a confidence interval ≥ 95%. Functional analysis of identified proteins was performed by means of the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (www.ingenuity.com). For each protein in the analysis, the Uniprot accession equivalent for one of the three higher vertebrates model species in IPA (human, rat, or mouse) was searched as previously reported for the transcriptome-encoding proteins of gilthead sea bream [49].

### Publication Abstract
The skin mucus of gilthead sea bream was mapped by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer. More than 2,000 proteins were identified with a protein score filter of 30. The identified proteins were represented in 418 canonical pathways of the Ingenuity Pathway software. After filtering by canonical pathway overlapping, the retained proteins were clustered in three groups. The mitochondrial cluster contained 59 proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial dysfunction. The second cluster contained 79 proteins related to antigen presentation and protein ubiquitination pathways. The third cluster contained 257 proteins where proteins related to protein synthesis, cellular assembly, and epithelial integrity were over-represented. The latter group also included acute phase response signaling. In parallel, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis methodology identified six proteins spots of different protein abundance when comparing unstressed fish with chronically stressed fish in an experimental model that mimicked daily farming activities. The major changes were associated with a higher abundance of cytokeratin 8 in the skin mucus proteome of stressed fish, which was confirmed by immunoblotting. Thus, the increased abundance of markers of skin epithelial turnover results in a promising indicator of chronic stress in fish.

### Keywords
Chronic stress, Skin mucus, Cytokeratins, Gilthead sea bream, Proteome

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jaume Pérez
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain


