### Accession
PXD000534

### Title
Identification of novel biomarker candidates for the immunohistochemical diagnosis of cholangiocellular carcinoma - LC-MS Part

### Description
The aim of this study was the identification of biomarkers for the immunohistochemical diagnosis of cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC). CCC is a primary cancer which arises from the epithelial cells of the bile ducts and is characterised by high mortality rates due to its late clinical presentation and limited treatment options. Tumorous tissue and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissue from eight CCC patients were analysed by two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and by mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. After data analysis and statistical evaluation of the proteins which were found to be differentially regulated between the two experimental groups (fold change ≥ 1.5; p-value ≤ 0.05), 15 candidate proteins were chosen for verification by immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort of 14 patients. This confirmed the significant up-regulation of chloride intracellular channel protein 1 (CLIC1), gelsolin (GSN), pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2 (PKM2), serpin H1, 14-3-3 protein sigma (SFN), stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1) and tax1-binding protein 3 (Tax1BP3) in tumorous cholangiocytes when compared to normal hepatocytes, whereas fatty acid-binding protein 1 (FABP1) and Betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase 1 (BHMT) were significantly down-regulated. Furthermore, STIP1 and SFN were able to differentiate between CCC tumour cells and non-tumorous cholangiocytes with a sensitivity of 100% and 86%, respectively and a specificity of 100% in both cases. We therefore conclude that these proteins should be considered as potential diagnostic biomarkers for CCC in an immunohistochemical application. Additional experiments addressing the validation of these novel biomarker candidates are being performed.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was the identification of novel biomarker candidates for the diagnosis of cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) and its immunohistochemical differentiation from benign liver and bile duct cells. CCC is a primary cancer that arises from the epithelial cells of bile ducts and is characterized by high mortality rates due to its late clinical presentation and limited treatment options. Tumorous tissue and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissue from eight CCC patients were analyzed by means of two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis and mass-spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. After data analysis and statistical evaluation of the proteins found to be differentially regulated between the two experimental groups (fold change &#x2265; 1.5; p value &#x2264; 0.05), 14 candidate proteins were chosen for determination of the cell-type-specific expression profile via immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 14 patients. This confirmed the significant up-regulation of serpin H1, 14-3-3 protein sigma, and stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 in tumorous cholangiocytes relative to normal hepatocytes and non-tumorous cholangiocytes, whereas some proteins were detectable specifically in hepatocytes. Because stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 exhibited both sensitivity and specificity of 100%, an immunohistochemical verification examining tissue sections of 60 CCC patients was performed. This resulted in a specificity of 98% and a sensitivity of 64%. We therefore conclude that this protein should be considered as a potential diagnostic biomarker for CCC in an immunohistochemical application, possibly in combination with other candidates from this study in the form of a biomarker panel. This could improve the differential diagnosis of CCC and benign bile duct diseases, as well as metastatic malignancies in the liver.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Lc-ms', 'Cholangiocellular carcinoma', 'Liver', 'Maldi']

### Affiliations
['Ruhr-Universität Bochum,\r\nMedical Faculty,\r\nMedizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics']

### Submitter
['Julian Uszkoreit']

### Lab Head
[]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['liver']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['epithelial cells of bile ducts']
Characteristics[disease]: ['normal' 'cholangiocellular carcinoma']
Comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite;AC=MS:1001910']
Comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample;AC=MS:1002038']
Comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=propionamide;MT=variable;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:24']
Comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']

