### Accession
PXD015437

### Title
TULIP2: an improved method for the identification of ubiquitin E3-specific targets

### Description
Protein modification by Ubiquitin or Ubiquitin-like modifiers is mediated by an enzyme cascade composed of E1s, E2s and E3s enzymes. E1, or ubiquitin-activating enzymes, perform the ubiquitin activation. Next, ubiquitin is transferred to ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes or E2s. Finally, ubiquitin ligases or E3s catalyze the transfer of ubiquitin to the acceptor proteins. E3 enzymes are responsible of determining the substrate specificity. Determining which E3 enzyme maps to which substrate is a major challenge that is greatly facilitated by the TULIP2 methodology. TULIP2 methodology is fast, precise and cost-effective. Compared to previous TULIP methodology protocol, TULIP2 methodology achieves a more than 50-fold improvement in the purification yield and two orders of magnitude improvement in the signal-to-background ratio after label free quantification by mass spectrometry analysis. The method includes the generation of TULIP2 cell lines, subsequent purification of TULIP2 conjugates, preparation and analysis of samples by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Five 15 cm diameter plates of U2OS cells were grown up to 60% to 80% confluence and the expression of TULIP2 construct was induced with 1µg/mL doxycycline for 24h. Next, cells were treated for 5h with proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Sigma Aldrich) at 10 µM. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, scraped and transferred to a 50 mL tube. Cells were spun down 5 min at 500 x g, supernatant was discarded and transferred to a 15 mL tube with 5 mL PBS. At this point, a 100 µL aliquot was taken to serve as input sample. After spinning down 1 min at 500 x g and discarding supernatant, input sample cells were lysed in 100 µL SNTBS buffer (2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 50mM TRIS pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). Rest of the sample was centrifuged 3 min at 500 x g and the supernatant discarded. Cell pellet was lysed in 10 mL Guanidinium buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10mM TRIS, pH 7.8). Samples were homogenized at room temperature by sonication using a tip sonicator (Q125 Sonicator, QSonica, Newtown, USA). Sonication was performed at 80% amplitude during 5 s. Subsequently, protein concentration was determined by BiCinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and sample total protein content was equalized accordingly.  Lysates were supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 8.0. 100 µL of nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Ni-NTA) beads (QIAGEN), were equilibrated with Guanidinium buffer supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 8.0,  added to the cell lysates, and incubated overnight at 4°C under rotation.  After lysate-beads incubation, samples were centrifuged 5 min at 500 x g and the supernatant was discarded. Ni-NTA beads were transferred with 1 mL Wash Buffer 1 (6 M Guanidine-HCL, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM Imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0,2 % Triton X-100) to an Eppendorf LoBind tube (Eppendorf). Centrifuged again, supernatant discarded, and moved to a new LoBind tube with Wash buffer 2 (8 M Urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol). Same procedure was repeated with Wash buffer 3 (8 M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol). Next, beads were washed twice with Wash buffer 4 (8 M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol). In every wash step, beads were allowed to equilibrate with the buffer for 15 min under rotation. After second wash with Wash buffer 4, Ni-NTA beads were separated from the buffer by passing through a 0.45 µm filter Ultrafree-MC-HV spin column (Merck-Millipore) which had been previously equilibrated with 250 µL of ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Using 400 µL of ABC buffer, Ni-NTA beads were transferred to a new Eppendorf LoBind tube and 500 ng of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) were added. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C while shaking at 1,400 rpm.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) as described previously (Tyanova et al., 2016a). We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (27th May 2019). Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications. Digestion with Trypsin/P was used, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and GlyGly (for ubiquitination sites) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. All peptides were used for protein quantification. Output from MaxQuant Data were exported and processed in MS Excel for further filtering, processing of the data, and visualization.  For the statistical analysis of RNF4-TULIP2 samples, Output from the analysis in MaxQuant was further processed in the Perseus computational platform (v 1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016b). LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and potential contaminants and proteins identified by site only or reverse peptide were removed. Samples were grouped in experimental categories and proteins not identified in 3 out of 3 replicates in at least one group were also removed. Missing values were imputed using normally distributed values with a 1.8 downshift (log2) and a randomized 0.3 width (log2) considering whole matrix values. Statistical analysis was performed and proteins being significantly enriched in the wild type RNF4 samples compared to the ΔGG (t-test with permutation-based False Discovery Rate (FDR) = 0.05 and S0=0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Protein modification by Ubiquitin or Ubiquitin-like modifiers is mediated by an enzyme cascade composed of E1, E2, and E3 enzymes. E1s, or ubiquitin-activating enzymes, perform ubiquitin activation. Next, ubiquitin is transferred to ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes or E2s. Finally, ubiquitin ligases or E3s catalyze the transfer of ubiquitin to the acceptor proteins. E3 enzymes are responsible for determining the substrate specificity. Determining which E3 enzyme maps to which substrate is a major challenge that is greatly facilitated by the TULIP2 methodology. TULIP2 methodology is fast, precise, and cost-effective. Compared to the previous TULIP methodology protocol, TULIP2 methodology achieves a more than 50-fold improvement in the purification yield and two orders of magnitude improvement in the signal-to-background ratio after label free quantification by mass spectrometry analysis. The method includes the generation of TULIP2 cell lines, subsequent purification of TULIP2 conjugates, preparation, and analysis of samples by mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Post-translational modifications, Proteomics, E3 enzymes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
González-Prieto laboratory, Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
González-Prieto laboratory, Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.


