### Accession
PXD009890

### Title
Adaptive physiology of reef-associated foraminifera to the combined effects of ocean acidification and warming

### Description
The association with photosymbiotic algae is crucial for the proliferation of many coral reef organisms, but increases their sensitivity to environmental changes. Large benthic foraminifera (LBF) are a diverse group of carbonate producers harboring algal photosymbionts. They act as key ecological engineers and are widely used as bioindicators. As in corals, elevated temperatures and light intensities are known to induce bleaching in LBF, but the combined effects of ocean acidification and warming remain unclear. To shed light into the adaptive physiology of LBF, we linked the assessment of the holobiont and photosymbiont physiological condition (mortality, growth, coloration, and chlorophyll a) to a bottom-up proteomics approach that allows the examination of cellular responses of host and symbionts simultaneously. In a two-months experiment, we exposed Amphistegina lobifera to the combined effects of ocean acidification (400, 1000 and 2800 ppm pCO2) and warming (28-control and 31°C). More than 1,000 proteins were identified by label-free mass spectrometry-based whole proteome analysis and assigned to the host or photosymbionts. Photopigment concentrations declined in response to elevated pCO2, visible by discoloration. These indicate the reduction of photosymbiont densities under ocean acidification, despite the fertilizing effects suggested for high inorganic carbon availability, and imply metabolic adjustments. Increases of proteolytic proteins suggest active host regulation of photosymbiont density in order to maintain homeostasis with its algal photosymbionts. Growth rates, however, were unaffected by elevated pCO2 levels at control temperatures, but high pCO2 levels (2800 ppm, pH 7.52) combined with thermal stress (31°C) impaired growth, though mortality and shell dissolution was negligible. While growth was unaffected by intermediate pCO2 levels (1000 ppm, pH 7.98) combined with ocean warming, this treatment induced the most distinct proteome responses. These include the regulation of ion transporters and host cytoplasmic proteins that likely abet calcification under ocean acidification. This study reveals a highly complex cellular response in both the host and the photosymbiont, which appears to facilitate a high resilience potential of A. lobifera to end of the century ocean conditions. Nevertheless, our results imply that when pCO2 levels rise above 1000 ppm during persistent ocean warming or extreme heating events these adaptive mechanisms become disrupted.

### Sample Protocol
Eight to nine specimens per experimental condition and biological replicate were pooled,lysed and tryptically digested. Aliquots of each sample corresponding to ~1 µg of tryptic digest were analyzed on a nano-LC-MS system in order to compensate for systematic errors derived e.g. from the protein concentration estimation. Thus, the sample amounts were corrected based on the alignment of total ion chromatograms (TICs) to warrant identical starting material prior to actual LC-MS analysis. After normalization of amounts, all twenty one samples (1 µg each) were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific), resulting in a dataset of 21 MS/MS runs. The samples were analyzed in randomized order to minimize systematic errors.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS software (version 3.0.6039.34628) from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) and the statistical software R, version 3.3.162 were used for label free quantification.  Raw MS data was imported into Progenesis and aligned to one automatically selected LC-MS reference file. After peak picking, MS/MS spectra were exported .mgf files. Identification of proteins and peptides was performed by the PEAKS Studio software suite, version 7.5, de novo to SPIDER. Searches were performed in a decoy-fusion manner against a concatenated database comprising publicly available protein and nucleotide sequences of foraminifera as well as diatoms (Bacillariophyta) from the NCBI database on 2016/03/15. Protein sequence databases were used as such, while nucleotide sequences were translated in all six reading frames prior to concatenation. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Full tryptic enzyme specificity was selected, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. For de novo and DB search, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. A maximum number of two variable modifications per peptide was allowed for de novo and DB search, while for the PTM and SPIDER search the default settings were used. PSM- and peptide-level FDR was limited to 1% and proteins had to be identified with at least one unique peptide in order to be reported. Identifications meeting these criteria were re-imported into Progenesis to calculate the normalized abundances on the peptide-level. Amino acid sequences of all proteins identified in the database search were uploaded in .fasta file format to the CD-HIT suite web server of the Weizhong Li Lab in order to generate cluster of homologous protein sequences. Sequence identity cut-off was set to 0.7 and minimum alignment coverage for the longer sequence was set to 0.0. All other parameters were left as default. Normalized abundance-values of the peptides were used to calculate protein cluster abundance. Only peptides unique to a given protein cluster were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Global change, Amphistegina lobifera, Large benthic foraminifera

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany


