### Accession
PXD028321

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis of neuronal cells and secretomes with timsTOF Pro

### Description
The neuropeptide VGF was recently proposed as a neurodegeneration biomarker. The Parkinson's disease-related protein leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) regulates endolysosomal dynamics, a process that involves SNARE-mediated membrane fusion and could regulate secretion. Here we investigate potential biochemical and functional links between LRRK2 and v-SNAREs. We find that LRRK2 directly interacts with the v-SNAREs VAMP4 and VAMP7. Secretomics reveals VGF secretory defects in VAMP4 and VAMP7 knockout (KO) neuronal cells. In contrast, VAMP2 KO "regulated secretion-null" and ATG5 KO "autophagy-null" cells release more VGF. VGF is partially associated with extracellular vesicles and LAMP1+ endolysosomes. LRRK2 expression increases VGF perinuclear localization and impairs its secretion. Retention using selective hooks (RUSH) assays show that a pool of VGF traffics through VAMP4+ and VAMP7+ compartments, and LRRK2 expression delays its transport to the cell periphery. Overexpression of LRRK2 or VAMP7-longin domain impairs VGF peripheral localization in primary cultured neurons. Altogether, our results suggest that LRRK2 might regulate VGF secretion via interaction with VAMP4 and VAMP7.

### Sample Protocol
The secretome samples were first precipitated with 10% TCA (at -20°C, overnight), centrifuged at 20 000xg and washed 4 times with 100% ethanol. The final pellets were resuspended in 50µl of 5% SDS in 100mM TEAB buffer, supplemented with 20mM TCEP and 50mM CAA and incubated for 5min at 95oC. S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 50µg of total lysate samples and on secretome samples, according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, lysate samples were first reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to all samples to a final concentration of 1.2% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH 7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Two extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2.5µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried. The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 100µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 1µL was injected on a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in water, 2% acetonitrile; Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 300nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (Ion Optics, Australia) using a gradient elution (2 to 10% solvent B during 40min; 10 to 15% during 23min; 15% to 25% during 27min; 25% to 80% for 10min and finally 80% for 5min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values from 0.8 to 1.3 V s/cm2 (1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.17s and the number of PASEF MS/MS scans was set to 10.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software version 1.6.17.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Rattus norvegicus database mixed with its trEMBL entries (updated February 2021, 36188 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 10 ppm and 40 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for Trypsin/P cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein and match between runs was allowed across samples. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (Tyanova et al., 2016). For statistical comparison, we set 3 groups, each containing up to 3 biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 30% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, FDR<0.05, S0=0.1 on both cell lysate and secretome sample groups and Student t-test, FDR<0.05, S0=0.1 or S0=1 for cell lysate and secretome sample groups, respectively. Finally, the differentially expressed proteins were subjected to bioinformatic analysis using EnrichR software freely available at https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/ for enrichment of GO terms using GO Cellular Component library from 2018 (Kuleshov et al., 2016). Ranking of enriched term was performed using combined score which is a combination of the p-value and z-score calculated by multiplying both scores as follows: c = ln(p) * z (see Help page of website for more details).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuronal cells, Timstof pro, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Vamps, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Chiara Guerrera, IR1, HDR Head of the Proteomics Platform SFR Necker INSERM US24  Faculty of Medecine,  University of Paris 160 rue de Vaugirard 75015 Paris Tél. : 01 40 61 54 67

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Chiara Guerrera, IR1, HDR Head of the Proteomics Platform SFR Necker INSERM US24  Faculty of Medecine,  University of Paris 160 rue de Vaugirard 75015 Paris Tél. : 01 40 61 54 67


