### Accession
PXD038121

### Title
Proteome-wide profiling using sample multiplexing of a human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line treated with cannabidiol (CBD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)

### Description
Cannabis has been used throughout history for medicinal and recreational purposes. The most notable cannabinoids derived from these plants are cannabidiol (CBD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Although well studied for their therapeutic effects, and highly debated concerning their recreational use, the underlying mechanisms of their biological effects are poorly defined. Here we used isobaric tag-based sample multiplexed proteome profiling to investigate protein abundance differences in the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line treated with CBD and THC. We highlighted significantly regulated proteins by each treatment and performed pathway classification and associated protein-protein interaction analysis. Our data suggest that these treatments may result in mitochondrial dysfunction and induce endoplasmic reticulum stress. This dataset can be mined further to investigate the potential role of CBD and THC in various biological and disease contexts and thus provide a foundation for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were syringe-lysed in 8M urea complemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein was quantified using the BCA protein assay. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and the excess of iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM DTT for 15 min. Approximately 30 µg of protein were chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 µL of 200 mM 3-[4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]propane-1-sulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5. Protein was digested using LysC overnight at room temperature followed by trypsin for 6 h at 37°C, both at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. After digestion, the samples were labeled using the TMTpro16 reagents for 60 min, the reactions were quenched using hydroxylamine (final concentration of 0.3% v/v). The samples were combined equally and subsequently desalted using a 100 mg SepPak C18t cartridge.  Offline fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 pump with an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 2.1 mm ID and 250 mm in length). Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a column flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. Ninety-six fractions were collected and then concatenated into 24 which were analyzed by LC-MS3.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML. Database searching included all human entries from UniProt (downloaded March 2022, 100,776 entries). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins were also included. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency, when the TMTpro modifications were set to variable), while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification.  PSMs (peptide spectrum matches) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).  PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein-level FDR was subsequently set at 1%.  For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise ratio ≥100 across all channels. For each protein, the filtered signal-to-noise values were summed to generate protein quantification values. To control for different total protein loading within an experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal in the experiment. For each protein in a TMTpro experiment, the signal-to-noise was scaled to sum to 100 to facilitate comparisons across experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Cannabis has been used historically for both medicinal and recreational purposes, with the most notable cannabinoids being cannabidiol (CBD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Although their therapeutic effects have been well studied and their recreational use is highly debated, the underlying mechanisms of their biological effects remain poorly defined. In this study, we use isobaric tag-based sample multiplexed proteome profiling to investigate protein abundance differences in the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line treated with CBD and THC. We identified significantly regulated proteins by each treatment and performed a pathway classification and associated protein-protein interaction analysis. Our findings suggest that these treatments may lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and induce endoplasmic reticulum stress. These data can potentially be interrogated further to investigate the potential role of CBD and THC in various biological and disease contexts, providing a foundation for future studies.

### Keywords
Rts, Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Cannabidiol, Tmtpro, Endoplasmic reticulum stress, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School  Department of Cell Biology 240 Longwood Ave. Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School  Department of Cell Biology 240 Longwood Ave. Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA


