### Accession
PXD035766

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the extracellular vesicles of the filamentous fungus Botrytis cinerea.

### Description
Botrytis cinerea is the causing agent of grey mould on hundreds of plants cultivated in fields, tunnels and greenhouses worldwide. Considering the central role of secretion in the necrotrophic interaction between the fungus and its host plants, non conventional secre-tion was explored through the search and characterisation of extracellular vesicles. In or-der to reveal the protein composition of these vesicles, a proteomic analysis was chosen.

### Sample Protocol
Samples with an equal protein concentration (10 µg) were loaded onto a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE, and the migration was stopped when the proteins entered the resolving gel. The steps of sample preparation and in gel digestion by the trypsin were performed as previously described [Rascle C et al. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2018]. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 58 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a ENSEMBL Botrytis cinerea ASL83294v1 database (13023 entries, release 47). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [Käll L et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The quantification parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based (6) Imputation mode : none and (7) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Fungal secretomes are known to contain a multitude of components involved in nutrition, cell growth or biotic interactions. Recently, extra-cellular vesicles have been identified in a few fungal species. Here, we used a multidisciplinary approach to identify and characterize extracellular vesicles produced by the plant necrotroph <i>Botrytis cinerea</i>. Transmission electron microscopy of infectious hyphae and hyphae grown in vitro revealed extracellular vesicles of various sizes and densities. Electron tomography showed the co-existence of ovoid and tubular vesicles and pointed to their release via the fusion of multi-vesicular bodies with the cell plasma membrane. The isolation of these vesicles and exploration of their protein content using mass spectrometry led to the identification of soluble and membrane proteins involved in transport, metabolism, cell wall synthesis and remodeling, proteostasis, oxidoreduction and traffic. Confocal microscopy highlighted the capacity of fluorescently labeled vesicles to target cells of <i>B. cinerea</i>, cells of the fungus <i>Fusarium graminearum</i>, and onion epidermal cells but not yeast cells. In addition, a specific positive effect of these vesicles on the growth of <i>B. cinerea</i> was quantified. Altogether, this study broadens our view on the secretion capacity of <i>B. cinerea</i> and its cell-to-cell communication.

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie, UMR 5240, Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bayer SAS, Lyon, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruel
Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie, UMR 5240, Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bayer SAS, Lyon, France.


