### Accession
PXD027778

### Title
Systems-wide Analysis Revealed Shared and Unique Responses to Moderate and Acute High Temperatures in Green Alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
Different intensities of high temperatures affect plant growth and yield in the field, but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Using the unicellular green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, under highly controlled photobioreactor conditions, we revealed systems-wide shared and unique responses to 24-hour moderate (35oC) and acute (40oC) high temperatures and subsequent recovery at 25oC. Heat at 35oC increased transcripts/proteins involved in gluconeogensis/glyoxylate-cycle for carbon uptake, promoted growth, and increased starch accumulation. Heat at 40oC inhibited growth, resulting in carbon uptake over usage and increased starch accumulation. Heat at 35oC transiently inhabited the cell cycle followed by partial synchronization while 40oC inhibited DNA replication and arrested cell cycle. Both high temperatures induced photoprotection, while 40oC decreased photosynthetic efficiencies, distorted thylakoid/pyrenoid ultrastructure, and affected carbon concentrating mechanism. We demonstrated increased transcript/protein correlation during heat, which decreased during recovery, suggesting reduced post-transcriptional regulation during heat may help coordinate heat tolerance activities efficiently. During recovery after both treatments, transcripts/proteins related to DNA synthesis increased while those involved in photosynthetic light reactions decreased. We propose down-regulating photosynthetic light reactions during DNA replication benefits cell cycle resumption by reducing ROS production. Furthermore, we identified transcripts/proteins with unique differential regulation at 35oC, uncovering previously overlooked novel elements in response to moderate high temperature. Our research improves understanding of heat responses in photosynthetic cells and provides potential targets to increase thermotolerance in algae and crops.

### Sample Protocol
Algal samples harvested (2 ml) from PBRs were centrifuged to remove supernatant, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80oC until use. Proteins were extracted using the IST sample preparation kit (PreOmics GmbH, Germany). Cell pellets (about 200 ug protein) were lysed in 50 µL lysis buffer, and 1/5th of the lysate was added into 40 µl lysis buffer and sheared in a sonicator (VWR Aquasonic 250D, 35Khz) for 3 min, then digested in a heating block at 37 oC (500 rpm, 3 h) followed by stopping the digestion with the stop buffer. Peptides were purified using the PreOmics cartridges according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Eluted peptides were transferred to 96 well plates, dried under vacuum for 2 h, and then dissolved in 30 µL of LC-loading buffer included in the kit. Finally, 5 µL of the suspension was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer coupled with a U3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptide separation was carried out on a C18 column (Fritted Glass Column, 25 cm × 75 μm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, made by ESI Source Solution, LLC., Woburn, MA) at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min and the following gradient: Time = 0–4 min, 2% B isocratic; 4–8 min, 2–10% B; 8–83 min, 10–25% B; 83–97 min, 25–50% B; 97–105 min, 50–98%. Mobile phase consisted of A, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode in which each MS1 scan was followed by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of as many precursor ions in 2 second cycle (Top Speed method). The mass range for the MS1 done using the FTMS was 365 to 1800 m/z with resolving power set to 60,000 @ 200 m/z and the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. The selected precursors were fragmented in the ion trap using an isolation window of 1.5 m/z, an AGC target value of 10,000 ions, a maximum fill time of 100 ms, a normalized collision energy of 35 and activation time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1, exclusion duration of 30 s, and a minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS set to 5000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. Quantitative analysis of MS measurements was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.12.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The library used to perform peptide spectrum matching was created based on version JGI5.5 of the C. reinhardtii genome. The search space was extended including methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set to 1%. Protein abundances were estimated using the Label free Quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). The mass spectrometric proteomic data is available via the ProteomeXchange Consortium partner repository, PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) with the dataset identifier XXX. Data Normalization and Protein-level missing value imputation. Normalization and missing value imputation were performed independently for 35oC and 40oC time courses. Proteins were excluded from the data set if there was no biological replicate group with more than one value among different time points, as these proteins were considered not suitable for quantitative downstream analysis. Following normalization using the median-of-ratios method (Anders and Huber, 2010), we used global variance estimates and local gene wise mean estimates to impute missing data points as independent draws from normal distributions. If a protein showed no quantification in a group of biological replicates at one time point, it was checked if the protein was present in the adjacent time points (the time point before and after the one in query). If this was the case, the protein mean was imputed using k-Nearest-Neighbour imputation, followed by sampling from a normal distribution. If adjacent time points had no values, no imputation was performed for the time point in query. All further protein analyses were based on imputed values.

### Publication Abstract
Different intensities of high temperatures affect the growth of photosynthetic cells in nature. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we cultivated the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii under highly controlled photobioreactor conditions and revealed systems-wide shared and unique responses to 24-hour moderate (35&#xb0;C) and acute (40&#xb0;C) high temperatures and subsequent recovery at 25&#xb0;C. We identified previously overlooked unique elements in response to moderate high temperature. Heat at 35&#xb0;C transiently arrested the cell cycle followed by partial synchronization, up-regulated transcripts/proteins involved in gluconeogenesis/glyoxylate-cycle for carbon uptake and promoted growth. But 40&#xb0;C disrupted cell division and growth. Both high temperatures induced photoprotection, while 40&#xb0;C distorted thylakoid/pyrenoid ultrastructure, affected the carbon concentrating mechanism, and decreased photosynthetic efficiency. We demonstrated increased transcript/protein correlation during both heat treatments and hypothesize reduced post-transcriptional regulation during heat may help efficiently coordinate thermotolerance mechanisms. During recovery after both heat treatments, especially 40&#xb0;C, transcripts/proteins related to DNA synthesis increased while those involved in photosynthetic light reactions decreased. We propose down-regulating photosynthetic light reactions during DNA replication benefits cell cycle resumption by reducing ROS production. Our results provide potential targets to increase thermotolerance in algae and crops.

### Keywords
High temperatures, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Proteomics, Label free

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63132
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Ru Zhang
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63132


