### Accession
PXD006809

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis identifies novel candidate substrates of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase, SRMS

### Description
SRMS (Src-related kinase lacking C-terminal regulatory tyrosine and N-terminal myristoylation sites) or PTK 70 (Protein tyrosine kinase 70) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that belongs to the BRK family kinases (BFKs). The gene encoding SRMS was first discovered in 1994. Yet to date less is known about the cellular role of SRMS primarily due to the unidentified substrates or signaling intermediates regulated by the kinase. In this study, we used phosphotyrosine antibody-based immunoaffinity purification in large-scale label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify novel candidate substrates of SRMS. Our analyses led to the identification of 1259 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides which mapped to 663 phosphoproteins, exclusively from SRMS-expressing cells. Dok1, a previously characterized SRMS substrate, was also identified in our analyses. Functional enrichment analyses revealed that the candidate SRMS substrates represented various biological processes typically linked to cell growth and RNA metabolism. Analyses of the sequence surrounding the phospho-sites in these proteins led us to identify novel candidate SRMS consensus substrate motifs. We utilized customized high-throughput peptide arrays to validate a subset of the candidate SRMS substrates and motifs identified in our MS-based analyses. Finally, we independently validated Vimentin and Sam68, as bonafide SRMS substrates through in vitro and in vivo assays. Overall, our study led to the identification of a significant number of novel and biologically relevant SRMS candidate substrates, which suggests the involvement of the kinase in a vast array of unexplored cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
24 hours-post transfection, the cells were lysed in lysis buffer comprising 9 M Urea and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The respective lysates were pooled in sterile 50 mL conical tubes and sonicated four times with 10-second bursts using the Virsonic 100 ultrasonic cell disruptor (Boston laboratory equipments). These were then centrifuged at 15,000 r.c.f and the supernatants transferred to sterile 50 mL conical tubes. Total protein concentration was determined via Bradford’s assay (#500-0006, Bio-Rad, USA). 12 mg total lysate protein, each from GFP and GFP-wild type SRMS-expressing cells, was taken for further processing. Proteins were reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT) (#D9779, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and alkylated with Iodoacetamide (#I6125, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The reduced and alkylated proteins diluted 4-fold with 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 and trypsinized with 0.01 mg/mL trypsin (#LS003740, Worthington, USA). Crude tryptic digests were purified via reverse-phase (hydrophobic) solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak cartridges (#WAT051910, Waters Corporation, USA). Briefly, the tryptic digests were loaded on the purification cartridges, washed with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (#28903, Thermo-Scientific, USA) and eluted with 0.1% TFA and 40% acetonitrile (#51101, Thermo-Scientific, USA). The purified tryptic peptides were then lyophilized and used towards enrichment of phosphotyrosine peptides. The enrichment of tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides was performed using the PTMScan p-Tyr 1000 phosphotyrosine enrichment kit (#8803, Cell Signaling Technologies, USA). Briefly, the lyophilized peptide samples were re-suspended in 1x Immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer provided in the kit. The diluted peptides were then centrifuged at 10,000 r.c.f for 5 minutes at 4 °C. The clear supernatant was retained. The pTyr-1000 antibody-bead conjugates were then washed with 1x PBS and incubated with the peptide mix overnight at 4 °C on a gyrorotator. The following day, the immunoprecipitates were serially washed with LC-MS-grade water (#51140, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) and 1x PBS. The immunoprecipitated peptides were then eluted with 0.1% TFA at room temperature. The eluted peptides were desalted using the Empore C18 solid phase extraction plate (#66875, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were analyzed by nano UPLC-MS/MS with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system interfaced to a Thermo-Fisher Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm x 25cm analytical column (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) at 300nL/min using a 2hr reverse phase gradient. Both columns were packed with PepMap C18, 3 µm resin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were eluted from the column at 300 nL/min using the following linear gradient: from 2 to 25% B in 100 min, from 25 to 50% B in 110 min, from 50 to 90% B in 112 min, from 90 to 2% B in 113 min and held at 2% B for an additional 7 min. The spray voltage was 2.2 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data Dependent mode with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 120 ms in the Orbitrap analyzer. The fifteen most abundant ions, with charge states ≥2, were selected for fragmentation by HCD (MS/MS) and analyzed at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human complete proteome FASTA database v.02/2013 (81,213 entries) using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.3.17) that integrates the Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were considered variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 6 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy. All modifications other than phosphotyrosine (pTyr) were discarded. Potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered. A threshold Andromeda score of 40 and a threshold Delta score of 8 was applied to the modified peptides (pTyr). The resulting list of modified peptides was further filtered at the level of phospho-site localization using a localization probability threshold of 0.75 to derive all class I phospho-sites. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Following the principle of parsimony, each protein group was considered a single identified protein for further data analyses since sufficient evidence was unavailable to distinguish between proteins from the same protein group. The replicates were grouped and statistical analyses of the quantified peptides were performed using the Perseus software (Version 1.5.0.15). The logarithmized intensities associated with each modified peptide from both biological replicates were used in a two-sample t-test (Student’s t-test). Modified peptides were filtered at a P-value threshold of 0.05 and categorized as either unique to control, test or both samples.

### Publication Abstract
SRMS (<i>S</i>rc-related kinase lacking C-terminal <i>r</i>egulatory tyrosine and N-terminal <i>m</i>yristoylation <i>s</i>ites), also known as PTK 70 (Protein tyrosine kinase 70), is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that belongs to the BRK family of kinases (BFKs). To date less is known about the cellular role of SRMS primarily because of the unidentified substrates or signaling intermediates regulated by the kinase. In this study, we used phosphotyrosine antibody-based immunoaffinity purification in large-scale label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify novel candidate substrates of SRMS. Our analyses led to the identification of 1258 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides which mapped to 663 phosphoproteins, exclusively from SRMS-expressing cells. DOK1, a previously characterized SRMS substrate, was also identified in our analyses. Functional enrichment analyses revealed that the candidate SRMS substrates were enriched in various biological processes including protein ubiquitination, mitotic cell cycle, energy metabolism and RNA processing, as well as Wnt and TNF signaling. Analyses of the sequence surrounding the phospho-sites in these proteins revealed novel candidate SRMS consensus substrate motifs. We utilized customized high-throughput peptide arrays to validate a subset of the candidate SRMS substrates identified in our MS-based analyses. Finally, we independently validated Vimentin and Sam68, as bona fide SRMS substrates through <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> assays. Overall, our study identified a number of novel and biologically relevant SRMS candidate substrates, which suggests the involvement of the kinase in a vast array of unexplored cellular functions.

### Keywords
Srms, Phosphoproteomics, Src, Ptk 70, Ptk6, Brk, Mass spectrometry, Frk, Substrates

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan
University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Raghuveera Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Kiven Erique Lukong
Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan


