### Accession
PXD042478

### Title
Pronounced metabolic alterations and susceptibility to inflammation, fibrosis, and cancer in livers from lysosomal acid lipase-deficient mice

### Description
Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is the sole lysosomal enzyme responsible for the degradation of cholesteryl esters and triacylglycerols at acidic pH. Impaired LAL activity leads to LAL deficiency (LAL-D), a severe and fatal disease characterized by ectopic lysosomal lipid accumulation. Reduced LAL activity also contributes to the development and progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). To advance our understanding of LAL-related liver pathologies, we performed comprehensive proteomic profiling of livers from mice with systemic genetic loss of LAL (Lal-/-) and from mice with hepatocyte-specific LAL-D (hepLal-/-). Lal-/- mice exhibited drastic proteome alterations, including dysregulation of multiple proteins related to metabolism, inflammation, liver fibrosis, and cancer. Global loss of LAL activity impaired both acidic and neutral lipase activities and resulted in hepatic lipid accumulation, indicating a complete metabolic shift in Lal-/- livers. Hepatic inflammation and immune cell infiltration were evident, with numerous upregulated inflammation-related gene ontology biological process terms. In contrast, both young and mature hepLal-/- mice displayed only minor changes in the liver proteome, suggesting that loss of LAL solely in hepatocytes does not phenocopy metabolic alterations observed in mice globally lacking LAL. These findings provide valuable insights into the mechanisms underlying liver dysfunction in LAL-D and may help in understanding why decreased LAL activity contributes to NAFLD. Our study highlights the importance of LAL in maintaining liver homeostasis and demonstrates the drastic consequences of its global deficiency on the liver proteome and liver function.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and processing for proteomics analysis Liver tissues were lysed in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing 1% SDS, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and 40 mM chloroacetamide using a Miccra homogenizer in combination with a Pico tool suitable for a volume range of 0.1 – 10 ml (Miccra, Heitersheim, Germany). Samples were then reduced and alkylated for 10 min at 95°C and centrifuged for 5 min at 7,000 x g and 4°C to remove cell debris, followed by protein estimation using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay. Fifty microgram of each sample was precipitated with acetone, dissolved in 25% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE)/50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to < 10% TFE, and digested by adding Promega Trypsin/LysC Mix in a 25:1 ratio and shaking overnight at 550 rpm and 37°C. Four microgram of the resulting peptide solution was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using in-house made stage tips with styrene divinylbenzene - reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) as material. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Peptides were separated on the Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano Dionex system equipped with an IonOpticks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (IonOpticks, Fitzroy, Australia); 0.1% formic acid in water was used as solvent A and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent B. The total LC-MS/MS run time per sample was 136.5 min with the following gradient: 0-5.5 min: 2% B; 5.5-65.5 min: 2-17% B; 65.5-95.5 min: 17-25% B, 95.5-105.5 min: 25-37% B, 105.5-115.5 min: 37-95% B, 115.5-125.5 min: 95% B; 125.5-126.5 min: 95-2% B; 126.5-136.5 min: 2% B at a flow rate of 400 nl/min at 40°C. The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) was operated in positive mode with enabled trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) at 100% duty cycle (100 ms ramp time, 100 – 1,700 m/z mass range, 0.6 – 1.6 V·s cm−2 ion mobility range). The source capillary voltage was set to 1,500 V and the dry gas flow to 3 l/min at 180°C. The scan mode was set to data-dependent acquisition parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation (DDA - PASEF) with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per acquisition cycle (overall DDA cycle time 1.1 s).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed by analyzing MS/MS data using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 against the UniProt public database with the taxonomy Mus musculus and common contaminants (downloaded 2021/08/17, 17219 sequences). Carbamidomethylation at Cys was used as a fixed modification, oxidation at Met was entered as a variable modification, and the following search criteria were used: trypsin, maximum number of missing cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 10 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1% PSM FDR and 1% protein FDR. Label-free quantitation (LFQ), including the "match between runs" feature of MaxQuant and requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor plus unique peptides, was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is the sole lysosomal enzyme responsible for the degradation of cholesteryl esters and triacylglycerols at acidic pH. Impaired LAL activity leads to LAL deficiency (LAL-D), a severe and fatal disease characterized by ectopic lysosomal lipid accumulation. Reduced LAL activity also contributes to the development and progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). To advance our understanding of LAL-related liver pathologies, we performed comprehensive proteomic profiling of livers from mice with systemic genetic loss of LAL (Lal-/-) and from mice with hepatocyte-specific LAL-D (hepLal-/-). Lal-/- mice exhibited drastic proteome alterations, including dysregulation of multiple proteins related to metabolism, inflammation, liver fibrosis, and cancer. Global loss of LAL activity impaired both acidic and neutral lipase activities and resulted in hepatic lipid accumulation, indicating a complete metabolic shift in Lal-/- livers. Hepatic inflammation and immune cell infiltration were evident, with numerous upregulated inflammation-related gene ontology biological process terms. In contrast, both young and mature hepLal-/- mice displayed only minor changes in the liver proteome, suggesting that loss of LAL solely in hepatocytes does not phenocopy metabolic alterations observed in mice globally lacking LAL. These findings provide valuable insights into the mechanisms underlying liver dysfunction in LAL-D and may help in understanding why decreased LAL activity contributes to NAFLD. Our study highlights the importance of LAL in maintaining liver homeostasis and demonstrates the drastic consequences of its global deficiency on the liver proteome and liver function.

### Keywords
Lal deficiency, Lysosomal acid lipase (lal), Mouse, Liver, Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (nafld)

### Affiliations
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, Omics Center Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria; 

### Submitter
Laura Liesinger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, Omics Center Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;


