### Accession
PXD041043

### Title
Stabilization of Pin1 by USP34 promotes Ubc9 isomerization and protein sumoylation in glioma stem cells to augment glioblastoma malignancy

### Description
he unique prolyl isomerase Pin1 that promotes protein conformational changes is a pivotal therapeutic target in many cancers, but little is known about the regulation of Pin1 protein stability. We previously found that Pin1 was highly expressed in glioma stem cells (GSCs) relative to non-stem tumor cells (NSTCs). Interestingly, treatment of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 markedly restored Pin1 protein expression in NSTCs to a level similar to GSCs. We therefore sought to identify the molecular regulators controlling the proteasomal degradation of Pin1 by mass spectrometry analysis of Pin1-interacting proteins in GSCs. The results showed that Pin1 interacts with a deubiquitinase USP34 in GSCs, suggesting that Pin1 may be stabilized by USP34.

### Sample Protocol
T4121 GSC lysate was subjected to immunoprecipitation with IgG or anti-Pin1 antibodies followed by gel electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining. The heavy chain, light chain, and the band of Pin1 bait were cut off the gel, and the rest proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Pin1-interacting protein complexes were digested with trypsin before analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e6, maximum inject time to 50 ms，and number of scan ranges to 1. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 100 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 100, Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e5,isolation width was 1.5 m/z, microscans to 1, and maximum inject time to 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) against a nonredundant International Protein Index arabidopsis sequence database v3.85 (released at September 2011; 39679 sequences) from the European Bioinformatics Institute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation (M)

### Publication Abstract
The peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase Pin1 is a pivotal therapeutic target in cancers, but the regulation of Pin1 protein stability is largely unknown. High Pin1 expression is associated with SUMO1-modified protein hypersumoylation in glioma stem cells (GSCs), but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that Pin1 is deubiquitinated and stabilized by USP34, which promotes isomerization of the sole SUMO E2 enzyme Ubc9, leading to SUMO1-modified hypersumoylation to support GSC maintenance. Pin1 interacts with USP34, a deubiquitinase with preferential expression and oncogenic function in GSCs. Such interaction is facilitated by Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of Pin1. Disruption of USP34 or inhibition of Plk1 promotes poly-ubiquitination and degradation of Pin1. Furthermore, Pin1 isomerizes Ubc9 to upregulate Ubc9 thioester formation with SUMO1, which requires CDK1-mediated phosphorylation of Ubc9. Combined inhibition of Pin1 and CDK1 with sulfopin and RO3306 most effectively suppresses orthotopic tumor growth. Our findings provide multiple molecular targets to induce Pin1 degradation and suppress hypersumoylation for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Deubiquitination, Pin1, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Wenchao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Wenchao Zhou
University of Science and Technology of China


