### Accession
PXD015134

### Title
Identification of SENP6 target proteins by endogenous SUMO2/3 IP-MS

### Description
Cellular signaling by the ubiquitin-related SUMO pathway relies on coordinated conjugation and deconjugation events. SUMO-specific deconjugating enzymes counterbalance SUMOylation, but comprehensive insight into their substrate specificity and regulation is missing. By characterizing SENP6 we define an N-terminal multi-SIM domain as critical determinant in targeting SENP6 activity to SUMO chains. Using an integrated proteomic profiling approach we reveal a network of SENP6 functions at the crossroad of chromatin organization and DNA damage response (DDR). SENP6 acts as SUMO eraser on key organizers of telomeric and centromeric chromatin domains and determines the SUMOylation status and chromatin association of the cohesin complex. Importantly, SENP6 is part of the hPSO4/PRP19 complex that drives ATR-Chk1 activation during DDR. Intriguingly, SENP6 deficiency impairs chromatin-association of the ATR cofactor ATRIP thereby compromising the activation of Chk1 signaling in response to replicative stress and sensitizing cells to replicative stress-induced DNA damage. Collectively, we propose a general role of SENP6 in orchestrating chromatin dynamics and genome stability networks by balancing chromatin-residency of protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of endogenous SUMO2/3 targets for mass spectrometry was done as previously described (Barysch et al., 2014). IP’s were performed in triplicates for anti-SUMO2/3 or anti-IgG control using 17 mg of protein from HeLa cell lysates prepared from cells transfected for 72 h with control siRNA or siRNA directed against SENP6. Immunoprecipitated material as well as input material (20µg of protein from HeLa lysates) were separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel-digestion with trypsin. Protein separation was done by SDS-PAGE using gradient gels (4-20%, BioRad), followed by protein staining (Instantblue, Expedeon). The individual gel lanes were cut into equal, small pieces and in-gel digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin was performed as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). In the end, extracted peptides were collected, concentrated and desalted using the STAGE technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Proteomic analyses were performed on an Easy nano-flow UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode (MS scans, 300-1750 m/z). Full-scan MS spectra of IPs/proteomic samples were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target with a resolution of 60.000/15.000 at 200 m/z with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The 15 most intense ions were fragmented by high collision induced dissociation (HCD). Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 30.000/15.000 at 200 m/z, AGC target to 1E5, maximal injection time to 64 ms/25 ms.

### Data Protocol
All aquired raw files of mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant Software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda database search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Fragmentation spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human database (version 2017). To perform searches, tryptic digestion and default settings for mass tolerances of MS and MS/MS spectra were applied. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, minimal LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and FastLFQ option was enabled for relative label-free quantification of proteins. The match between run feature was used and the minimal unique peptides for identification were set to 1 and only unique peptides were allowed for protein quantification.  Further data analysis and statistics were done with the Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5). First, contaminants and reverse entries, as well as proteins only identified by a modified peptide were removed. The log2 value of all LFQ intensities was calculated. Using the histogram analysis function of the software, normal distribution of the LFQ values was visually checked. Good correlation of the experimental replicates was assured by multiscatter plot analysis. Samples were then grouped into triplicates and a Student’s t-test was performed with a randomization of 500 and a s0 factor of 0.1. To overcome the missing value problem, imputation of the proteome and IP datasets under SENP6 knockdown was done in Perseus using default settings. Prior to any replacement of missing values by normal distribution, the matrix was filtered for at least three valid values in total and rows not matching these criteria were discarded. LFQ values and results of the t-test after imputation were combined with the matrix prior to imputation. Then the datasets were exported and used for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. Significant enrichment was defined in Excel based on the p-value and the Student’s t-test difference applying following criteria: for the IP dataset: -log 10 p-value > 1.3 and log2 ratio ≥ 1 and for the proteome -log 10 p-value > 1.3 and log2 ratio ≥ 1 or ≤ -1.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling by the ubiquitin-related SUMO pathway relies on coordinated conjugation and deconjugation events. SUMO-specific deconjugating enzymes counterbalance SUMOylation, but comprehensive insight into their substrate specificity and regulation is missing. By characterizing SENP6, we define an N-terminal multi-SIM domain as a critical determinant in targeting SENP6 to SUMO chains. Proteomic profiling reveals a network of SENP6 functions at the crossroads of chromatin organization and DNA damage response (DDR). SENP6 acts as a SUMO eraser at telomeric and centromeric chromatin domains and determines the SUMOylation status and chromatin association of the cohesin complex. Importantly, SENP6 is part of the hPSO4/PRP19 complex that drives ATR-Chk1 activation. SENP6 deficiency impairs chromatin association of the ATR cofactor ATRIP, thereby compromising the activation of Chk1 signaling in response to aphidicolin-induced replicative stress and sensitizing cells to DNA damage. We propose a general role of SENP6 in orchestrating chromatin dynamics and genome stability networks by balancing chromatin residency of protein complexes.

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Senp, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Goethe University, Medical School, Institute of Biochemistry II, Frankfurt am Main
Institute of Biochemistry II • Goethe University Medical School University Hospital Building 75 • Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 • 60590 Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Kathrin Schunck

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II • Goethe University Medical School University Hospital Building 75 • Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 • 60590 Frankfurt, Germany


