### Accession
PXD021530

### Title
A global map of protein–metabolite interactions in budding yeast reveals a novel role of a proteogenic dipeptide Ser-Leu in the regulation of a key glycolytic enzyme Pgk1.

### Description
Protein-metabolite interactions (PMIs) are of crucial importance for all cellular processes but remain understudied. Here, we applied a novel biochemical approach named PROMIS, to address the complexity of the protein-small molecule interactome in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. By doing so, we provide a unique dataset, which can be queried for novel PMIs between 74 small molecules and 3982 proteins using a user-friendly interface. By interpolating PROMIS with the list of predicted PMIs, we provided experimental validation for 225 binding events. Remarkably, of the 74 small molecules co-eluting with proteins, 36 were proteogenic dipeptides. Targeted analysis of a representative dipeptide, Ser-Leu, revealed numerous protein interactors comprising chaperones, proteasomal subunits, and metabolic enzymes. We could further demonstrate that Ser-Leu binding increases activity of a glycolytic enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase (Pgk1). Consistent with the binding analysis, Ser-Leu supplementation leads to the acute metabolic changes and delays timing of a diauxic shift. Supported by the dipeptide accumulation analysis our work attests to the role of Ser-Leu as a metabolic switch at the interface of protein degradation and central metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega). Digested proteins were desalted on self-made C18 Empore® extraction discs (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips. Peptides were loaded on the C18 reversed-phase column connected to ACQUITY UPLC M-Class. Mass spectra acquisition was performed using Thermo Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Obtained chromatograms were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16. Peptide identification was performed using its built-in search engine, Andromeda with S. cerevisiae proteome library, modified 19 February 2017 and downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dipeptide, Purine degradation, Yeast, Promis, Ligand, Central metabolism, Pgk1, Glycolysis, Small molecule, Complexes, Protein–metabolite interaction

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Germany


