### Accession
PXD018118

### Title
Proteome and Crotonylome of normal and leucine deprivation treated AML12 cells

### Description
Leucine, as a branched amino acid, is not only a substrate for protein synthesis, but also a signaling molecule that affects many biological processes. Lysine crotonylation is a novel post-translational modification in both histone and non-histone proteins. What effect amino acids have on crotonylation remains unclear. Here, we identified a large number of crotonylated proteins and sites affected by leucine deprivation for 2 hours in AML12 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate Preparation and Trypsin Digestion  Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM) The debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (P0012, Beyotime). For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT Labeling Peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Crotonyllysine Enrichment To enrich crotonylated peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM-503, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 10% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 22% to 35% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The scan range of one full scan is from 350-1550m/z. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resolution for MS is 60,000, MS/MS is 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamido-methylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and three other modifications (oxidation on Met, crotonylation on Lys, and acetylation on the peptide N-terminus) were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Amino acids play crucial roles in the MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase) complex 1 (MTORC1) pathway. However, the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we establish a cell-free system to mimic the activation of MTORC1, by which we identify CANX (calnexin) as an essential regulator for leucine-stimulated MTORC1 pathway. CANX translocates to lysosomes after leucine deprivation, and its loss of function renders either the MTORC1 activity or the lysosomal translocation of MTOR insensitive to leucine deprivation. We further find that CANX binds to LAMP2 (lysosomal associated membrane protein 2), and LAMP2 is required for leucine deprivation-induced CANX interaction with the Ragulator to inhibit Ragulator activity toward RRAG GTPases. Moreover, leucine deprivation promotes the lysine (K) 525 crotonylation of CANX, which is another essential condition for the lysosomal translocation of CANX. Finally, we find that KAT7 (lysine acetyltransferase 7) mediates the K525 crotonylation of CANX. Loss of KAT7 renders the MTORC1 insensitivity to leucine deprivation. Our findings provide new insights for the regulatory mechanism of the leucine-stimulated MTORC1 pathway.<b>Abbreviations:</b> CALR: calreticulin; CANX: calnexin; CLF: crude lysosome fraction; EIF4EBP1: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 1; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; GST: glutathione S-transferase; HA: hemagglutinin; HEK293T: human embryonic kidney-293T; KAT7: lysine acetyltransferase 7; Kcr; lysine crotonylation; KO: knockout; LAMP2: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2; LAMTOR/Ragulator: late endosomal/lysosomal adaptor: MAPK and MTOR activator; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; PDI: protein disulfide isomerase; PTM: post-translational modification; RPS6KB1/p70S6 kinase 1: ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1; RPTOR: regulatory associated protein of MTOR complex 1; SESN2: sestrin 2; TMEM192: transmembrane protein 192; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1.

### Keywords
Proteome; crotonylome; leucine deprivation

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Zheng Zilong

### Lab Head
Dr Zilong Zheng
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University


