### Accession
PXD035535

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of cardiac organoids derived from ALPK3 knockout hPSCs

### Description
Pathogenic mutations in alpha kinase 3 (ALPK3) cause cardiomyopathy and a range of musculoskeletal defects. How ALPK3 mutations result in disease remains unclear and little is known about this atypical kinase. Using a suite of engineered human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) we show that ALPK3 localizes to the sarcomere, specifically at the M-Band. Both sarcomeric organization and calcium kinetics were disrupted in ALPK3 deficient hPSC derived cardiomyocytes. Further, cardiac organoids derived from ALPK3 knockout hPSCs displayed reduced force generation. Phosphoproteomic profiling of wildtype and ALPK3 null hPSC derived cardiomyocytes revealed ALPK3-dependant phospho-peptides were enriched for proteins involved in sarcomere function and protein quality control. We demonstrate that ALPK3 binds to the selective autophagy receptor SQSTM1 (Sequestome 1) and is required for the sarcomeric localization of SQSTM1. We propose that ALPK3 is a myogenic kinase with an integral role in the intracellular signaling networks underlying sarcomere maintenance required for continued cardiac contractility.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were washed three times with ice cold PBS on ice. The cells were then scraped off the dish using 4% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate in 100mM tris-HCl, pH 8.5 before heating at 95C for 5 minutes. Cell lysates were allowed to cool on ice for 5 minutes prior to snap freezing on dry ice and stored at -80C. Samples were thawed on ice, quantified with BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized to 300 µg / 200 µl. Protein was reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (Sigma) and alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) (Sigma) for 5 min at 45C. Samples were cooled on ice and then digested with 3 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) and 3 µg of sequencing grade LysC (Wako) overnight at 37C. A five µg aliquot was removed for total proteomic analysis and the phosphopeptides enriched from the remaining digest using a the EasyPhos protocol as previously described [PMID: 30190555].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–950 m/z (60,000 resolution, 2.5 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with HCD of 37 x 16 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (28% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, automatic injection time). Data were searched against the UniProt human database (June 2021; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with Spectronaut 15.1.210713.50606using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Quantification was performed using MS2-based extracted ion chromatograms employing 3-6 fragment ions >450 m/z with automated fragment-ion interference removal as described previously [PMID: 25724911].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Alpk3, Cardiac organoids

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


