### Accession
PXD006349

### Title
Fast hyperbaric decompression after heliox saturation altered the brain proteome in rats

### Description
In order to better understand physiological mechanisms and neurological symptoms involved in the development of decompression sickness we determined effects in rats on the brain proteome of fast decompression (1 bar/20 s) compared to controls (1 bar/10 min) after heliox saturation diving. The orbitrap LC-MS/MS data files presented here resulted in 1062 proteins quantified using label-free proteomics. Based on the 128 significantly regulated proteins in the orbitrap dataset and 56 in an iontrap dataset (967 quantified proteins), the networks “synaptic vesicle fusion and recycling in nerve terminals” and “translation initiation” were significantly enriched in a system biological database analysis (Metacore). Ribosomal proteins (RLA2, RS10) and the proteins hippocalcin-like protein 4 and proteasome subunit beta type-7 were significantly upregulated in both datasets. The heat shock protein 105 kDa, Rho-associated protein kinase 2 and Dynamin-1 were significantly downregulated in both datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Two groups of female Wistar rats (Charles Rivers Laboratories, USA) weighing approximately 250 g were kept under 12:12-h light-dark cycles in cages with 4 animals together in a mobile cabinet with built-in ventilation and air filtration on the air inlet as well as on the exhaust. All animals had free access to drinking water and standard rat chow throughout the exposure period. All protocols were performed in accordance with the Norwegian Regulation on Animal Experimentation and approved by the Norwegian Animal Research Authority (S-2007/5669, id 195). All rats were trained to walk on a treadmill for later determination of signs and symptoms of decompression sickness (DCS). The animals were weighed every morning. On the day of the hyperbaric exposure, 2 or 3 rats were placed in the 130 L pressure chamber. The chamber was flushed with heliox for 20 minutes to remove nitrogen and pressurized with heliox (80:20) to 2.5 bar, giving a pO2 of approximately 50 kPa, followed by pure helium infusion to obtain the final pressure of 5 bars. The chamber temperature was kept at approximately 26oC during the 5 bar exposure. Three hours later the animals were decompressed at rates of 1 bar/20 s (FD, fast decompression, n=10) or 1 bar/10 min (SD, slow decompression, n=10). When pO2 reached 16 kPa during the linear decompression in group SD (control group), pure oxygen was injected to reach a pO2 of about 25 kPa before decompression was continued to surface pressure. In the FD group, where the total decompression time was less than two minutes, the pO2 was not adjusted for. Immediately after surfacing, the rats were investigated for DCS symptoms, initially in the cage, and approximately 5-10 min afterwards while walking on the treadmill. Observation on and recordings of pulmonary and neurological symptoms, such as heavy and fast breathing, chokes, unconsciousness, and complete or partial paralysis in one or more legs, were performed. All animals survived and none was treated for DCS symptoms by recompression. One week after the dive the animals were euthanized with CO2, the brains were intracardially perfused with sterile saline (remove traces of blood) and dissected out whole before snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80oC until further protein analysis.  From each animal one of the cerebral hemispheres (approximately 0.7 g), excluding both the frontal lobes and the cerebellum, was cut in small pieces with scalpel. The pieces were mixed with fresh ice-cold homogenisation buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, containing 100 mM KCl and proteases inhibitors cocktail from Roche Diagnostics Gmbh) at the ratio ¼ (w/v)- add 4 ml to 1 gr- and homogenised in Potter-Elvehjem. The homogenate was centrifuged for 15 min at 20 000 g at 4°C and the supernatant was collected, aliquoted and immediately frozen at -80°C. Protein samples were trypsinized in solution and approximately 1μg of peptides were subjected to LC-MS analysis using 88 min runs with a biphasic acetonitrile gradient on an Ultimate NCS-3500RS HPLC and a nanoViper column coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro as previously described (Berle M. et al. Fluids and barriers of the CNS. 2011;8: 19). The top 7 peaks from the MS scan were fragmented in the MSMS analysis; minimum signal required was 1000.

### Data Protocol
The orbitrap raw files were analyzed in Progenesis LC-MS® v2.6 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd). The chromatographic features were automatically aligned (>96.8% alignment score), and only features with charges between +2 to +6 with associated MS/MS spectra were accepted for export (mgf file) for identification using X!Tandem and OMSSA in SerachGUI with the SwissProt Rat canonical database. The search criteria were: trypsin with one miss-cleavages accepted, fixed carbamidomethylation on cystein, variable oxidation on methionine, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.7.The search result and associated spectra were combined and assigned to proteins in PeptideShaker at 1% FDR and exported to Progenesis (all validated PSMs) and assigned to the features. The protein abundances reported were based on the sum of the normalized abundance of the quantified unique peptides. Metacore v6.26 (Thomson Reuters) was used to analyse the significantly regulated proteins in the FD group compared to the SD group resulting from the orbitrap and an iontrap LC-MS/MS. String v10.0 was used to analyze the significantly regulated proteins with more than >20% regulation for potential protein-protein interactions and GO enrichments. Venny 2.1.0 was used to compare data sets Perseus v1.5.3.2 was used to generate unsupervised clustering heatmaps with dendrograms and PCA plots.

### Publication Abstract
Better understanding of the physiological mechanisms and neurological symptoms involved in the development of decompression sickness could contribute to improvements of diving procedures. The main objective of the present study was to determine effects on the brain proteome of fast decompression (1 bar/20 s) compared to controls (1 bar/10 min) after heliox saturation diving, using rats in a model system. The protein S100B, considered a biomarker for brain injury, was not significantly different in serum samples from one week before, immediately after, and one week after the dive. Alterations in the rat brain proteome due to fast decompression were investigated using both iontrap and orbitrap LC-MS, and 967 and 1062 proteins were quantified, respectively. Based on the significantly regulated proteins in the iontrap (56) and orbitrap (128) datasets, the networks "synaptic vesicle fusion and recycling in nerve terminals" and "translation initiation" were significantly enriched in a system biological database analysis (Metacore). Ribosomal proteins (RLA2, RS10) and the proteins hippocalcin-like protein 4 and proteasome subunit beta type-7 were significantly upregulated in both datasets. The heat shock protein 105 kDa, Rho-associated protein kinase 2 and Dynamin-1 were significantly downregulated in both datasets. Another main effect of hyperbaric fast decompression in our experiment is inhibition of endocytosis and stimulation of exocytosis of vesicles in the presynaptic nerve terminal. In addition, fast decompression affected several proteins taking parts in these two main mechanisms of synaptic strength, especially alteration in CDK5/calcineurin are associated with a broad range of neurological disorders. In summary, fast decompression after heliox saturation affected the brain proteome in a rat model for diving, potentially disturbing protein homeostasis, e.g. in synaptic vesicles, and destabilizing cytoskeletal components. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006349.

### Keywords
Ribosomal proteins, Heliox saturation, Translation initiation, Synaptic vesicle, Cytoskeleton, Diving, S100b, Fast decompression, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Bergen University College
Associate professor, Department of Biomedical laboratory sciences and chemical engineering, Bergen University College, Bergen, Norway.

### Submitter
Alvhild Alette Bjoerkum

### Lab Head
Dr Alvhild Alette Bjørkum
Associate professor, Department of Biomedical laboratory sciences and chemical engineering, Bergen University College, Bergen, Norway.


