### Accession
PXD008274

### Title
Label free phosphoproteomic analysis of early phosphorylation events during deetiolation in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Light environment provides signals for plants to develop and accomplish their life cycle successfully. Those signals are perceived and transduced by photoreceptors. Phosphorylation is one of the biochemical mechanisms initiating light signalling cascade and is a challenging question in the photobiology field today. Here, we study early light-induced phosphoproteome in Arabidopsis thaliana through a Label free LC-MS/MS proteomic approach to identify proteins which significantly change their phosphorylation status in a light-responsive way. And investigate the participation of the photoreceptors during light-dependent phosphoroylation changes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 5 day-old dark grown WT seedlings (WT D) and 5 day-old dark grown WT and phyA phyB cry1 cry2 double mutant seedlings that received a 20 min white light pulse (WTL and TETL) before harvested. Proteins were extracted in cold extraction buffer (0.7 M sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 0.5 M Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 50 mM EDTA and 2% v/v β-Merchaptoethanol) and lyophilized. For each sample, 450ug of protein extracts were resuspended and washed on Amicon 3kDa with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and vaccum dried. Prior to tryptic digestion, a reduction (with 0.2mM DTT) and alkylation (with0.8mM of Iodoacetamide) of cysteine S-S bridges were performed on the protein extract. 1:50 w/w of trypsin was then added (diluted in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 1% deoxycholate) and samples were incubated at 37⁰C overnight. A phosphopeptide enrichment of the resulting protein digests was then performed using the Pierce TiO2 Phosphopeptide enrichment and Clean up kit prior to analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatographic system. One fifth of the peptides resulting from the phosphopeptide enrichment were separated at 300nL/min on a ReproSil-Pur C18 50cm length column with an acetonitrile gradient of 90 minutes and analyzed in Data Dependent Acquisition mode with MS1 spectra acquisition in the Orbitrap at resolution 120K, HCD fragmentation of the most intense peptides and acquisition of the resulting fragments (MS2 spectra) in the Ion Trap for a total cycle time of 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Arabidopsis Thaliana complete proteome database using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software v 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, Nature Biotech., 2008). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. For validation of identifications, the False Discovery Rate was set at 1% at peptide and protein levels based on a target/decoy search. MaxQuant was also used for 'Label Free' peptide quantification with the 'match between runs' option activated. Intensity values in the Peptides.txt output file of MaxQuant were used for peptide quantification. Normalization across the samples was applied using the median intensity value of each sample column. Missing values were imputated with a noise value corresponding to the 1-percentile of all intensity values of each sample column. Peptides were considered as quantifiable if they have at least 2 real values (before missing values imputation) in one of the two conditions to compare, the other peptide were considered as Not Quantifiable (NQ). Peptide ratios were calculated for each two conditions to compare and centered by calculation of a Z-score value. Peptides were considered as variants if they fulfilled these two conditions : Welch’s test p-value over the 3 replicates <0.05 and absolute value of Z-score>1.96.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Light, Photoreceptors

### Affiliations
INGEBI
INGEBI-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina

### Submitter
María Agustina Mazzella

### Lab Head
Dr María Agustina Mazzella
INGEBI-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina


