### Accession
PXD004870

### Title
Oryza sativa,Global proteome,LC-MSMS

### Description
Rice is one of the most important global food crops, and is also a model organism for cereal research 31 . Complete genome sequencing of rice, together with advances in transcriptomics and proteomics, has had a dramatic impact on plant growth and 5 breeding programs 32 . Genomic analysis of DNA methylation in rice has revealed methylation patterns associated with gene bodies and promoters, and the occurrence of high levels of DNA methylation in the centromeric domain 33 . A genome-wide investigation of acetylation in rice revealed that H3K9ac and H3K27ac are mainly enriched at transcription start sites associated with active transcription 34 . Furthermore, global proteome analysis has shown that phosphorylation and succinylation are involved in diverse cellular and metabolic processes 35, 36 . However, despite these considerable advances in our knowledge, additional large-scale analysis of the lysine acetylome in rice is expected to identify many more Kac sites and acetylated proteins in this improtant crop plant. In this study, affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS were used for large-scale analysis of the lysine acetylome in rice variety Nipponbare. In total, 1353 lysine acetylation sites were detected in 866 protein groups in rice seedlings. Proteomic analysis showed that Kac occurs in proteins involved in diverse biological processes with varied cellular functions and subcellular localization.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Leaf material was ground with liquid nitrogen and the resulting powder was transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% 14 Triton-100, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, and protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded and the remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The sample was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH 4 CO 3 , pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH 4 CO 3 until the urea concentration was less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin:protein mass ratio and digestion was performed overnight, followed by a second 4 h digestion with a 1:100 trypsin:protein mass ratio. HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment Samples were next fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated into 80 fractions with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile (ACN) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 10) over 80 min, and peptides were combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 15 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Beads were then washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH 2 O, and bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Eluted fractions were combined, vacuum-dried, cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific), and separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 20 min, 20% to 35% over 8 min, an increase to 80% over 2 min, and a further 5 min at 80%, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analysed by Q Exactive plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were subjected to nano spray ionization (NSI) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 33, and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 16 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 16 16 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5x10 4  n the MS survey scan with 10.0 s dynamic exclusion. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied, an automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, and 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
Database searching The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot_Oryza sativa database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges were allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamido methylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation on Met, succinylation on lysine and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other MaxQuant parameters were set to default values, and the site localization probability was set as >0.75. Motif analysis Motif-x software was used for analysis of model sequences constituted with amino 17 acids in specific positions of modifier-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of acetylation sites) in all protein sequences. Database protein sequences were used as background database parameters, and default settings were used for all other parameters. Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, we used the Functional Annotation tool in DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7 to identify enriched GO terms against the Homo sapiens background. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of protein-containing IPI entries against all IPI proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. A GO with a corrected p-value <0.05 was considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis The Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways via the Functional Annotation tool in DAVID against the Homo sapiens background. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of protein-containing IPI entries against all IPI proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control 18 methods. Pathways with a corrected p-value <0.05 were considered significant, and were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac) is an important protein post-translational modification in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Herein, we report the results of a global proteome analysis of Kac and its diverse functions in rice (Oryza sativa). We identified 1353 Kac sites in 866 proteins in rice seedlings. A total of 11 Kac motifs are conserved, and 45% of the identified proteins are localized to the chloroplast. Among all acetylated proteins, 38 Kac sites are combined in core histones. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that Kac occurs on a diverse range of proteins involved in a wide variety of biological processes, especially photosynthesis. Protein-protein interaction networks of the identified proteins provided further evidence that Kac contributes to a wide range of regulatory functions. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the acetylation level of histone H3 (lysine 27 and 36) is increased in response to cold stress. In summary, our approach comprehensively profiles the regulatory roles of Kac in the growth and development of rice.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Acetylome, Lysine acetylation, Calvin cycle., Photosynthesis, Global proteomics

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,China
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology / Co-Innovation Center for
Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional
Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,
China

### Submitter
Gong zhi yun

### Lab Head
Dr Gong zhi yun
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,China


