### Accession
PXD039633

### Title
USP7 represses lineage differentiation genes in mouse embryonic stem cells by both catalytic and non-catalytic activity

### Description
USP7, a ubiquitin-specific peptidase (USP), plays an important role in many cellular processes through its catalytic deubiquitination of various substrates. However, its nuclear function to shape the transcriptional network in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) remains poorly understood. Here, we report that USP7 maintains mESCs identity through both catalytic activity-dependent and -independent repression of lineage differentiation genes. Usp7 depletion attenuates SOX2 level and derepresses lineage differentiation genes thereby compromising mESCs pluripotency. Mechanistically, USP7 deubiquitinates and stabilizes SOX2 to repress mesoendodermal (ME) lineage genes. Moreover, USP7 assembles into RYBP-variant Polycomb repressive complex 1 and contributes to Polycomb chromatin-mediated repression of ME lineage genes in a catalytic activity-dependent manner. Importantly, USP7 deficient in its deubiquitination function is able to maintain RYBP binding to chromatin for repressing primitive endoderm-associated genes. Overall, our study demonstrates that USP7 harbors both catalytic and non-catalytic activity to repress different lineage differentiation genes thereby revealing a previously unrecognized role in controlling gene expression for maintaining mESCs identity.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Proteins were separated by 1D gel electrophoresis and peptides were prepared as previously described (Zhu et al., 2020). Briefly, for DDA identification, each lane was cut into five parts; while for DIA quantification, the five parts were further combined into two parts, with one part containing the target proteins and the other with IgG heavy/light chains. Each gel band was cut into 2 mm3 pieces, followed by reduction with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 25 ℃ for 1h, alkylation with 55 mM IAA in in 25 mM NH4HCO3 solution at 25 ℃ in the dark for 30 min, and sequential tryptic digestion at an enzyme concentration of 10ng/ul at 37℃ for overnight. Tryptic-digested peptides were extracted using 50% ACN/5% FA for the first time and 75% ACN/0.1% FA for the second time. After that, peptide solutions were dried under vacuum, and further purified by Pierce C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data from the DIANN result (“pg_matrix”) was used for analysis. The coefficient of Pearson correlation between 5 IgG group replicates or 5 Usp7 CO-IP group replicates was all over 0.88. The Student’s T-Test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction and fold change were used to analyze the difference between the IgG group and the Usp7 CO-IP group. When | fold change| > 4 and Student’s T-Test adjusted p-value < 0.01, we got 2841 up-regulated, 165 down-regulated, and 1916 no-significant proteins. All 4922 proteins were used to get a volcano plot with R. All 3006 regulated proteins were used to do pathway enrichment and network analysis with IPA software. Q6A4J8 (UBP7_MOUSE), P20263 (PO5F1_MOUSE), and P48432 (SOX2_MOUSE) were selected from the data. The mean and the standard deviation of biological replicates in each protein were calculated to draw the bar chart and error bar. The Student’s T-Test was used to analyze the difference between IgG and Usp7 CO-IP in each protein.

### Publication Abstract
USP7, a ubiquitin-specific peptidase (USP), plays an important role in many cellular processes through its catalytic deubiquitination of various substrates. However, its nuclear function that shapes the transcriptional network in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) remains poorly understood. We report that USP7 maintains mESC identity through both catalytic activity-dependent and -independent repression of lineage differentiation genes. <i>Usp7</i> depletion attenuates SOX2 levels and derepresses lineage differentiation genes thereby compromising mESC pluripotency. Mechanistically, USP7 deubiquitinates and stabilizes SOX2 to repress mesoendodermal (ME) lineage genes. Moreover, USP7 assembles into RYBP-variant Polycomb repressive complex 1 and contributes to Polycomb chromatin-mediated repression of ME lineage genes in a catalytic activity-dependent manner. USP7 deficiency in its deubiquitination function is able to maintain RYBP binding to chromatin for repressing primitive endoderm-associated genes. Our study demonstrates that USP7 harbors both catalytic and noncatalytic activities to repress different lineage differentiation genes, thereby revealing a previously unrecognized role in controlling gene expression for maintaining mESC identity.

### Keywords
Pluripotent stem cells; usp7; polycomb; epigenetic regulation

### Affiliations
Westlake University
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Tiannan Guo
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China


