### Accession
PXD018857

### Title
Ubiquitin-mediated modulation of necroptotic effector MLKL

### Description
We aimed to identify lysine (K) residues that are endogenously ubiquitylated upon TNF-induced necroptosis. To this end, we used a quantitative mass spectrometry-based approach. Briefly, MDFs were treated with TSZ or left untreated and protein lysates were digested with trypsin into peptides. Ubiquitylated peptides bearing the di-glycine (K-GG) remnant were enriched by immunoprecipitation with anti-K-ε-GG antibody. A total of three biological replicates were prepared and the 6 samples were labelled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT). Samples were mixed and analysing by Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectroscopy (LC-MS). Quantification was performed to determine the relative abundance of site-specific ubiquitylation events in each condition.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse Dermal Fibroblast (MDFs) were treated with TNF (10 ng/ml), SM-164 (100 nM) and z-VAD-FMK (20 μM) (TSZ) for 2 h or left untreated. Cells were lysed in 5 ml of total cell lysis buffer (8M ure a, 50mM Tris pH 8, 50 mM NaCl, supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail and 5.5 mM Chloroacetamide (ChlAA). Lysates were sonicated and clarified by centrifugation at 4C and 14,000 rpm for 15 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. For each condition, 20 mg of protein was used as total starting material. Protein was precipitated by chloroform/methanol precipitation method. For alkylation, ChlAA was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated 1 h at RT in the dark on rotator. Proteins were then digested with 40 μg/sample of LysC for 4 h at RT on rotator. Then, 4 volumes of 25 mM Tris pH 8 was added and digestion with 100 μg of trypsin (Roche, 11418475001) was conducted at RT on rotator o/n. Digestion was stopped by addition of 10% TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and samples were incubated for 10 minutes at RT. The forming precipitate was removed by centrifugation (10 minutes, 4000 rpm, RT). Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Walters, WAT036790). To perform the K-GG immunoprecipitation, the dried peptides were resuspended in 1.3 ml of 1xIAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.4, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) and the pH was adjusted to 7. To remove insoluble material, the solution was cleared by centrifugation (8 min, 13.200 rpm, 4°C). Prior to the immunoprecipitation, the K-GG antibody beads (Cell Signaling, 5562) were washed 3X each with cold 1X IAP buffer. The K-GG antibody beads were adjusted to 50% slurry and 40 l 50% slurry K-GG antibody beads per sample was used. The immunoprecipitation was carried out for 2.5 h at 4°C. Next, the samples were centrifuged (2700 g, 1.5 min, 4°C), the supernatant was removed and beads were washed 3X with 750 l cold 1X IAP buffer. Beads were further washed 2X with Milli-Q H2O. After the last washing, water was removed and beads were resuspended in the remaining 100 l Milli-Q H2O. Next, beads were transferred into Pierce™ Micro-Spin Column (ThermoFisher, 89879) and H2O was removed by centrifuge (2700 g, 1.5 min, 4°C). The K-GG peptides were eluted in a final volume of 160 μl 0.15% TFA.  The peptides were labelled by TMT10plex (Thermo), then pooled and dried in SpeedVac (Thermo).  The dried peptide mixture was resuspened in 0.1% NH4OH/100% H2O, and fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with an initial 5 min loading then linear gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) – 35% CH3CN /0.1%NH4OH in 30min, then to 80% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 5 min and stayed for another 5 min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min.  Fractions were collected ay every 30sec to a 96 wellplate by column from retention time at 3 min to 45 min, and then pooled by rows to 8 concatenated fractions and dried in SpeedVac.  The peptides were reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% FA/H2O and then injected for on-line LC-MS/MS analysis on the Orbitraip Fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system (both from Thermo Fisher). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 nano trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5µ) then peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm) over a linear gradient of 8–32% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 90 min, cycle time at 120 min at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) with the Top Speed 3s cycle time.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 375 – 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC set at 4e5 and  maximum injection time at 50 ms.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 5) with intensity threshold at 1e4 were fragmented in ion trap at 35% collision energy, with AGC at 1e4 and 50 ms maximum injection time, and isolation width at 0.7 Da in quadrupole.  The top 5 MS2 fragment ions were SPS selected with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented in HCD at 65% NCE, and detected in the Orbitrap to get the report ions intensities at a better accuracy.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) using both Sequest HT and Mascot (V2.3) search engines to search against the reviewed Uniprot protein database of Mus  Musculus (Version January 2018) or SwissProt (April 2011) plus the in-house contaminate database.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 25 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and the dynamic modifications included Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), TMT6plex (K, K-GG). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search.  The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for quantification. Only master proteins were reported.  # Name Description "TMT10plex SJ256496" 1 LRG02_R1U MDFs> Untreated (Replica 1)  127N 2 LRG02_R1T MDFs> Treated (Replica 1)  126 3 LRG02_R2U MDFs> Untreated (Replica 2)  129N 4 LRG02_R2T MDFs> Treated (Replica 2)  128N 5 LRG02_R3U MDFs> Untreated (Replica 3)  131 6 LRG02_R3T MDFs> Treated (Replica 3)  130N

### Publication Abstract
Necroptosis is a lytic, inflammatory form of cell death that not only contributes to pathogen clearance but can also lead to disease pathogenesis. Necroptosis is triggered by RIPK3-mediated phosphorylation of MLKL, which is thought to initiate MLKL oligomerisation, membrane translocation and membrane rupture, although the precise mechanism is incompletely understood. Here, we show that K63-linked ubiquitin chains are attached to MLKL during necroptosis and that ubiquitylation of MLKL at K219 significantly contributes to the cytotoxic potential of phosphorylated MLKL. The K219R MLKL mutation protects animals from necroptosis-induced skin damage and renders cells resistant to pathogen-induced necroptosis. Mechanistically, we show that ubiquitylation of MLKL at K219 is required for higher-order assembly of MLKL at membranes, facilitating its rupture and necroptosis. We demonstrate that K219 ubiquitylation licenses MLKL activity to induce lytic cell death, suggesting that necroptotic clearance of pathogens as well as MLKL-dependent pathologies are influenced by the ubiquitin-signalling system.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Mlkl, Mouse, Msms, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


