### Accession
PXD006159

### Title
Phosphorylation coexists with O-GlcNAcylation in a plant virus protein and shapes viral infection

### Description
Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are two widespread post-translational modifications (PTM) often affecting the same eukaryotic target protein. Plum pox virus (PPV) is a member of the genus Potyvirus that infects a wide range of plant species. O-GlcNAcylation of the capsid protein (CP) of PPV has been extensively studied, and some evidence about CP phosphorylation has been additionally reported. Here, we made use of proteomics analyses to demonstrate that PPV CP is phosphorylated in vivo at its N-terminal region. In contrast with the classical “Yin-Yang” mechanism that applies to some mammalian proteins, PPV CP phosphorylation affects residues different from the O-GlcNAcylated ones (serines Ser-25, Ser-81, Ser-101 and Ser-118). Our findings show that PPV CP can be concurrently phosphorylated and O-GlcNAcylated at nearby residues. However, an analysis using a differential proteomics strategy based on iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation) showed a significant enhancement of phosphorylation at Ser-25 in virions recovered from O-GlcNAcylation-deficient plants, which uncovers the existence of some cross-talk between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation in PPV-CP. Whereas precluding phosphorylation at the four identified phosphotarget sites only had a limited impact in viral infection, mimicking phosphorylation prevents PPV infection in Prunus persica and weakens infection in Nicotiana benthamiana and other herbaceous hosts, favouring the emergence of potentially compensatory second mutations. We postulate that the joint action of phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation in the N-terminal region of CP allows a fine-tuning of the protein stability, providing the fair amount of CP required in each step of viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion of protein extracts, peptide labelling with iTRAQ reagent and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data from both mass spectrometer systems were converted to mgf files which were also searched against a Plum pox virus protein database, containing 13 protein-coding genes and using the Mascot Server v.2.3.2 (Matrix Science).  Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 3; fixed modifications, beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation and glycosylation (HexNAc) of serine and threonine.  For the iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) data analysis, in addition to the search parameters indicated, we also included iTRAQ-4plex (N-term and K) as fixed modification.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm and 0.5 Da for precursors, and 0.05 and 0.5 Da for fragment masses, for TripleTOF and ion trap, respectively.  The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (P < 0.05) and only peptides with a significant individual ion score of at least 30 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are two widespread post-translational modifications (PTMs), often affecting the same eukaryotic target protein. Plum pox virus (PPV) is a member of the genus Potyvirus which infects a wide range of plant species. O-GlcNAcylation of the capsid protein (CP) of PPV has been studied extensively, and some evidence of CP phosphorylation has also been reported. Here, we use proteomics analyses to demonstrate that PPV CP is phosphorylated in&#xa0;vivo at the N-terminus and the beginning of the core region. In contrast with the 'yin-yang' mechanism that applies to some mammalian proteins, PPV CP phosphorylation affects residues different from those that are O-GlcNAcylated (serines Ser-25, Ser-81, Ser-101 and Ser-118). Our findings show that PPV CP can be concurrently phosphorylated and O-GlcNAcylated at nearby residues. However, an analysis using a differential proteomics strategy based on iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) showed a significant enhancement of phosphorylation at Ser-25 in virions recovered from O-GlcNAcylation-deficient plants, suggesting that crosstalk between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation in PPV CP takes place. Although the preclusion of phosphorylation at the four identified phosphotarget sites only had a limited impact on viral infection, the mimicking of phosphorylation prevents PPV infection in Prunus persica and weakens infection in Nicotiana benthamiana and other herbaceous hosts, prompting the emergence of potentially compensatory second mutations. We postulate that the joint action of phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation in the N-proximal segment of CP allows a fine-tuning of protein stability, providing the amount of CP required in each step of viral infection.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Plum pox virus, Crosstalk, Plant virus, O-glcnacylation, Coat protein, Potyvirus, Yin-yang

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC)
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Antonio García
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC)


