### Accession
PXD006190

### Title
Comparison of fractionation proteomics for local SWATH library building

### Description
For data-independent acquisition by means of sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH), a reference library of data-dependent acquisition (DDA) runs is typically used to correlate the quantitative data from the fragment ion spectra with peptide identifications. The quality and coverage of such a reference library is therefore essential when processing SWATH data. In general, library sizes can be increased by reducing the impact of DDA precursor selection with replicate runs or fractionation. However, these strategies can affect the match between the library and SWATH measurement, and thus larger library sizes do not necessarily correspond to improved SWATH quantification. Here, three fractionation strategies to increase local library size were compared to standard library building using replicate DDA injection: protein SDS-PAGE fractionation, peptide high-pH RP-HPLC fractionation and MS-acquisition gas phase fractionation. The impact of these libraries on SWATH performance was evaluated in terms of the number of extracted peptides and proteins, the match quality of the peptides and the extraction reproducibility of the transitions. These analyses were conducted using the hydrophilic proteome of differentiating human embryonic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Biological sample: hESC differentiated in adherent manner using 2 µM retinoic acid without b-FGF. Extraction of the hydrophilic proteome using R1-buffer: 40 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1/100 Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fischer, cat. number 78441) and 1/1000 Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. number E1014-25KU) at 1-10 x 106 cells/mL. SDS-PAGE fractionation of undiff and diff pool + in-gel digestion. GP fractionation of undiff and diff pool: m/z 300-410, 410-490, 490-580, 580-700, 700-1250. RPRP fractionation of undiff and diff pool: 15-25-30-40-80% B (buffer A: ammonium formate pH 10, buffer B: 100% ACN). Samples dissolved in 0.1% F.A. + internal standards and iRT peptides. MS analyses (DDA and SWATH) were performed on a TripleTOF 5600 MS (Sciex) fitted with a DuoSpray ion source in positive ion mode, coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC 400 HPLC system (Sciex). Peptides were separated on a microLC YMC Triart C18 column (I.D. 300 µm, length 15 cm, particle size 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min by means of trap-elute injection (YMC Triart C18 guard column, I.D. 500 µm, length 5 mm, particle size 3 µm). Elution was performed using a gradient of 4% to 45% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in 80% ACN) over 120 min. For DDA, a 4.30 s instrument cycle was repeated in high sensitivity mode throughout the whole gradient, consisting of a full scan MS spectrum (300-1250 m/z) with accumulation time of 0.25 s, followed by 20 MS/MS experiments (65-1600 m/z) with 0.20 s accumulation time each, on MS precursors with charge state 2 to 5+ exceeding a 250 cps threshold. Rolling collision energy was used as suggested by the manufacturer and former target ions were excluded for 15 s. For SWATH, the TripleTOF 5600 system was set up in the same manner as described above with identical chromatographic conditions. Ninety six precursor isolation windows were defined using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator (Sciex) based on precursor m/z frequencies in the DDA samples, with a minimum window width of 3 m/z. The accumulation time was set to 0.25 s for the MS scan (300-1250 m/z) and 0.025 s for the MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z). Collision energies applied for each window were calculated using rolling collision energy based on the m/z range of each SWATH and a charge 2+ ion, with a collision energy spread of five. The total cycle time was 2.70 s.

### Data Protocol
PeakView software (Sciex) was used to create *.mgf files from the DDA data. For each library, a merge search of the ten DDA files was performed by Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) against a human database (reviewed protein database downloaded from Swissprot, November 2015) supplemented with the cRAP database (laboratory proteins and dust/contact proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), and the internal standards defined above (20,230 entries). Peptide mass tolerance was maximum 15 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.2 Da. Methylthio (on cysteine) was set as fixed modification, and deamidation (on asparagine and/or glutamine) and oxidation (on methionine) as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Decoy and percolator were enabled. SWATH data was processed using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0.1 in PeakView 2.2 Software. For each fractionation method, a separate SWATH project was created in which the search results of the respective fractionation library were matched with the same (unfractionated) SWATH data set for each library. At the import stage, no maximum number of proteins was specified, and shared peptides were excluded. The SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0.1 uses the spectrum that best represents the peptide when peptides are identified multiple times. Retention time alignment was performed with the spiked standard iRT peptides. Following processing parameters were used: (1) ten Peptides per Protein, (2) six Transitions per Peptide, (3) Mascot score instead of Peptide Confidence Threshold, (4) FDR 1%, (5) do not exclude Modified Peptides, (6) Fix Rank not selected, (7) five min XIC Extraction Window and (8) 50 ppm XIC Width. Only unique peptides were used for quantification as shared peptides were not imported. All information (including areas, score, FDR, observed retention time) was exported in .xlsx format for results analysis. The SWATH Acquisition Replicates Template was used to evaluate the reproducibility of the transitions based on the biological replicates one to five of diff hESC. Differential protein expression analysis between undiff and diff hESC was performed in MarkerView (Sciex) using a two-sample t-test of the normalized protein peak areas based on total area sums. Missing values were treated as 0.0. For peptide measurements, the arithmetic sum of the transitions is made and for proteins measurements, the arithmetic sum of the peptides. 

### Publication Abstract
For data-independent acquisition by means of sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH), a reference library of data-dependent acquisition (DDA) runs is typically used to correlate the quantitative data from the fragment ion spectra with peptide identifications. The quality and coverage of such a reference library is therefore essential when processing SWATH data. In general, library sizes can be increased by reducing the impact of DDA precursor selection with replicate runs or fractionation. However, these strategies can affect the match between the library and SWATH measurement, and thus larger library sizes do not necessarily correspond to improved SWATH quantification. Here, three fractionation strategies to increase local library size were compared to standard library building using replicate DDA injection: protein SDS-PAGE fractionation, peptide high-pH RP-HPLC fractionation and MS-acquisition gas phase fractionation. The impact of these libraries on SWATH performance was evaluated in terms of the number of extracted peptides and proteins, the match quality of the peptides and the extraction reproducibility of the transitions. These analyses were conducted using the hydrophilic proteome of differentiating human embryonic stem cells. Our results show that SWATH quantitative results and interpretations are affected by choice of fractionation technique. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006190.

### Keywords
Fractionation proteomics, Library building, Swath-ms, Comparative study, Hesc

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Elisabeth Govaert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Apr. Dieter Deforce
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


