### Accession
PXD021074

### Title
Evaluation of two methods for LS-MS/MS proteomic analysis of formalin fixed and paraffin embedded tissues

### Description
The proteomics of archival samples has advanced significantly during the last two decades, making possible the use of vast FFPE tissue archives in biomarker studies. However, due to the limited data regarding comparison of the performance of different protocols, there is currently no consensus on the most effective protocol for shotgun proteomic analysis of FFPE tissue. In-solution digestion method using Rapigest as detergent and FASP method, both reported to deliver superior results on FFPE tissues were compared using two label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS acquisition modes. Archival FFPE prostate tissues stored 7 years and mirroring fresh frozen samples were processed with both protocols in 3 technical replicates. Data were comparatively evaluated in terms of protein and peptide identifications in fresh frozen and FFPE samples, analysis of the fresh and FFPE tissues representative proteome (molecular weight distribution, distribution according to protein’s pI, cellular component analysis of proteins and quantitation accuracy) and technical reproducibility of the Rapigest and FASP protocols.

### Sample Protocol
The samples used in this study were prostate tissues from 3 patients with benign prostate hyperplasia, split into two portions : one portion was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC while the other portion was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 h, dehydrated with a graded series of ethanol and embedded in paraffin, respectively. The frozen tissues (10-15 mg per sample) were pulverized with liquid nitrogen, resuspended in 1:20 ratio (w/v) of Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 5mM MgCl2x6H2O, 10 mM CHAPS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.5 M DTT), mixed and allowed to dissolve by sonication. FFPE tissues were deparaffinized three times with xylene followed by rehydration with ethanol (95%, 70% and 50%) and water for 5 min. After air dry for 30 min the tissues were resuspended in 1:20 ratio (w/v) of Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 5mM MgCl2x6H2O, 10 mM CHAPS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.5 M DTT), vortexed, sonicated in ice bath for 30 min, and incubated at 95oC for 30 min and than at 80 °C for 2 h with mixing at 1000 rpm.  Pools from the 3 fresh frozen and 3 corresponding FFPE samples were made in 3 technical replicates per protocol, resulting in 12 pool samples (Rapigest_fresh_pool 1-3, Rapigest_FFPE_pool 1-3, FASP_fresh_pool 1-3 and FASP_FFPE_pool 1-3). After tryptic digestion, equal amount of the 3 technical replicates was combined into a pool representative named S POOL. Rapigest protocol: Portion of each individual sample in Lysis buffer containing 100 µg of protein was adjusted to 100 µl with Lysis buffer and 150 μl of methanol and 38 μl of chloroform were added. After vortexing vigorously for about 1 min and centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 5 min, most of the upper layer of methanol/water was aspirated and 112 μl of methanol was added. Proteins were pelleted and dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1% RapiGestTM detergent. DTT was added (0.12 µmol/50 µg protein) and the solution was sonicated and boiled for 5 minutes. POOLS: The volume of each pool was adjusted to 35 µl with 0.1% RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and heated at 80oC for 15 minutes. Sample pools were reduced in 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60oC, followed by alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Trypsin (TRYPSEQM-RO ROCHE) was added at a 1:100 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37 °C. 5% TFA was added to final concentration of 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes. The final concentration of protein was 200 ng/μl and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase was added as an internal control with concentration of 25 fmol/μl. FASP protocol: Proteins were alkylated in 40 mM IAA in the dark for 30 minutes. Eight volumes of Urea buffer (8M Urea, 10% isopropanol in 100 mM NH4HCO3) was then added to the sample pools. Sample pools were then transferred to the columns (Pierce™ Protein Concentrators PES, 30K MWCO, 0.5 mL), centrifuged at 15,000 g for 30 min. Detergent removal by buffer exchange was performed in two successive washes with eight volumes of Urea buffer and urea was then removed by two washes with Wash buffer 1 (10% isopropanol in 50 mM NH4HCO3), followed by two washes with Wash buffer 2 (50 mM NH4HCO3). Trypsin (TRYPSEQM-RO ROCHE) was added at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered using an initial spin of 15000 g for 10 min followed by two washes with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 . The collected peptides were acidified with 1.0% FA to final concentration of 0.1% and digest of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase was added as an internal detection control to 25 fmol/μl. The final protein concentration was 200 ng/μl. Nano LC-MS/MS: S pool samples were run with 250 ng in triplicate in MSE and UDMSE. Individual pools (Rapigest_fresh_pool 1-3, Rapigest_FFPE_pool 1-3, FASP_fresh_pool 1-3 and FASP_FFPE_pool 1-3) were run with 250 ng in UDMSE only, in one technical replicate. Peptides were trapped on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column Symmetry C18, 5µm particles, 180 µm×20mm, (Waters Corporation), for 3 min at 8 µL/min in 0.1% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN)/99.9% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Peptide separation was done on C18 column HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75µm×250mm (Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using 90 min multistep concave gradient. The column temperature was set to 55 °C. Spectra were collected over the mass range 50–2000 m/z with scan time of 0.5 s. For the MSE acquisition, collision energy was held at 4 V for low energy scan and ramped from 17 to 45 V for the high energy scan. For the UDMSE acquisition, collision energy was held at 0 V for low energy scan while for the high energy cycles, look-up table file was put into the MS file: (i) ion-mobility bins 0–20: CE of 2 eV, (ii) ion-mobility bins 21–120: CE ramp from 10.6 eV to 50.4 eV, (iii) ion-mobility bins 121–200: CE ramp from 51 eV to 60 eV. A reference sprayer was operated at 500 nl/min to produce a lockmass spectrum with Glu-1-Fibrinopeptide B (EGVNDNEEGFFSAR) (m/z 785.8426) every 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification of the raw data was done using ProteinLynx Global SERVER ((PLGS, version 3.0.3, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA)). Data was searched against the UniProtKB database of manually annotated and reviewed human sequences containing 20,198 proteins (April 2017), to which yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (UniProt P00330) sequence was added. Optimized Low Energy (LE) and High Energy (HE) threshold settings for PLGS data processing were determined by PLGS Threshold Inspector (Version 2.3 Build 2, Carper Soft) as 600 counts and 150 counts for LE and HE threshold, respectively. The data were post-acquisition lock mass corrected using the doubly charged monoisotopic ion of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were automatically determined by PLGS during database searching. Search settings included up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, and the methionine oxidation as variable modification. A minimum of two fragment ion matches was required per peptide identification and five fragment ion matches per protein identification, with at least one peptide matches per protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 4% threshold for database search in PLGS.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomics of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples has advanced significantly during the last two decades, but there are many protocols and few studies comparing them directly. There is no consensus on the most effective protocol for shotgun proteomic analysis. We compared the in-solution digestion with RapiGest and Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) of FFPE prostate tissues stored 7&#xa0;years and mirroring fresh frozen samples, using two label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS acquisitions. RapiGest identified more proteins than FASP, with almost identical numbers of proteins from fresh and FFPE tissues and 69% overlap, good preservation of high-MW proteins, no bias regarding isoelectric point, and greater technical reproducibility. On the other hand, FASP yielded 20% fewer protein identifications in FFPE than in fresh tissue, with 64-69% overlap, depletion of proteins &gt;70&#xa0;kDa, lower efficiency in acidic and neutral range, and lower technical reproducibility. Both protocols showed highly similar subcellular compartments distribution, highly similar percentages of extracted unique peptides from FFPE and fresh tissues and high positive correlation between the absolute quantitation values of fresh and FFPE proteins. In conclusion, RapiGest extraction of FFPE tissues delivers a proteome that closely resembles the fresh frozen proteome and should be preferred over FASP in biomarker and quantification studies. SIGNIFICANCE: Here we analyzed the performance of two sample preparation methods for shotgun proteomic analysis of FFPE tissues to give a comprehensive overview of the obtained proteomes and the resemblance to its matching fresh frozen counterparts. These findings give us better understanding towards competent proteomics analysis of FFPE tissues. It is hoped that it will encourage further assessments of available protocols before establishing the most effective protocol for shotgun proteomic FFPE tissue analysis.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Ffpe, Rapigest, Proteomics, Protein extraction, Lc-ms/ms, Fasp

### Affiliations
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje

### Submitter
Katarina Davalieva

### Lab Head
Dr Katarina Davalieva
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia


