### Accession
PXD027534

### Title
Proteome of mouse striatal dopamine synaptosomes purified by fluorescence sorting

### Description
Dopamine transmission is a monoaminergic system involved in reward processing and motor control. Volume transmission is thought to be the main mechanism by which monoamines modulate effector transmission though synaptic structures are scarcely described. In the present work we aimed to unravel the cellular and molecular synaptome of single projection pathways (Zhu F, Cizeron M, Qiu Z, Benavides-Piccione R, Kopanitsa MV, Skene NG, Koniaris B, DeFelipe J, Fransén E, Komiyama NH & Grant SGN (2018) Architecture of the Mouse Brain Synaptome. Neuron 99: 781–799.e10). To that end, we established a workflow combining fluorescence tracing of the dopaminergic pathway, fluorescence activated synaptosome sorting and mass spectrometry-based proteomics. With this approach we provide the first ex-vivo model to thoroughly analyse the cellular and molecular organisation of dopaminergic synapses from mouse striatum.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates of 35*107 dopaminergic fluorescence activated sorted synaptosomes were accumulated for proteomics analysis and were compared to triplicates of 35*107 singlets synaptosomes. Both samples were treated in parallel at all steps. Protein samples were solubilized in Laemmlli buffer. A small part of each triplicate was analysed by silver-staining using SilverXpressR staining kit (Invitrogen, Cat#LC6100). Protein content was normalized across triplicates to 140 ng (lowest triplicate protein amount) and deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel for very short separation. After colloidal blue staining, each lane was cut in 2 bands which were subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% ACN, rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 50-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 105 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of R = 120 000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000 and a maximum fill time of 54 ms. Only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 30%, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 5 x 104 and normalized AGC target od 100%. Advanced Peak Detection was activated. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 2.5 x 104. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the Ho Mus musculus SwissProt protein database (v2021-02-04; 17,050 entries) added with green Fluorsecent Protein. Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. Precursor Detector node was included. Search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), phosphorylation of serines, threonines and tyrosines (+79), methionine loss (-131 Da), methionine loss with acetylation (-89 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (L Käll, J Canterbury, J Weston, W S Noble and M J MacCoss. Semi-supervised learning for peptide identification from shotgun proteomics datasets, Nature Methods 4:923 – 925, November 2007) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique and razor peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount. Protein ratio were calculated as the median of all possible pairwise peptide ratios. A t-test was calculated based on background population of peptides or proteins. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of two peptides and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05. Proteins with an abundance ratio above 1.5 were considered enriched and depleted below a ratio of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Striatum, Synapse, Synaptosome, Dopamine, Mouse, Proteome, Fass

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome, Univ.Bordeaux
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Claverol
Plateforme Proteome, Univ.Bordeaux


