### Accession
PXD017406

### Title
HX-MS data: Feedback regulation of heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) activity by Hsp70-mediated trimer unzipping and dissociation from DNA

### Description
The heat shock response is a universal transcriptional response to proteotoxic stress orchestrated by heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 in all eukaryotic cells. Despite over 40 years of intense research, the mechanism of HSF1 activity regulation remains poorly understood at a molecular level. In metazoa Hsf1 trimerizes upon heat shock through a leucin-zipper domain and binds to DNA. How Hsf1 is dislodged from DNA and monomerized remained enigmatic. Here, using purified proteins we demonstrate that unmodified trimeric Hsf1 is dissociated from DNA in vitro by Hsc70 and DnaJB1. Hsc70 binds to multiple sites in Hsf1 with different affinities. Hsf1 trimers are monomerized by successive cycles of entropic pulling, unzipping the triple leucinezipper. Starting this unzipping at several protomers of the Hsf1 trimer results in faster monomerization. This process directly monitors the concentration of Hsc70 and DnaJB1. During heat shock adaptation Hsc70 first binds to a high affinity site in the transactivation domain leading to partial attenuation of the response and subsequently, at higher concentrations, Hsc70 removes Hsf1 from DNA to restore the resting state.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen-Exchange Mass Spectrometry - Sample preparation Effects of Hsc70 or Hdj1/DNAJB1 on Hsf1. 6 μM Hsf1 (monomer or trimer) were preincubated for 30 min at 25°C in the presence of 12 μM Hsc70 or 9 μM Hdj1 in Hsf1 SEC buffer (25 mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT) and, subsequently, diluted 10-fold in H2O/D2O buffer to a final volume of 100 μl and incubated for 30 s at 25°C. Deuteration reaction was quenched by adding 100 μl of ice-cold quench buffer (400 mM Na-phosphate, pH 2.2) and was immediately injected into the ice-cold HPLC system. Effects of the Hsp70 system on Hsf1. 10 μM Hsf1 trimers were pre-incubated in the presence of 40 μM Hsc70, 12 μM Hdj1, 2 mM ATP, 4 mM MgCl2 in Hsf1 SEC buffer (25 mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT) for 30 min at 25°C, subsequently, diluted 10-fold in D2O buffer to a final volume of 100 μl, and incubated for 300 s at 25°C. The deuteration reaction was quenched by adding 100 μl of the ice-cold quench buffer (2% formic acid) and was immediately injected into the ice-cold HPLC system. Performing Hydrogen-Exchange Mass Spectrometry measurements In the ice cooled HPLC set-up the protein was digested online using a column with immobilized pepsin and the peptides were desalted on a C8 trap column (POROS 10 R2, Applied Biosystems, #1-1118-02) for 2 min and eluted over an analytical C8 column (Waters GmbH, 186002876) using a 10 min gradient from 5 to 55% acetonitrile. All experiments were performed using a Maxis mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) and analyzed with the Data Analysis software. The calculated centroid values were corrected for the back-exchange using a 100% deuterated sample.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed manually in Data Analysis software, Bruker.  Peptides with sufficient intensity based on MS/MS data were selected (to obtain sufficient Hsf1 sequence coverage). % of exchaange and difference in deuteron incorporation was investigated, unexchanged sample and 100% control sample (6M GdnHCl denatured Hsf1) were used as references.

### Publication Abstract
The heat shock response is a universal transcriptional response to proteotoxic stress orchestrated by heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 in all eukaryotic cells. Despite over 40&#xa0;years of intense research, the mechanism of Hsf1 activity regulation remains poorly understood at the molecular level. In metazoa, Hsf1 trimerizes upon heat shock through a leucine-zipper domain and binds to DNA. How Hsf1 is dislodged from DNA and monomerized remained enigmatic. Here, using purified proteins, we demonstrate that unmodified trimeric Hsf1 is dissociated from DNA in&#xa0;vitro by Hsc70 and DnaJB1. Hsc70 binds to multiple sites in Hsf1 with different affinities. Hsf1 trimers are monomerized by successive cycles of entropic pulling, unzipping the triple leucine-zipper. Starting this unzipping at several protomers of the Hsf1 trimer results in faster monomerization. This process directly monitors the concentration of Hsc70 and DnaJB1. During heat shock adaptation, Hsc70 first binds to a high-affinity site in the transactivation domain, leading to partial attenuation of the response, and subsequently, at higher concentrations, Hsc70 removes Hsf1 from DNA to restore the resting state.

### Keywords
Hsp70, Dna binding, Hsf1, Entropic pulling, Heat shock response, Heat shock factor, Attenuation, Dnajb1/hdj1

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBHAlliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH)

### Submitter
Szymon  Kmiecik

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Peter Mayer
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBHAlliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany


