### Accession
PXD023977

### Title
Boosting MS1-only proteomics with machine learning allows 2000 protein identifications in single-shot human proteome analyses using 5-minute HPLC gradients

### Description
Proteome-wide analyses rely on tandem mass spectrometry and extensive separation of proteolytic mixtures imposing considerable instrumental time consumption that is one of the main obstacles in a broader acceptance of proteomics in biomedical and clinical research. Recently, we presented a fast proteomic method termed DirectMS1 based on ultra-short LC gradients, as well as MS1-only mass spectra acquisition and data processing. The method allows significant squeezing of the proteome-wide analysis time to a few minutes at the depth of quantitative proteome coverage of 1000 proteins at 1% FDR. In this work, to further increase the capabilities of the DirectMS1 method, we explored the opportunities presented by the recent progress in the machine learning area and applied the LightGBM tree-based learning algorithm into the scoring of peptide-feature matches when processing MS1 spectra. Further, we integrated the peptide feature identification algorithm of DirectMS1 with the recently introduced peptide retention time prediction utility, DeepLC. Additional approaches to improve performance of the DirectMS1 method are discussed and demonstrated, such as FAIMS coupled to the Orbitrap mass analyzer. As a result of all improvements to DirectMS1, we succeeded in identifying more than 2000 proteins at 1% FDR from the HeLa cell line in a 5 minute gradient LC-FAIMS/MS1 analysis.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with FAIMS Pro interface coupled with UltiMate 3000 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). Trap column µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100 (5 µm, 300 µm, i.d. 5 mm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and self-packed analytical column (Inertsil 3 µm, 75 µm i.d., 15 cm length) were employed for separation. Mobile phases were as follows: (A) 0.1 % FA in water; (B) 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA in water. Loading solvent was 0.05 % TFA in water. The gradient was from 5 % to 35 % phase B in 4.8 min at 1.5 µL/min. Total method time was 7.3 min. FAIMS separations were performed with the following settings: inner and outer electrodes temperature was 100 °C; FAIMS carrier gas flow was 4.7 L/min; asymmetric waveform dispersion voltage (DV) was −5000 V; entrance plate voltage was 250 V. Compensation voltages (CV) -50 V, -65 V, and -80 V was used in a stepwise mode during LC-MS analysis. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed in MS1-only mode of acquisition. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 375 to 1500 at a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200 with AGC target of 4·10^5, 1 microscan and 50 ms maximum injection time. 200 ng of HeLa digest was loaded on column.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into mzML format using msConvert. Peptide feature detection was done using Biosaur. Identification was done using DirectMS1 search engine (v. 2.0.2). Parameters for the search were following: minimum 3 scans for detected peptide isotopic cluster; minimum 1 visible C13 isotope; charges from 1+ to 6+, no missed cleavage sites, 1% protein level  FDR and 8 ppm initial mass accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome-wide analyses rely on tandem mass spectrometry and the extensive separation of proteolytic mixtures. This imposes considerable instrumental time consumption, which is one of the main obstacles in the broader acceptance of proteomics in biomedical and clinical research. Recently, we presented a fast proteomic method termed DirectMS1 based on ultrashort LC gradients as well as MS1-only mass spectra acquisition and data processing. The method allows significant reduction of the proteome-wide analysis time to a few minutes at the depth of quantitative proteome coverage of 1000 proteins at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). In this work, to further increase the capabilities of the DirectMS1 method, we explored the opportunities presented by the recent progress in the machine-learning area and applied the LightGBM decision tree boosting algorithm to the scoring of peptide feature matches when processing MS1 spectra. Furthermore, we integrated the peptide feature identification algorithm of DirectMS1 with the recently introduced peptide retention time prediction utility, DeepLC. Additional approaches to improve the performance of the DirectMS1 method are discussed and demonstrated, such as using FAIMS for gas-phase ion separation. As a result of all improvements to DirectMS1, we succeeded in identifying more than 2000 proteins at 1% FDR from the HeLa cell line in a 5 min gradient LC-FAIMS/MS1 analysis. The data sets generated and analyzed during the current study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD023977.

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Hela, Protein identification, Faims, Ms1-only, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
V. L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N. N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 Moscow, Russia
INEP CP RAS

### Submitter
Mark Ivanov

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail Vladimirovich Gorshkov
V. L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N. N. Semenov Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 Moscow, Russia


