### Accession
PXD033852

### Title
cAMP/PKA signaling phosphorylates LRBA in renal collecting duct

### Description
Vasopressin/cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA)/aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channels signaling in the kidneys is a canonical pathway that determines AQP2 activity in response to body fluid balance. AQP2 phosphorylation by PKA increases water reabsorption from urine for the prevention of further water loss.  We used several activators of cAMP/PKA signaling as screening tools to generate various phosphorylation patterns of PKA substrates and AQP2 in a mouse cortical collecting duct principal cell line (mpkCCDcl4). We next quantified phosphorylation levels of PKA substrates and AQP2 after western blot analysis using a phospho-PKA substrates antibody. Finally, we screen for PKA substrates whose phosphorylation levels were well correlated with those of AQP2. Immunoprecipitation with a phospho-PKA substrates antibody followed by mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the leading candidate in this assay proved to be a lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor protein (LRBA). Phosphorylation levels of LRBA was nearly perfectly correlated with those of AQP2.

### Sample Protocol
V2R agonist, [deamino-Cys1, d-Arg8]-vasopressin (dDAVP) or vehicle was added to the basolateral side of the mpkCCD cells for 1 h. After treatment, the lysates of mpkCCD cells were collected. Anti-pPKA substrates antibody (#9624; Cell Signaling Technology) was bound to protein G magnetic beads (Dynabeads® ProteinG, Invitrogen Corporation), and the cell lysates were purified. The proteins bound to the antibody were denatured in an SDS sample buffer (Cosmo Bio, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for 20 min at 60 °C. Equal amounts of protein were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and visualized by silver staining (Sil-Best Destain Kit, Nacalai Tesque, Inc. Kyoto, Japan). Two stained bands and their control bands were excised from gels. Liquid Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of gel bands was conducted by MS BioWorks (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) with the following protocol. Each gel was washed with 25-mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile and reduced with 10-mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 50-mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. The proteins in gels were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 4 h. LC-MS/MS analysis of gel bands was conducted by MS BioWorks (Ann Arbor) with the following protocol. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75-µm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 0.5 h gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Advanced Peak Determination(APD) was enabled, and the instrument was run with a 3-s cycle time for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin/P; database: SwissProt Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (N-term), pyroGlu (N-term Q), deamidation (N/Q); Mass values: monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; max missed cleavages: 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering, and creating a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase A (PKA) directly phosphorylates aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channels in renal collecting ducts to reabsorb water from urine for the maintenance of systemic water homeostasis. More than 50 functionally distinct PKA-anchoring proteins (AKAPs) respectively create compartmentalized PKA signaling to determine the substrate specificity of PKA. Identification of an AKAP responsible for AQP2 phosphorylation is an essential step toward elucidating the molecular mechanisms of urinary concentration. PKA activation by several compounds is a novel screening strategy to uncover PKA substrates whose phosphorylation levels were nearly perfectly correlated with that of AQP2. The leading candidate in this assay proved to be an AKAP termed lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor protein (LRBA). We found that LRBA colocalized with AQP2 in&#xa0;vivo, and <i>Lrba</i> knockout mice displayed a polyuric phenotype with severely impaired AQP2 phosphorylation. Most of the PKA substrates other than AQP2 were adequately phosphorylated by PKA in the absence of LRBA, demonstrating that LRBA-anchored PKA preferentially phosphorylated AQP2 in renal collecting ducts. Furthermore, the LRBA-PKA interaction, rather than other AKAP-PKA interactions, was robustly dissociated by PKA activation. AKAP-PKA interaction inhibitors have attracted attention for their ability to directly phosphorylate AQP2. Therefore, the LRBA-PKA interaction is a promising drug target for the development of anti-aquaretics.

### Keywords
Lrba, Renal collecting duct, Aqp2, Pka substrates

### Affiliations
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo 113-8510, Japan
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU)

### Submitter
YU HARA

### Lab Head
Dr Shinichi Uchida
Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo 113-8510, Japan


