### Accession
PXD013507

### Title
Modeling of DNA methylation in cis reveals principles of chromatin folding in vivo in the absence of crosslinking and ligation

### Description
Mammalian chromosomes are folded into intricate hierarchies of interaction domains, within which topologically associating domains (TADs) and CTCF-associated loops partition the physical interactions between regulatory sequences. Current understanding of chromosome folding largely relies on chromosome conformation capture (3C)-based experiments, where chromosomal interactions are detected as ligation products after crosslinking of chromatin. To measure chromosome structure in vivo, quantitatively and without relying on crosslinking and ligation, we have implemented a modified version of damID named damC. DamC combines DNA-methylation based detection of chromosomal interactions with next-generation sequencing and a biophysical model of methylation kinetics. DamC performed in mouse embryonic stem cells provides the first in vivo validation of the existence of TADs and CTCF loops and confirms 3C-based measurements of the scaling of contact probabilities. Combining damC with transposon-mediated genomic engineering shows that new loops can be formed between ectopically introduced and endogenous CTCF sites, which alters the partitioning of physical interactions within TADs. This orthogonal approach to 3C provides the first crosslinking- and ligation-free validation of the existence of key structural features of mammalian chromosomes and provides novel insights into how chromosome structure within TADs can be manipulated.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were dissolved in 400 µL 50mM HEPES pH 8.5 in 8.3M guanidine hydrochloride. All the samples were heated at 95oC for 5 min, sonicated using Bioruptor® sonication device and supplemented with 5mM TCEP and 10mM CAA. To reduce sample complexity, lysates were diluted to 6M guanidine hydrochloride and transferred onto 100kDa molecular weight cut-off Amiconultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units. Samples were concentrated for 2 x 15 minutes at 14kG followed by refill of the filter with 6M guanidine hydrochloride in 50mM HEPES pH 8.5 and 3 x 45 minutes at 14kG followed by refill of the filter with 1M guanidine hydrochloride in 50mM HEPES pH 8.5. For digestion 10µg of Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and 10µg of trypsin (Thermo Fisher) were added to each sample and incubated over night at 37oC. In the morning additional 10µg of trypsin was added, incubated for 3h and acidified using TFA. To estimate nuclear proteins copy numbers samples were desalted using SEP-PAK (Waters) and subjected to high pH offline fractionation on a YMC Triart C18 0.5 x250 mm column (YMC Europe GmbH) using the Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies). 96 fractions were collected for each experiment and concatenated into 48 fractions as previously described63. For each LC-MS analysis, approximately 1 µg of peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 2 cm trap (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon NanoLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher). On-line peptide separation was performed on the 15 cm EASY-Spray C18 column (ES801, Thermo Fisher) by applying a linear gradient of increasing ACN concentration at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher) or an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS Tribrid (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometers were operated in a data-dependent mode. The top 10 most intense precursor ions from the Orbitrap survey scan were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation and analyzed using the ion-trap.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant version 1.5.3.8 was used to search raw mass spectrometry data using default settings64 against the mouse protein sequences from Uniprot database (release 2017-04). The label free quantification (LFQ)  algorithm was used for quantification. The protein groups table were loaded to Perseus software66 (version 1.5.0.0) filtered for potential contaminants and reverse hits. Protein copy numbers per cell were calculated using the Protein ruler plugin of Perseus by standardization to the total histone MS signal57 (Wisniewski et al., 2014). The LFQ values were normalized using same normalization for all samples. To estimate cytoplasmic contamination “GOCC slim name” annotations provided in Perseus were used. Exclusively cytoplasmic proteins were defined as being associated with GOCC terms “cytoplasm” or “cytosol” and not associated with terms “nucleus”, “nuclear”, “nucleoplasm” and “nucleosome”. Exclusively nuclear proteins were defined as being associated with GOCC terms “nucleus”, “nuclear”, “nucleoplasm” and “nucleosome” and not associated with terms “cytoplasm” or “cytosol”. The cytoplasmic contamination was estimated using a ratio of summed LFQ intensity between exclusively cytoplasmic proteins and exclusively nuclear proteins in samples with and without nuclear extraction.

### Publication Abstract
Current understanding of chromosome folding is largely reliant on chromosome conformation capture (3C)-based experiments, where chromosomal interactions are detected as ligation products after chromatin crosslinking. To measure chromosome structure in vivo, quantitatively and without crosslinking and ligation, we implemented a modified version of DNA adenine methyltransferase identification (DamID) named DamC, which combines DNA methylation-based detection of chromosomal interactions with next-generation sequencing and biophysical modeling of methylation kinetics. DamC performed in mouse embryonic stem cells provides the first in vivo validation of the existence of topologically associating domains (TADs), CTCF loops and confirms 3C-based measurements of the scaling of contact probabilities. Combining DamC with transposon-mediated genomic engineering shows that new loops can be formed between ectopic and endogenous CTCF sites, which redistributes physical interactions within TADs. DamC provides the first crosslinking- and ligation-free demonstration of the existence of key structural features of chromosomes and provides novel insights into how chromosome structure within TADs can be manipulated.

### Keywords
Topologically associating domains, Chromosome folding, Proteomic ruler, Tads, Mouse embryonic stem cells, Chromosomal interactions, Ctcf-associated loops

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research Maulbeerstrasse 66 4058 Basel Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Giorgetti
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research Maulbeerstrasse 66 4058 Basel Switzerland


