### Accession
PXD006810

### Title
NleB host targets -  The bacterial arginine glycosyltransferase effector NleB preferentially modifies Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD)

### Description
The inhibition of host innate immunity pathways is essential for the survival of attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogens such as enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) and Citrobacter rodentium during mammalian infections. To subvert these pathways, A/E pathogens utilize a type III secretion system (T3SS) to introduce effectors that target key signaling pathways thereby suppressing the anti-microbial response. One effector used by A/E pathogens is the arginine glycosyltransferase NleB1 (NleBCR in C. rodentium) that modifies conserved arginine residues with N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) in death-domain containing host proteins thereby blocking extrinsic apoptosis signaling. When expressed ectopically, NleB1 modifies the host proteins, FADD, TRADD and RIPK1. However, the true repertoire of arginine-GlcNAcylation during infection with endogenous levels of NleB delivered by the pathogen is unknown. Here we explored the effects of arginine-GlcNAcylation by NleB on the global host proteome. Utilizing an affinity proteomic approach for Arginine-GlcNAcylated glycopeptide, we compared the global repertoire of arginine-GlcNAcylation during ectopic expression of NleB, EPEC infection in vitro or C. rodentium infection in vivo. When NleB was overexpressed, multiple host proteins were arginine-GlcNAcylated. However, when endogenous levels of NleB were delivered during EPEC and C. rodentium infection, R117of FADD was rapidly and preferentially modified. The arginine-GlcNAcylation modification of FADD was extremely stable and insensitive to environmental or host cell degradation. Despite its stability and effect on the inhibition of apoptosis, arginine-GlcNAcylation did not illicit any proteomic changes, even in response to prolonged expression of NleB. Thus, under wild type levels of expression, NleB1/NleBCR antagonizes death-receptor-induced apoptosis of infected cells by modifying FADD in an irreversible and silent manner.

### Sample Protocol
in-solution digestions Basic reverse phase fractionation SILAC

### Data Protocol
Maxquant based identificiation and quantification of SILAC/Arginine-glycopeptides

### Publication Abstract
The inhibition of host innate immunity pathways is essential for the persistence of attaching and effacing pathogens such as enteropathogenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (EPEC) and <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i> during mammalian infections. To subvert these pathways and suppress the antimicrobial response, attaching and effacing pathogens use type III secretion systems to introduce effectors targeting key signaling pathways in host cells. One such effector is the arginine glycosyltransferase NleB1 (NleB<sup>CR</sup> in <i>C. rodentium</i>) that modifies conserved arginine residues in death domain-containing host proteins with <i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), thereby blocking extrinsic apoptosis signaling. Ectopically expressed NleB1 modifies the host proteins Fas-associated via death domain (FADD), TNFRSF1A-associated via death domain (TRADD), and receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinase 1 (RIPK1). However, the full repertoire of arginine GlcNAcylation induced by pathogen-delivered NleB1 is unknown. Using an affinity proteomic approach for measuring arginine-GlcNAcylated glycopeptides, we assessed the global profile of arginine GlcNAcylation during ectopic expression of NleB1, EPEC infection <i>in vitro</i>, or <i>C. rodentium</i> infection <i>in vivo</i> NleB overexpression resulted in arginine GlcNAcylation of multiple host proteins. However, NleB delivery during EPEC and <i>C. rodentium</i> infection caused rapid and preferential modification of Arg<sup>117</sup> in FADD. This FADD modification was extremely stable and insensitive to physiological temperatures, glycosidases, or host cell degradation. Despite its stability and effect on the inhibition of apoptosis, arginine GlcNAcylation did not elicit any proteomic changes, even in response to prolonged NleB1 expression. We conclude that, at normal levels of expression during bacterial infection, NleB1/NleB<sup>CR</sup> antagonizes death receptor-induced apoptosis of infected cells by modifying FADD in an irreversible manner.

### Keywords
Epec, Nleb

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Hartland
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne 3000, Australia


