### Accession
PXD033874

### Title
GFP pulldown for the RiboVD project

### Description
GFP-tagged viral peptide sequences and their controls were used to pull down interactors from human (uninfected) or green monkey (viral infected) cell lysate. After sample preparation, digestion and bottom-up LC-MS/MS analysis, the enriched proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Chromotek GFP-nanotraps (magnetic beads) were used to pull down GFP-tagged fusion proteins and their interactors. After washes to remove the non-interacting proteins, acidic glycine buffer was used for elution. The eluate was digested with trypsin overnight and then desalted using C18 StageTips. The samples were dried up in a SpeedVac and kept at -80C until use. Before analysis , the samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA in water and analyzed on a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC using a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient and a Thermo EASYSpray PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column. The MS used was a Thermo Q Exactive Plus, run in positive mode, top10 data-dependent acqusition, with  30 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0, searching against the corresponding homo sapiens or Chlorocebus proteome, with viral sequences added where necessary. LFQ was allowed, and minimum 2 peptide/minimum 1 unique peptide was required with FDR 0.01. Then Perseus 2.0.3.0 was used to analyze the MaxQuant proteinGroups file. After removing contaminants the LFQ intensity values were transfromed, filtered and imputed. Next a two-side t-test was done, with the results visualized in a volcano-plot. Results with p<0.05 and minimum fold change of 2 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Coronavirus, Pulldown, Interaction, Motif

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Uppsala University, Chemistry-BMC

### Submitter
Eszter Kassa

### Lab Head
Dr Ylva Ivarsson
Uppsala University, Chemistry-BMC


