### Accession
PXD002990

### Title
Complementary Phosphoproteomic Approaches Link IL-23R Downstream Signaling with Metabolic Adaptation in Lymphocytes

### Description
Interleukin (IL)-23 mediated signal transduction represents a major molecular mechanism underlying the pathology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). In addition, emerging evidence supports the role of IL-23-driven Th17 cells in inflammation. Components of the IL-23 signalling pathway, such as IL23R, JAK2 and STAT3, have been characterised, but elements unique to this network as compared to other interleukins have not been readily addressed. In this study, we have undertaken a multi-stage phosphoproteomics approach to better characterise downstream signalling events. To this end, we performed and compared phosphopeptide and phosphoprotein enrichment methodologies after activation of T lymphocytes by IL-23. We demonstrate the complementary nature of the two phosphor-enrichment approaches by maximising the capture of phosphorylation events. A total of 8069 unique phosphopeptides (containing 8344 unique sites), and 4317 unique phosphorylated proteins were identified, amongst which STAT3, PKM2, CDK6 and LASP-1 clearly showed induction of specific phosphorylation sites that were not readily observed after IL-2 stimulation. Interestingly, we observed subsequent translocation of STAT3 and PKM2 to the nucleus as well as increased phosphorylation especially of the nuclear portion at ~30 min after IL-23 stimulation, suggesting a wide range of cellular responses including proliferation and metabolic adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment After clearing of the lysate by centrifugation at 4000 rpm, protein concentration was measured (BCA protein assay, Thermo Scientific) and adjusted between stimulated and unstimulated sample. Phosphorylation of STAT3 was tested at this stage by Western Blot using a small aliquot of lysate.  Equal amounts of lysate (experiment A/B: 3.25 mg, C: 1.5 mg) were alkylated using 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) followed by chloroform/methanol precipitation as described previously (34). Samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 25 mM TEAB, 0.8 % N-octyl-glucopuranoside. Solubilised samples were diluted 8-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (KR not P) overnight at 37 oC. Samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and labeled on column with dimethyl and 2H4 dimethyl as described before (35). Samples were pooled after elution and resuspended in in 80 % acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1 % TFA. Phosphopeptides were enriched in a 2-step procedure (hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) followed by ion metal chromatography (IMAC) as described (13). In Brief, a HILIC column (Amide 80, 4.6 x 250mm, Tosoh Bioscience LLC) was used to enrich and separate hydrophilic peptides into 30 fractions between 10 and 70 minutes on a Dionex 3000 UHPLC system. To accommodate the decreased solubility after dimethylation, peptides were loaded in 80% ACN. To reduce sample numbers peptide fractions were pooled. The resulting 10 fractions were incubated with 30 μl of a 50 % slurry of PHOS-Select Iron affinity gel (Sigma) for 30 min at RT and placed onto 0.22 μm nylon Spin-X centrifuge tubes for subsequent purification. Samples were washed 2 x 250 mM acetic acid/30 % ACN followed by ddH20 and eluted with 400 mM ammonium hydroxide. Samples were lyophilized to dryness and kept at -80 oC until analysis. Unbound material in experiments A, B was dried down and stored at -80 oC for subsequent TiO2 enrichment.    TiO2 enrichment protocol was performed as described before with some modifications for single steps (36,37). In brief, samples were resuspended in 120 μl GA solution (80 mg/ml glycolic acid/80% ACN/2% TFA). TiO2 beads (Titansphere 10 μm loose beads, Hichrom Ltd, UK) were washed with 0.6 % NH4OH, then equilibrated with GA solution. Samples were incubated with 25 mg beads for 1.5 h shaking at RT and washed resuspending beads by vortexing followed by a centrifugation step at 8000 rpm. Washing steps were GA solution, 80 % ACN/0.2 % TFA and 20 % ACN/0.5 % TFA. Two elution steps were performed, first with 0.6 % NH4OH, 1 h RT and then 60 % ACN/0.05 % TFA, 30 min RT collecting eluted peptides by centrifugation at 9000 rpm and followed by clearing over a C8 tip to remove residual beads (38). Samples were dried down and stored at - 80 oC until analysis.                            Phosphoprotein enrichment We performed three independent biological experiments stimulating 50 x 106 cells Kit225 cells per time point with IL-23 or IL-2 (10 ng and 20 ng (360 U)/5 x 106 cells) (experiments 1 - 3). Samples from experiment 1 were used for analysis by mass spectrometry and validation by Western Blot, samples from experiment 2 and 3 for analysis by Western Blot only. Phosphoproteins were enriched using Pierce Phosphoprotein enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific, Pierce). In brief, after cytokine stimulation cells were washed twice in cold 25 mM HEPES buffer before lysing cells in lysis buffer (lysis/binding wash buffer with 0.25 % CHAPS) containing protease inhibitors (Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Thermo Scientific) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor, Roche) for 45 min on ice vortexing periodically. Lysates were then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 30 mins at 4 oC to remove cellular debris and pellet nuclei. Supernatant was collected and protein concentration was measured using BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific) and adjusted to 0.5 mg/ml. Samples were loaded onto equilibrated IMAC resin cartridges, incubated for 30 min shaking at 4 oC and washed 3 x with lysis/binding/wash buffer. Samples were eluted in elution buffer without CHAPS and concentrated as instructed. Equal amounts (50 μg per sample) were reduced by adding 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated and subjected to chloroform-methanol precipitation and in-solution trypsin digestion as described above.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide analysis: Results are from three different independent biological replicates comparing unstimulated Kit225 cells (t = 0 min) versus Kit225 cells after 30 minutes stimulation with IL-23 (t = 30 min). Cells within one experiment were taken from the same culture. Cells for experiments A and B were from the same batch and equal passage number, cells for experiment C were a separate batch with same passage number. All batches originated from cells frozen on the same date and stored in liquid nitrogen. Unstimulated/stimulated samples were digested as described above and the peptides labelled with two different dimethyl labels per the table below; note the inverted label strategy between dataset A and datasets B and C. Analysis of the MS data for these phosphopeptide datasets was performed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (PD, Thermo Scientific) and the default Dimethylation 2plex method. As search node we used Mascot (v2.3) and the Uniprot Swissprot database (human, retrieved 08/12/2013) with the following parameters: Missed cleavage = 1, Peptide Cut Off Score = 10, Precursor Mass Tolerance = 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance = 0.02 Da, Dynamic Modifications = Oxidation(M); Dimethyl/Dimethyl 2H(4) (K, N-term);Phospho (ST,Y), Static Modifications = Carbamidomethyl (C), Percolator Maximum Delta Cn =  0.05 & Target FDR = 0.05 ). Precursor quantitation settings were Mass Precision = 3 ppm, S/N Threshold = 1, RT Tolerance of Isotope Pattern Multiplets = 1 min, Single-Peak/Missing Channels Allowed = 1, Replace Missing Quan Values With Minimum Intensity = True. The results were initially filtered in PD according to the following parameters - quantify unique peptides only, Maximum Fold Change = 10000, Minimum Quantitation Value threshold = 0.1, Mascot cut-off value = 20, false discovery rate = 1 %, Peptide Grouping disabled, Protein Grouping enabled (using Strict Maximum Parsimony Principle). The list was refined to select only phosphopeptides, exported as .csv and further filtered in Excel to select Search Rank = 1, Unambiguous (allowing for protein grouping) peptides.  For each phosphopeptide, in cases of multiple data points due to multi-modal elution profiles or different charge states, the example with the highest mean abundance across both conditions was taken.  These final quantitation values for unique phosphopeptides are shown in the filtered data tabs of Table S1. Finally, stimulated/unstimulated ratios were normalised to correct for mixing error by dividing all values by the median of all peptides exported from PD (normalisation factor for datasets: A: 1.10, B: 1.14, C: 0.95).

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin (IL)-23 mediated signal transduction represents a major molecular mechanism underlying the pathology of inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. In addition, emerging evidence supports the role of IL-23-driven Th17 cells in inflammation. Components of the IL-23 signaling pathway, such as IL-23R, JAK2 and STAT3, have been characterized, but elements unique to this network as compared to other interleukins have not been readily explored. In this study, we have undertaken an integrative phosphoproteomics approach to better characterise downstream signaling events. To this end, we performed and compared phosphopeptide and phosphoprotein enrichment methodologies after activation of T lymphocytes by IL-23. We demonstrate the complementary nature of the two phosphoenrichment approaches by maximizing the capture of phosphorylation events. A total of 8202 unique phosphopeptides, and 4317 unique proteins were identified, amongst which STAT3, PKM2, CDK6 and LASP-1 showed induction of specific phosphorylation not readily observed after IL-2 stimulation. Interestingly, quantitative analysis revealed predominant phosphorylation of pre-existing STAT3 nuclear subsets in addition to translocation of phosphorylated STAT3 within 30&#x2009;min after IL-23 stimulation. After IL-23R activation, a small subset of PKM2 also translocates to the nucleus and may contribute to STAT3 phosphorylation, suggesting multiple cellular responses including metabolic adaptation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics il-23

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


