### Accession
PXD008100

### Title
SILAC identifies LAD1 as an oncogenic filamin binder regulating actin dynamics in response to EGF and marking aggressive breast tumors

### Description
Mutations mimicking growth factor-induced proliferation and motility characterize aggressive subtypes of mammary tumors. To unravel novel players, we applied phosphoproteomics on untransformed mammary cells, which were pre-stimulated with the epidermal growth factor (EGF). This analysis identified ladinin-1 (LAD1), a hitherto poorly characterized protein, as a phosphor-effector of the EGF-to-ERK pathway. We report that LAD1 is essential for mammary cell proliferation and migration. LAD1 is transcriptionally induced, undergoes phosphorylation by EGF and partly co-localizes with actin stress fibers. Yeast 2-hybrids, proximity ligation and co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that LAD1 binds with filamins, actin cross-linking proteins. Co-sedimentation analyses attribute to LAD1 a role in actin treadmilling, probably in collaboration with SFN/14-3-3sigma. Depletion of LAD1 led to a decrease in transcripts relevant to cell survival, and inhibited growth of mammary xenografts in an animal model. Furthermore, LAD1 is highly expressed in two aggressive subtypes of breast cancer, as well as predicts poor patient prognosis. This study identifies a new cytoskeletal component essential for cell migration and for the acquisition of oncogenic attributes by human mammary tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Cell were were grown in culture with media containing isotopically labeled AAs and treated as described. The cells were harvested after different time points and proteins were extracted. Cells from control, serum or EGF treatments from the same time point were mixed to a single sample. The proteins were digested and separated on a SCX chromatography. The fractions were enriched for phosphopeptide susing titanium oxide that were later analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were analysed by the MaxQuant software for identification and silac quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations mimicking growth factor-induced proliferation and motility characterize aggressive subtypes of mammary tumors. To unravel currently unknown players in these processes, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis on untransformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) that were stimulated in culture with epidermal growth factor (EGF). We identified ladinin-1 (LAD1), a largely uncharacterized protein to date, as a phosphorylation-regulated mediator of the EGF-to-ERK pathway. Further experiments revealed that LAD1 mediated the proliferation and migration of mammary cells. LAD1 was transcriptionally induced, phosphorylated, and partly colocalized with actin stress fibers in response to EGF. Yeast two-hybrid, proximity ligation, and coimmunoprecipitation assays revealed that LAD1 bound to actin-cross-linking proteins called filamins. Cosedimentation analyses indicated that LAD1 played a role in actin dynamics, probably in collaboration with the scaffold protein 14-3-3&#x3c3; (also called SFN). Depletion of LAD1 decreased the expression of transcripts associated with cell survival and inhibited the growth of mammary xenografts in an animal model. Furthermore, LAD1 predicts poor patient prognosis and is highly expressed in aggressive subtypes of breast cancer characterized as integrative clusters 5 and 10, which partly correspond to triple-negative and HER2-positive tumors. Thus, these findings reveal a cytoskeletal component that is critically involved in cell migration and the acquisition of oncogenic attributes in human mammary tumors.

### Keywords
Lad1 egf phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Technion
Departments of Biological Regulation , Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot , Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Yosef Yarden
Departments of Biological Regulation , Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot , Israel


