### Accession
PXD006887

### Title
Analysis of isotope incorporation in differentiated and undifferentiated podocytes

### Description
We subjected podocytes (either differentiated or undifferentiated) to a pulse with stable isotope labeled amino acids for 24, 48, 72 and 96h.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved in urea buffer containing 8M urea and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 1X PIM (Roche complete protease inhibitor tabl. EDTA-free). After sonification for 30 s on 10% power, the protein lysates were centrifuged with 14,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C followed by transfer of the supernatant to a new tube and measurement of protein concentrations with the help of a commercial BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the reduction of disulfide bonds the samples were exposed to Dithiothreitol (DTT, 10mM) for 1 hour at room temperature (RT). Alkylation was performed with Iodacetamide (IAA, 40mM) in the dark Proteins were digested overnight at RT using a 1:100 ratio of trypsin (1μg trypsin per 100 μg protein from each sample). Adding of 0.5 % formic acid the next morning stopped this process.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using MaxQuant as indicated in the method section of the paper.

### Publication Abstract
Podocytes are highly specialized, epithelial, postmitotic cells, which maintain the renal filtration barrier. When adapting to considerable metabolic and mechanical stress, podocytes need to accurately maintain their proteome. Immortalized podocyte cell lines are a widely used model for studying podocyte biology in health and disease in vitro. In this study, we performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of the cultured human podocyte proteome in both proliferative and differentiated conditions at a depth of &gt;7000 proteins. Similar to mouse podocytes, human podocyte differentiation involved a shift in proteostasis: undifferentiated podocytes have high expression of proteasomal proteins, whereas differentiated podocytes have high expression of lysosomal proteins. Additional analyses with pulsed stable-isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture and protein degradation assays determined protein dynamics and half-lives. These studies unraveled a globally increased stability of proteins in differentiated podocytes. Mitochondrial, cytoskeletal, and membrane proteins were stabilized, particularly in differentiated podocytes. Importantly, protein half-lives strongly contributed to protein abundance in each state. These data suggest that regulation of protein turnover of particular cellular functions determines podocyte differentiation, a paradigm involving mitophagy and, potentially, of importance in conditions of increased podocyte stress and damage.-Schroeter, C. B., Koehler, S., Kann, M., Schermer, B., Benzing, T., Brinkkoetter, P. T., Rinschen, M. M. Protein half-life determines expression of proteostatic networks in podocyte differentiation.

### Keywords
Human, Pulse silac, Podocytes, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


