### Accession
PXD043447

### Title
Venom tradeoff shapes interspecific interactions, physiology and reproduction

### Description
An animal’s ability to effectively capture prey and defend against predators is pivotal to its survival1. A key innovation in many predator-prey interactions is venom, which consists of many toxin proteins that shape its phenotype2. Its unusually direct relationship of gene-toxin-phenotype make it an appealing system for studies at the organismal level 3,4. In this work we use the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis as a model organism as it provides us with the opportunity to test for the first time how toxin-genotypes impact predator-prey interactions. Specifically, we compare a native-population5 and a transgenic line which both have significantly reduced levels of Nv1, the major toxin in adult Nematostella6, to animals with wildtype levels of Nv1. We demonstrate that the transgenic strain phenocopies native anemones lacking Nv1 as they both have impaired ability to defend themselves against grass shrimp, a native predator. Mummichog killifish, unexpectedly are attracted to Nematostella with wildtype-levels of Nv1, highlighting that Nv1 plays a complex role in shaping interspecific-interactions. Finally, we demonstrate an evolutionary tradeoff as the reduction of Nv1 levels causes faster growth and increased reproductive rates compared to Nematostella control lines. Overall, our results experimentally link organism’s venom to its physiology, reproduction and interspecific interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were denatured and reduced in 100 μl of 8M urea, 10 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min. Urea was diluted by addition of 8 volumes of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 followed by addition of sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) (0.4 μg/ sample) and incubated overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation. The resulting peptides were acidified by addition 30ul 10% formic acid (FA) and desalted on C18 home-made Stage tips. Peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA and dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and Peptide concentration was determined by Absorbance at 280 nm.  nanoLC-MS/MS analysis Analysis of Lysates: MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument, Ultimate 3000 Dionex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). From each sample, 0.35µg of peptides were injected. Peptides were separated over a 107 min acetonitrile gradient (4% to 50%) at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min on a reverse phase 25-cm-long C18 column (75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo PepMapRSLC). Survey scans (300–1,650 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection time 20 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 27). A resolution of 60,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions, with “peptide preferable” profile were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (target value 1E5 charges, maximum ion injection times 25 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 20 sec. Data was acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 2.0.3.0. Peak lists were searched against an NVE FASTA sequence database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and allowed up to two miscleavages. The ‘match-between-runs’ option was used for lysate samples. For water sample the “dependent peptides” option was used. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino-acids were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm for lysate samples only (Cox, J. et al. MaxLFQ allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–2526 (2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tri-trophic, Tradeoff, Predator-prey, Venom, Evolution, Ecology

### Affiliations
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences Faculty of Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
joachim surm

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Surm
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences Faculty of Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem


