### Accession
PXD008178

### Title
Substrates of human TRAP complex

### Description
While the Sec61-complex in the membrane of the human endoplasmic reticulum facilitates translocation of all precursor polypeptides with amino-terminal signal peptides or transmembrane helices, the Sec61-associated translocon-associated protein (TRAP)-complex supports translocation of only a subset of precursor polypeptides, i.e. in a substrate-specific manner. To characterize TRAP-dependent precursors, we combined siRNA-mediated TRAP depletion in HeLa cells, label-free quantitative proteomics, and differential expression analysis. Sec61 served as a positive control

### Sample Protocol
• Cell preparations and manipulations:  HeLa cells (ATCC no. CCL-2) were cultivated at 37°C in a humidified environment with 5% CO2, in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma- Aldrich) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin.   For gene silencing, 5.2 × 105 HeLa cells were seeded per 6-cm culture plate, followed by incubation under normal culture conditions. For TRAPB silencing, the cells were transfected with a final concentration of 10 nM targeting siRNA (Qiagen) or 10 nM AllStars Negative Control siRNA (Qiagen) using HiPerFect Reagent (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After 24 h, the medium was changed and the cells were transfected a second time. SEC61A1 silencing was performed using two different siRNAs.   • Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis:  Cells (1 × 106) were harvested, washed twice in PBS, and lysed in buffer containing 6M GnHCl, 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA; Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0. The lysate was heated to 95°C for 2 min, and then sonicated in a Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) at the maximum power setting for 10 cycles of 30 s each. The entire process of heating and sonication was repeated once, and then the sample was diluted 10-fold with digestion buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 8, with 10% acetonitrile). Protein extracts were digested for 4 h with endoproteinase lysC, followed by the addition of trypsin for overnight digestion. The next day, booster digestion was performed using an additional dose of trypsin. After digestion, peptides were purified via SDB-RPS StageTips, eluted as either one or three fractions, and loaded for mass spectrometry analysis. Purified samples were loaded onto a 50-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed with 1.9-micron beads) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1700 m/z, and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Dynamic exclusion was enabled to minimize repeated sequencing of the same precursor ions. Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform. The peak list was searched against Human Uniprot databases, with an initial precursor and fragment tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match between the run feature was enabled, and proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant

### Data Protocol
Each MS experiment included three sample groups—one control and two stimuli (down-regulation by two different siRNAs)—each having three data points. Missing data points were generated by imputation, whereby we distinguished two cases. For completely missing proteins lacking any valid data points, imputed data points were randomly generated in the bottom tail of the whole proteomics distribution, following the strategy in the Perseus software (http://www.biochem.mpg.de/5111810/perseus). For proteins having at least one valid MS data point, missing data points were generated using the local least squares (LLS) imputation method. Gene-based quantile normalization was applied to homogenize the abundance distributions of each protein with respect to statistical properties. To identify which proteins were affected by Sec61α and TRAPβ knock-down in siRNA-treated cells, we log2-transformed the ratio between siRNA and control samples, and performed two separate t-tests for each siRNA against the control sample. The P value was corrected using a permutation false discovery rate (FDR) test. Proteins with an FDR-adjusted P value (i.e., q value) of below 5% were considered significantly affected by knock-down of the targeted proteins. The results from the two t-tests were then intersected for further analysis. All statistical analyses were performed using the R package SAM (http:www-stat-class.stanford.edu).

### Publication Abstract
In mammalian cells, one-third of all polypeptides are transported into or across the ER membrane via the Sec61 channel. While the Sec61 complex facilitates translocation of all polypeptides with amino-terminal signal peptides (SP) or transmembrane helices, the Sec61-auxiliary translocon-associated protein (TRAP) complex supports translocation of only a subset of precursors. To characterize determinants of TRAP substrate specificity, we here systematically identify TRAP-dependent precursors by analyzing cellular protein abundance changes upon TRAP depletion using quantitative label-free proteomics. The results are validated in independent experiments by western blotting, quantitative RT-PCR, and complementation analysis. The SPs of TRAP clients exhibit above-average glycine-plus-proline content and below-average hydrophobicity as distinguishing features. Thus, TRAP may act as SP receptor on the ER membrane's cytosolic face, recognizing precursor polypeptides with SPs of high glycine-plus-proline content and/or low hydrophobicity, and triggering substrate-specific opening of the Sec61 channel through interactions with the ER-lumenal hinge of Sec61&#x3b1;.

### Keywords
Hela cells, Ms, Sec61 complex, Er protein import, Trap complex

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie Universität des Saarlandes Gebäude 44 Kirrbergerstr. 100 66421 Homburg Deutschland   phone: +49 (0)6841 1626510 fax: +49 (0)6841 1626288

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Richard Zimmermann
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie Universität des Saarlandes Gebäude 44 Kirrbergerstr. 100 66421 Homburg Deutschland   phone: +49 (0)6841 1626510 fax: +49 (0)6841 1626288


