### Accession
PXD002000

### Title
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance to enrofloxacin in uropathogenic Escherichia coli in dog

### Description
Escherichia coli (E. coli) urinary tract infections (UTIs) are becoming a serious problem both for pets and humans (zoonosis) due to the close contact and to the increasing resistance to antibiotics. Great progress has been made in the discovery of novel antibiotics to counteract E. coli pathogens. However, this huge progress has been undercut by the evolution of bacteria in the way of drug resistance. Enrofloxacin is one of the most efficient antibiotics against E. coli pathogens and there is considerable evidence that documents how this microorganism is becoming more resistant to this antibiotic and is developing multidrug resistance. This study has been performed in order to unravel the mechanism of induced enrofloxacin resistance in canine E. coli isolates that represent a good tool to study this pathology. For a comprehensive investigation about antibiotic resistance mechanisms, an E. coli isolate from urinary tract infection (UTI) was induced to grow under a concentration of 10 µg/ml of enrofloxacin. Proteins represent the main contributors to the mechanisms involved in antibiotic resistance in bacteria. Their abundance profile provides reliable information about the mechanisms involved in this process. Three  biological replicates of control and resistant isolate have been analyzed both through 2D DIGE and shotgun proteomics. In our case, prior to perform the proteomics analysis, the screening with MS profiling of control and resistant isolates was performed highlighting the differences among strains and successfully clustering experimental strains according to PC analysis (PCA). The results clearly demonstrate differential profiles in peptide expression among clusters and between isolate and reference strain. According to these preliminary results, the protein profile of the resistant group was compared with the one of its sensitive counterpart by a proteomic analysis based on 2D-DIGE to separate proteins combined to MALDI MS analysis and database search to identify differentially expressed proteins. This analysis showed the modulation of 19 proteins between the two conditions. At the same time, another comparative proteomics investigation was also carried out by free-label nLC-MSE. This method has allowed the qualitative and quantitative analysis of total protein extracts of the two groups for the simultaneous screening of a larger number of proteins. A total of 57 differentially expressed proteins were identified and a comprehensive study on the proteins associated with enrofloxacin resistance was carried out. We classified these modulated proteins by their molecular functions and pathways where they are principally involved. This approach allowed to highlight some pathways that can be involved in an increased antibiotic resistance. Two major mechanisms were discovered. The first one was related to the stabilization of DNA structure through the up-regulation of Dsp protein. The second one was the downregulation of outer membrane protein W in order to reduce the membrane permeability to enrofloxacin. Discovered differentilally expressed proteins are principally involved in antibiotic resistance and linked to the oxidative stress response, to DNA protection and in membrane permeability. Moreover, since enrofloxacin is an inhibitor of DNA gyrase, the overexpression of DNA starvation/stationary phase protection protein (Dsp) could be a central point to discover the mechanism of this clone to counteract the effects of enrofloxacin. In parallel, the dramatic decrease of the synthesis of the outer membrane protein W, which represents one of the main gates for enrofloxacin entrance, could explain additional mechanism of E. coli defense against this antibiotic. The proteins differentially expressed could represent putative targets for the development of new strategies to counteract drug and multidrug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial isolation and characterization  Bacterial culture E. coli strain was chosen among the library of canine isolates from urine of dogs affected by cystitis. Briefly, 200 µl of urine sample were streaked onto blood agar plates (Oxoid, Italy) and incubated at 37°C for 18-24 h under aerobic condition. For induction of antibiotic resistance, bacterial cells of this isolate were cultured in Mueller-Hinton broth (Oxoid, Italy) with increasing enrofloxacin concentration up to 10 µg/ml. Three biological replicates of this isolate before enrofloxacin induction were grown in Mueller-Hinton broth (Oxoid, Italy) without antibiotic (sensible isolate) in order to have the control group (C). Three biological replicates were grown with 10 µg/ml of enrofloxacin (after resistance induction) in order to have the stable resistant group (E). Once the bacterial concentration of 1010 UFC/ml (n°5 McFarland standard; BioMériéux, France) was reached in each culture, cells were harvested through centrifugation at 3000 g for 15 min at 4° C. Cell pellet was washed 6 times in PBS and stored at -20° C up to protein extraction procedure.   Proteomics analysis Protein extraction About 50 mg of cellular pellet for each sample was collected. Cell pellets were washed three times in a cold washing solution containing 10mM tris and 1mM EDTA and then collected by centrifuge at 1500g for 5 minutes at 4°. 300 µl of a buffer solution (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 1% ASB-14) were added to each sample and solubilized by pipetting. Protein concentration was measured using Biorad Protein Assay kit and following manufacturer instructions.  2D DIGE All samples were adjusted to a protein concentration of 5 µg/µl and adjusted to pH 8,6. 2D DIGE kit (Amersham CyDye DIGE Fluor Kits, product code 25-8010-65) was used according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeling of the dyes was performed as described in table 1 of supplementary material. 150 µg of labeled proteins were loaded on a 24 cm 4-7 Ipg strip rehydrated ON with a final volume of 450µl of buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 1% ASB-14, 30mM DTT, 0,5% IPG Buffer, 0,01% Bromophenol blue) in dark. The isoelectric focusing was carried out in an IPG-Phor apparatus (GE) up to 80000 Vhr at a maximum voltage of 8000 V. After first dimension the strips were equilibrated in a buffer containing 6M urea, 2% SDS, 0,05 M TRIS, 20% glycerol, 1% DTT for 15 minutes and afterwards in the same buffer except with 2,5% iodoacetamide instead than DTT for other 15 minutes. The second dimension (Ettan DALTsix electrophoresis unit) was carried out in 12% acrylamide gel at a constant power of 1W per gel.  Protein identification from two-dimensional electrophoresis gel After steps of dehydration, reduction and alkylation, single spots were digested with a solution of 0.01 μg/μl of porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 16h.  Peptides were concentrated using C18 ZipTip (Millipore) and then were spotted on a Ground Steel plate (Bruker-Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The MS analysis was performed on a Ultraflex III MALDI-TOF/TOF spectrometer (Bruker- Daltonics) in positive reflectron mode. For the external calibration, the standard peptide mixture calibration (Bruker-Daltonics: m/z: 1046.5418, 1296.6848, 1347.7354, 1619.8223, 2093.0862, 2465.1983, 3147.4710) was used.  Expression Analysis by nLC-MSE.  Briefly, protein extracts of six samples were precipitated with a cold mix of Ethanol, Methanol, and Acetone (ratio 2:1:1, v/v), then dissolved in 6 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 and digested 50:1 (w⁄w) with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight. After reduction with 10 mM DTT and alkylation with 20 mM IAA.  Separation of tryptic peptides and subsequent qualitative and quantitative nLC-MSE analysis were performed by nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Tof Premier mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Manchester, U.K.).  An amount of 100 fmol /μl of digestion of Enolase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae was added to each sample as internal standard, then a final concentration of 0.6 μg of protein digestion were loaded on column for peptides separation. Peptides were loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μmx20 mm precolumn (Waters Corp.) and subsequently separated by a 170 min reversed phase gradient at 250 nL/min (3–40% CH3CN over 145 min) using a NanoEase BEH C18 1.7 μm, 75 μmX25 cm nanoscale LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 35 °C.  The Q-Tof Premier mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system operated in ‘‘Expression Mode’’ switching between low (4 eV) and high (15-40 eV) collision energies on the gas cell, using a scan time of 1.5 s per function over 50-1990 m/z. The processing of low and elevated energy, added to the data of the reference lock mass, provides a time-aligned inventory of accurate mass-retention time components for both the low and elevated-energy (EMRT, exact mass retention time).

### Data Protocol
Image analysis and statistical analysis  Image acquisition was performed with a Typhoon apparatus (GE) following manufacturer protocol. Briefly, the first scan of each gel of each dye was performed at 500 µm in order to set the DMT value to achieve a similar target value between 50000 and 80000 and within 15000 from each other. The final scan for each dye was performed at 100 µm. Image files in .gel format were analyzed through 2D DIGE module of SamaSpots software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Spots with a p value lower than 0,05 and a fold change higher than 2 were taken into consideration for further mass spectrometry analysis and protein identification. Micropreparative 2D electrophoresis for spot cutting was carried out loading 600 micrograms of protein sample in a 24 cm, pH 4-7 IPG strip (focusing protocol: passive rehydration, 100v/6h, 300V/4h, 8000V/6h, 8000V/90000VhT). The second dimension was carried out as for the DIGE procedure. The matching was also done with SameSpots software and spots were manually excised.  Protein identification from two-dimensional electrophoresis gel To select monoisotopic peptide masses, mass spectra were analyzed with FlexAnalysis 3.3 software (Bruker-Daltonics).  After an internal calibration (known autolysis peaks of trypsin, m/z: 842.509 and 2211.104) and exclusion of contaminant ions (known matrix and human keratin peaks), the created peak lists were analyzed by MASCOT v.2.3.0 algorithm (www.matrixscience.com) against SwissProt 2014_10 database restricted to Escherichia coli taxonomy (22993 sequences). For database search these parameters were estabilished: carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation on methionines was set respectively among fixed and variable modifications, one missed cleavage site was set for trypsin and maximal tolerance was estabilished at 70 ppm. For protein identification assignment only Mascot scores higher than 56 were considered significant (p<0.05). To confirm the identification obtained, and MS/MS spectra were acquired switching  the instrument  in LIFT mode with 4– 8×103 laser shots using the instrument calibration file. For the fragmentation, precursor ions were manually selected and the precursor mass window was automatically set. For each MSMS spectra acquired, spectra baseline subtraction, smoothing (Savitsky–Golay), and centroiding were operated using Flex-Analysis 3.3 software. These parameters have been used for database search: among fixed and variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation on methionine was set respectively , maximum of one missed cleavage was estabilished, the mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm for precursor ions and to a maximum of 0. 5 Da for fragments. The taxonomy was restricted to Escherichia coli (22993 sequences). The confidence interval for protein identification was set to 95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified.  Expression Analysis by nLC-MSE.   Each sample was run in four technical replicates.  For qualitative and quantitative analysis, LC-MS data from four replicates experiments for each six samples were processed using ProteinLynx GlobalServer v.3.0.1 (PLGS, Waters Corporation). Protein identifications were obtained with the embedded ion accounting algorithm of the software searching into UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Escherichia coli database release 2013_12 (25 245 entries) to which the sequence of enolase (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot AC: P00924) was appended. These search parameters were set: automatic tolerance for precursor ions and for product ions, minimum 3 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum 7 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum 2 peptide matched per protein, 1 missed cleavage, carbamydomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines as fixed and variable modifications, false positive rate (FPR) of the identification algorithm under 4% and 100 fmol of the enolase internal standard set as calibration protein concentration. The most reproducible proteotypic peptides for retention time and intensity of enolase digestion (m/z 745.43; m/z 814.49; m/z 1288.70; m/z 1416.72; m/z 1578.80, m/z 1840.89) were used to normalize the EMRTs table. The expression analysis was performed considering 12 technical replicates available for each experimental condition (i.e., one experimental condition, control and enrofloxacin resistant group, × three biological replicates × four technical replicates) following the hypothesis that each group is an independent variable. The list of normalized proteins was screened according to the following criteria: protein identified in at least 3 out of 4 runs of the same sample with a fold change of regulation higher than +/- 20%; We considered significant only modulated proteins with a 0 < P < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Escherichia coli (E. coli) urinary tract infections (UTIs) are becoming a serious problem both for pets and humans (zoonosis) due to the close contact and to the increasing resistance to antibiotics. This study has been performed in order to unravel the mechanism of induced enrofloxacin resistance in canine E. coli isolates that represent a good tool to study this pathology. The isolated E. coli has been induced with enrofloxacin and studied through 2D DIGE and shotgun MS. Discovered differentially expressed proteins are principally involved in antibiotic resistance and linked to oxidative stress response, to DNA protection and to membrane permeability. Moreover, since enrofloxacin is an inhibitor of DNA gyrase, the overexpression of DNA starvation/stationary phase protection protein (Dsp) could be a central point to discover the mechanism of this clone to counteract the effects of enrofloxacin. In parallel, the dramatic decrease of the synthesis of the outer membrane protein W, which represents one of the main gates for enrofloxacin entrance, could explain additional mechanism of E. coli defense against this antibiotic. All 2D DIGE and MS data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifier PXD002000 and DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.6019/PXD002000. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: HUPO 2014.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Antibiotic resistance, Urinary tract infections, Enrofloxacin

### Affiliations
DIVET, Università degli studi di Milano
1. Istitituto Sperimentale Italiano L. Spallanzani,Milano, Italy; 2. Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie e Sanità Pubblica, Università degli Studi  di Milano, Milano, Italy.

### Submitter
Paola Roncada

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Roncada
1. Istitituto Sperimentale Italiano L. Spallanzani,Milano, Italy; 2. Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie e Sanità Pubblica, Università degli Studi  di Milano, Milano, Italy.


