### Accession
PXD014400

### Title
Insoluble fraction_Heat stress_S.pombe LC-MSMS

### Description
We have carried out proteomic studies to identify the thermo-unstable proteome fraction in fission yeast.  We have performed biochemical separation of pellet fractions by centrifugation of whole cell extracts from wild-type cultures grown at different temperatures, and performed untagged liquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) of biological triplicates. We demonstrate that formation of protein aggregates during heat shock is a chaperone-mediated adaptation strategy which occurs with thermo-unstable endogenous proteins as well.

### Sample Protocol
Biological triplicates of pellet fractions of 250 ml cultures (OD600 0.5) grown in MM at 30°C, 37°C or 42°C were obtained using a Precellys cell disrupter (Bertin Technologies) to lyse the cell suspensions.  10 µg of each pellet fraction were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM, 37ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (5 µmol, 25ºC, 20 min).  The resulting protein extract was washed with 2 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n) and then for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega).  After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark).  Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 12-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 4 minutes and gradually increased to 5% buffer B and 95% buffer A in 1 min and to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min.  After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 90% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile).  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2 kV and source temperature at 200°C.  The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.  Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5, dynamic exclusion (90 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top ten most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation.  Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 30 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.1.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science).  The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot Schizosaccharomyces pombe reference proteome database (as in June 2019) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (Beer et al, 2017).  For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed.  The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra.  Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification.  Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC).  The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p- and q-values

### Publication Abstract
Cells have developed protein quality-control strategies to manage the accumulation of misfolded substrates during heat stress. Using a soluble reporter of misfolding in fission yeast, Rho1.C17R-GFP, we demonstrate that upon mild heat shock, the reporter collapses in protein aggregate centers (PACs). They contain and/or require several chaperones, such as Hsp104, Hsp16, and the Hsp40/70 couple Mas5/Ssa2. Stress granules do not assemble at mild temperatures and, therefore, are not required for PAC formation; on the contrary, PACs may serve as nucleation centers for the assembly of stress granules. In contrast to the general belief, the dominant fate of these PACs is not degradation, and the aggregated reporter can be disassembled by chaperones and recovers native structure and activity. Using mass spectrometry, we show that thermo-unstable endogenous proteins form PACs as well. In conclusion, formation of PACs during heat shock is a chaperone-mediated adaptation strategy.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Aggregates, S. pombe, Insoluble protein, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Oxidative Stress and Cell Cycle Group, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, C/ Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Susanna Boronat

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Hidalgo
Oxidative Stress and Cell Cycle Group, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, C/ Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


