### Accession
PXD005667

### Title
Quantitative metaproteomics and activity-based probe enrichment on fecal samples from a mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease

### Description
Tandem mass spectrometry based shotgun proteomics of distal gut microbiomes is exceedingly difficult due to the inherent complexity and taxonomic diversity of the samples. We introduce two new methodologies to improve metaproteomic studies of microbiome samples. These methods include the stable isotope labeling in mammals to permit protein quantitation across the two mouse cohorts, as well as the application of activity-based probes to enrich and analyze both host and microbial proteins with specific functionalities. We used these technologies to study the microbiota from the adoptive T cell transfer mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and compare these samples to an isogenic control; thereby, limiting genetic and environmental variables that influence microbiome composition.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation protocol for “unenriched” samples: Pooled fecal samples were thawed in 3 mL of cold PBS and vigorously vortexed to break up fecal pellets and insoluble fecal matter was removed. The fecal solution containing suspended bacterial cells was aliquoted into 1 mL fractions. Fractions were pelleted (6,500xg, 15 min, 4 °C), washed twice with cold PBS, and suspended into 450 µL of lysis buffer consisting of 0.1% Triton-X 100 in PBS and Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail. Samples were lysed via sonication in a Qsonica Q700 sonicator at 4 °C for 15 min. Insoluble cellular material was removed via centrifugation (10,000xg, 5 min, 4 °C) and the remaining soluble protein concentration was measured via BCA assay. Prepared soluble microbiome samples from RAG-/- control and IBD mice were mixed 1:1 in aliquots containing 50 µg each 14N and 15N labeled proteome. The proteomic content was precipitated with 30% w/v of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and stored at 4 °C overnight. The microbiome proteome was pelleted (21,000xg, 20 min, 4 °C) and washed twice with -80 °C acetone prior to trypsin digestion to generate peptides for LC-MS/MS data collection.  Fecal microbiome preparation with BioGlyCMK probe labeling for “enriched” samples: 50 mg of RAG-/- (14N) and IBD (15N) mouse bacterial pellets derived from fecal matter (isolated and washed as described above) were resuspended in PBS and mixed in a 1:1 ratio in a total volume of 500 µL. The combined samples were subjected to labeling with 100 µM BioGlyCMK probe (1% DMSO for unlabeled controls) and incubated overnight at 4 °C under light agitation. Bacteria were pelleted (6,500xg, 15 min, 4 °C), washed 2x with 1 mL PBS to remove unreacted probe, and resuspended in 450 µL of PBS with 0.1% SDS. Samples were lysed via sonication in a Qsonica Q700 sonicator at 4 °C for 15 min. Proteins were denatured via dilution with 500 µL of 2% SDS in PBS followed by heating at 95 °C for 15 min. Denatured samples were diluted with 4 mL PBS (0.2% SDS) and incubated with 100 µL of high capacity streptavidin agarose beads overnight at room temperature. Beads were pelleted (500xg, 2 min) and subjected to extensive washing with 0.2% SDS in PBS (1x), PBS (3x), and ultrapure water (3x) prior to trypsin digestion.  Microbiome protein trypsin digestion “Unenriched” and “Enriched” samples were resuspended and denatured in 60 µL of 8 M urea, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0, introduced to 1 µL of 300 mM TCEP to reduce all disulfide bonds, and agitated for 20 min at 25 °C. The reduced thiols were then alkylated via addition of 7 µL 500 mM 2-chloroacetamide and incubated with gentle agitation for 15 min at 25 °C while protected from light. Following alkylation, samples were diluted with 180 µL of 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0 to reduce the urea concentration to less than 2 M. General proteomic digestion was performed by addition of 2.5 µg of trypsin to each sample in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2 and incubation overnight at 37 °C. “Unenriched” samples were quenched with 13 µL of formic acid, centrifuged (21,000xg, 20 min) and the supernatant was stored at -20 °C. BioGlyCMK-enriched samples were filtered via spin column (100xg, 1 min) and the beads were washed twice with 50 µL ultrapure H2O. Filtrates were combined and acidified with 17 µL of formic acid, centrifuged (21,000xg, 20 min), and the supernatant was stored at -20°C. Preparation of MudPIT LC column  Trypsin-digested peptides were loaded onto a biphasic MudPIT column (250 µm fused silica (Agilent), paced with 2.5 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18 resin followed by 2.5 cm of Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX)). An analytical column was prepared from 100 µm fused silica pulled to a 5 µm tip by a micropipette puller (Sutter Instrument Company, Model P-2000). This column was then pressure loaded with 12 cm of 3 µm Aqua C18 resin.  LC-MS/MS MudPIT data collection Standard MudPIT tandem mass spectrometry was performed using a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. The sample and analytical columns were joined by a zero dead volume union (Waters). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using an 11-step MudPIT program. Each step began with 1 minute of 100% Buffer A (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), a 4-min salt pulse with x% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate, 95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), then 5 min 100% buffer A, followed by a 105 min gradient from 5-65% buffer B (20% H2O, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and finally 5 min of 100% buffer A. The 4-minute buffer C salt pulses (x) were as follows: 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 80%, 100% with the final pulse consisting of 90% buffer C and 10% buffer B. Precursor ions were recorded by scanning in the range of m/z 400.00-1800.00 with the FTMS analyzer and a resolution of 60,000. The top 8 peaks were selected for fragmentation using HCD with normalized collision energy set to 35.0. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with exclusion duration set to 60.0 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification with ComPIL Precursor and fragmentation ion data were extracted from the Xcalibur RAW files via rawXtract 1.9.9.2 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17) in the MS1 and MS2 file formats. The MS2 spectra were scored with Blazmass 0.9993 against peptides of the Comprehensive Protein Identification Library (ComPIL) database, containing over 80 million proteins from multiple microbial database sources as well as human, mouse, and plant proteins. Both Blazmass and ComPIL source code are open source (https://github.com/sandipchatterjee/blazmass_compil). Settings for peptide scoring included: 1) a variable modification of oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da), 2) a static modification for alkylated cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da), and 3) a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 50 ppm tolerance for fragmentation ions. Filtering was performed using DTASelect 2.1.3 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17), requiring 2 peptides per protein and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with respect to proteins. The following parameters were used for filtering when run from the command line: “--quiet --brief --trypstat --modstat -y 2 -DM 10 --extra --dm --pfp 0.01 -p 2”. Samples containing a mixture of 14N and 15N peptides for ratio quantification were searched against a ComPIL database consisting of 14N and then 15N-labeled peptides. DTASelect filtering was performed on each search individually as well as the combined results, producing 3 outputs for several downstream bioinformatic analyses. Peptide and protein quantification The 14N/15N ratio of each peptide was quantified using the program Census (available on the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2), http://goldfish.scripps.edu/). Census uses the results of DTASelect filtering along with the extracted MS1 spectral data to both determine the isotopic enrichment within a sample and to calculate the 14N/15N isotopic ratio for each identified peptide within one LC-MS/MS data collection experiment. Enrichment calculations were performed on filtered results searched only against the 14N database. Census quantification on the combined 14N/15N filtering results file was performed with the default settings for 15N ratio quantification in high-resolution, including a 15 ppm tolerance for isotope extraction. Census filtering parameters were modified to disable iterative outlier analysis and exclude outliers with a p-value >0.05. The median of the peptide ratios was centered to 1 via division by the inverse log of the median of the log-transformed ratios. Protein loci ratios were determined by computing a weighted ratio of the associated peptides, weighted by the regression factor (r), a value determined by Census to describe the confidence in ratio quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry based shotgun proteomics of distal gut microbiomes is exceedingly difficult due to the inherent complexity and taxonomic diversity of the samples. We introduce two new methodologies to improve metaproteomic studies of microbiome samples. These methods include the stable isotope labeling in mammals to permit protein quantitation across two mouse cohorts as well as the application of activity-based probes to enrich and analyze both host and microbial proteins with specific functionalities. We used these technologies to study the microbiota from the adoptive T cell transfer mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and compare these samples to an isogenic control, thereby limiting genetic and environmental variables that influence microbiome composition. The data generated highlight quantitative alterations in both host and microbial proteins due to intestinal inflammation and corroborates the observed phylogenetic changes in bacteria that accompany IBD in humans and mouse models. The combination of isotope labeling with shotgun proteomics resulted in the total identification of 4434 protein clusters expressed in the microbial proteomic environment, 276 of which demonstrated differential abundance between control and IBD mice. Notably, application of a novel cysteine-reactive probe uncovered several microbial proteases and hydrolases overrepresented in the IBD mice. Implementation of these methods demonstrated that substantial insights into the identity and dysregulation of host and microbial proteins altered in IBD can be accomplished and can be used in the interrogation of other microbiome-related diseases.

### Keywords
Silam, Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Lc-msms, Metaproteomics, Activity-based probes, Mudpit, Microbiome

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, USA

### Submitter
Mike Mayers

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis W. Wolan
Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, USA


