### Accession
PXD010159

### Title
A human endogenous retrovirus encoded protease potentially cleaves numerous cellular proteins

### Description
The human genome consists of considerable portions derived from retroviruses typically inherited already for millions of years. So-called human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are usually severely mutated, yet some coding-competent HERV sequences exist. The HERV-K(HML-2) group includes evolutionarily young proviruses that still encode typical retroviral proteins. HERV-K(HML-2) has been implicated in various human diseases because transcription is often upregulated and encoded proteins are known to affect cell biology. HERV-K(HML-2) protease has received little attention so far. With findings for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) protease in mind we set out to identify human cellular proteins being substrates of HERV-K(HML-2) protease employing a modified Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) procedure. Thousands of significantly processed human proteins were revealed by TAILS and we could verify cleavage of a majority of selected human proteins in vitro. Our analysis suggests that hundreds, if not thousands of cellular proteins are potential substrates of HERV-K(HML-2) protease. As identified proteins participate in diverse, often disease-relevant cellular processes, it is conceivable that expression of HERV-K(HML-2) protease has functional consequences for cell biology and thus development of human diseases. Endogenous retrovirus-encoded protease may also be relevant for disease development in species other than human.

### Sample Protocol
TAILS was performed as described previously (Kleifeld, Doucet et al. 2010; Shahinian, Loessner et al. 2014; Tholen, Biniossek et al. 2014). Briefly, 2.0 mg of cell lysate per condition was used and the N-termini were blocked with either heavy or light formaldehyde, and then mixed in a 1:1 ratio. After tryptic digest samples were desalted using a reversed phase C18 column, internal peptides were captured by the HPG-ALD polymer. Non-bound, N-terminal peptides were collected by ultrafiltration, prefractionated by SCX as described above, and analyzed by LC–MS/MS. For mass spectrometry analysis, a Q−Exactive plus system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl / min each. Buffer A was 0.5 % formic acid, and buffer B was 0.5 % formic acid in 100 % acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5 – 40 % acetonitrile in 80 min). The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific), 2 µm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, length 150 mm, I.D. 50 μM. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode with a top 10 method at a mass range of 300 − 2000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data in raw format was converted to the mzXML format (Pedrioli, Eng et al. 2004) using msconvert (Kessner, Chambers et al. 2008) with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data, and deisotoping of MS2 data. Peptide sequences were identified by X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) (Craig and Beavis 2004) using the human reviewed canonical Uniprot sequences (without isoforms) together with an equal number of randomized decoy sequences, generated by DBtoolkit (Martens, Vandekerckhove et al. 2005). Semi Arg-C specificity with up to three missed cleavage sites was applied. Static modifications were (+57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde + 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde + 34.06 Da). The relative quantification (fold changes) for each peptide was calculated using XPRESS algorithm (Han, Eng et al. 2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protease, N-terminomics

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
PD Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Fellow Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
PD Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Fellow Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de


