### Accession
PXD032302

### Title
FIP-fve stimulates cell proliferation and enhances IL-2 release by activating MAP2K3/p38α（MAPK14）signaling pathway in Jurkat E6-1 cells

### Description
FIP-fve, a fungal fruiting body protein from Flammulina velutipes, has potential immunomodulatory properties. Here, we investigated the immunomodulation mechanism of FIP-fve in Jurkat E6-1 cells by conducting cell viability assay and IL-2 release assay. Kinase inhibitors experiment and proteomics analysis were also involved in the mechanism study. It was found that FIP-fve stimulated cell proliferation and enhanced IL-2 secretion in a dose-dependent manner in Jurkat E6-1 cells. Unbiased high-throughput proteomics analysis showed that 4 T cell immune activation markers including ZAP-70, CD69, CD82 and KIF23 were upregulated in response to FIP-fve treatment. Further pathway analysis indicated that MAP2K3/p38 pathway related proteins including MAP2K, p38, ELK, AATF, FOS, and JUN-B were unregulated. In addition, losmapimod (p38 inhibitor) and gossypetin (MAP2K3 inhibitor) inhibited FIP-fve enhanced cell proliferation and IL-2 release in Jurkat E6-1 cells. Our results demonstrate that FIP-fve stimulates cell proliferation and enhances IL-2 secretion through MAP2K3/ p38α activation.

### Sample Protocol
After treated with FIP-fve for 24 hours, Jurkat E6-1 cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer (Solarbio, China) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, USA), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma, USA), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (Sigma, USA) by ultra-sonication on ice bath for 3 min. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA Protein Assay kit (Shanghai EpiZyme Biotechnology, China). The protein was enzymolyzed and labeled with TMT reagent according to FASP[24] before being sent to Shanghai Luming Biotechnology Co., Ltd. China for Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT™) proteomic analysis. Reverse phase (RP) separation was performed on an 1100HPLC System (Agilent, USA) equipped with an Agilent Zorbax Extend RP column (5 μm, 150 mm × 2.1 mm). The mobile phase was composed of 2% acetonitrile in water (solvent A) and 98% acetonitrile in water (solvent B). The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min in the following gradients: 8 min, 98% A; 8.01 min, 95% A; 28 min, 75% A; 50 min, 60% A; 50.01 min, 10% A; 60 min, 10% A; 60.01 min, 98% A; 65 min, 98% A. The injection volume was 1 μL. PDA was set at 210 and 280 nm. The samples were harvested from 8 min to 50 min, and elution buffer was collected in 10 centrifuge tubes every minute and was numbered. The separated peptides were lyophilized for MS detection. All analyses were performed by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo, USA). The samples were loaded and separated by a C-18 column (75 μm × 150 nm, 2 μm, 100 A, Dionex, USA) on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo, USA). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the linear gradient lasted 90 min (0-55 min, 8% B; 55-79 min, 30% B; 79-80 min, 50% B; 80-90 min, 100% B; mobile phase A = 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B = 80% ACN/0.1% FA in water). Full MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300-1600 m/z with a mass resolution of 70000, and the AGC target value was set at 1 × 106. The ten most intense MS peaks were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an NCE of 32 MS/MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 2 × 105 and a max infection time of 8 ms. The Q-E dynamic exclusion was set at 30.0 s and run under positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Database Search Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2) was used to thoroughly search all of the Q Exactive raw data against the sample protein database. Database searches were performed with trypsin digestion specificity. Cysteine alkylation was considered a fixed modification in the database search. For the protein quantification method, TMT6-plex was selected. The global false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01, and the protein groups considered for quantification required at least 2 peptides. Xcalibur 2.1 data processing software was used for FIP-fve characteristic mass spectrometry identification; Proteome Discoverer TM 2.2 software was used for cell proteomics experimental data analysis; and the UniProt human database was used. The false positive rate of peptide identification was less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>FIP-fve</i>, a fungal fruiting body protein from <i>Flammulina velutipes</i>, has potential immunomodulatory properties. Here, we investigated the immunomodulation mechanism of <i>FIP-fve</i> in Jurkat E6-1 cells by conducting a cell viability assay and IL-2 release assay. Kinase inhibitors experiment and proteomics analysis were also involved in the mechanism study. It was found that <i>FIP-fve</i> stimulated cell proliferation and enhanced IL-2 secretion in a dose-dependent manner in Jurkat E6-1 cells. Unbiased high-throughput proteomics analysis showed that 4 T cell immune activation markers, including ZAP-70, CD69, CD82, and KIF23, were upregulated in response to <i>FIP-fve</i> treatment. Further pathway analysis indicated that MAP2K3/p38 pathway-related proteins, including MAP2K, p38, ELK, AATF, FOS, and JUN-B, were unregulated. In addition, losmapimod (p38 inhibitor) and gossypetin (MAP2K3 inhibitor) inhibited <i>FIP-fve</i> enhanced cell proliferation and IL-2 release in Jurkat E6-1 cells. Our results demonstrate that <i>FIP-fve</i> stimulates cell proliferation and enhances IL-2 secretion through MAP2K3/p38&#x3b1; activation.

### Keywords
Fip-fve, Immunomodulation mechanism, Map2k3/p38α, Il-2, Proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
Institute for Agri-food Standards & Testing Technology, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
kefei GU

### Lab Head
Dr Kefei GU
Institute for Agri-food Standards & Testing Technology, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, China


