### Accession
PXD021543

### Title
Flavonol-mediated stabilization of efflux complexes regulates polar auxin transport

### Description
The transport of auxin controls the rate, direction and localization of plant growth and development. The course of auxin transport is defined by the polar subcellular localization of the PIN proteins, a family of auxin efflux transporters. Using blue native PAGE and quantitative mass spectrometry, we identify native PIN core transport units as homo- and heteromers assembled from PIN1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 subunits only.  To identify the protein composition of the larger, low stringency-solubilized PIN assembly we affinity-purified GFP-fused PIN proteins from Arabidopsis roots after expression from their native promoters and after the induction of discrete lateral roots, and analyzed the captured proteins by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
120 mg of roots were harvested for each purification and homogenized in 1.4 ml ice cold Tris-HCl saline buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8) containing complete protease inhibitors in a glass potter on ice before centrifugation for 30 minutes at 150,000 x g. The membrane pellet was resuspended in 640µl ml Tris-HCl saline buffer containing detergent (ComplexioLyte 47 for DARPIN-anti-GFP, 1.5% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM)) and solubilized for one hour at 7°C with rotation. Samples were then once more centrifuged for 30 minutes at 150,000 x g. Affinity purification used 50µl µMACS-anti GFP or streptavidin beads (Miltenyi Biotec; for biotin-DARPIN. Samples were incubated with beads for 90 minutes at 7°C with rotation before the mixture was applied to a column pre-equilibrated with Tris-HCl saline buffer containing 1% Triton 100 (w/v). Columns were then washed six times with 200µl homogenisation buffer containing 1:10 diluted Complexiolyte 47 or 0.1% DDM (w/v), then 1x with 100µl wash buffer 2 (Miltenyi Biotech). Proteins were eluted with 80µl Laemmli buffer. Samples for LC-MS/MS analysis were prepared and measured as previously described (Schwenk et al., 2014). Briefly, proteins eluted from APs were shortly run on SDS-PAGE gels, silver-stained, and lanes were cut into two sections (> and < 50 kDa MW). In-gel digestion with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) was carried out following a standard procedure (Pandey et al., 2000). Extracted peptides were vacuum-dried and redissolved in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 µm particles; Thermo Scientific) with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (20µl/min for 5 min) and separated by reversed phase chromatography via a 10 cm C18 column (PicoTip™ Emitter, 75 µm, tip: 8 µm, New Objective, self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch HPLC; flow rate 300 nl/min) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Aqueous organic elution gradient (eluent “A”: 0.5% acetic acid; eluent “B” 0.5% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile): “A”/”B” gradient: 5 min 3% B, 60 min from 3% B to 30% B, 15 min from 30% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B). Sensitive and high-resolution MS-analyses were carried out on an Orbitrap Elite / Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (both Thermo Scientific). Precursor signals (LC-MS) were acquired with a target value of 1,000,000 / 500,000) and a nominal resolution of 240,000 / 60,000 (FWHM) at m/z 400; scan range 370 to 1700 m/z. Up to ten / five data-dependent CID fragment ion spectra (isolation width 1.0 m/z with wideband activation) per scan cycle were allowed in the ion trap with a target value of 10,000 (maximum injection time 200 / 400 ms for affinity purifications and 400 ms for PIN fusion protein standard) with dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration 30 s; exclusion mass width ± 20 ppm), preview mode for FTMS master scans, charge state screening, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state rejection all enabled.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were extracted using ProteoWizard’s “msconvert” (version 3.0.6906). Peak lists were searched against a combined Arabidopsis database using Mascot 2.6.0 (Matrix Science, UK). Preliminary searches with high peptide mass tolerance (± 50 ppm) were used for linear shift mass recalibration using in-house developed software. Final searches were carried out with ± 5 ppm and ± 0.8 Da for precursor m/z and fragment ion spectra, respectively. One missed trypsin cleavage and common variable modifications including S/T/Y phosphorylation were accepted for peptide identification. Significance threshold was set to p < 0.05. Proteins identified by only one specific MS/MS spectrum or representing exogenous contaminations such as trypsin, keratins or immunoglobulins were eliminated.  Label-free quantification of proteins was based on peak volumes (PVs = peptide m/z signal intensities integrated over time) of peptide features extracted with MaxQuant v1.4 with integrated effective mass calibration. Features were then aligned between different LC-MS/MS runs and assigned directly or indirectly to identified peptides with retention time tolerance ± 1 min and mass tolerance ± 1.5 ppm using in-house developed software. Resulting peptide PV data was used for estimation of absolute abundance (abundancenormspec values, calculated as the sum of all protein-specific peptide PVs divided by the number of protein-specific amino acids from the respective protein sequence accessible to MS analysis under the conditions used) and for determination of (co)purification specificity (protein ratios, rPV) using the TopCorr method (median of at least 2–6 individual peptide PV ratios of the best correlating protein-specific peptides (Bildl et al., 2012)). Proteins were considered specifically co-purified when their rPV (from root tissue expressing the respective GFT-tagged target versus root tissue expressing a GFP control (GFP-LTi6) exceeded a critical threshold (between 10 and 20) determined from respective rPV histograms). Primary results were further scrutinized by manual inspection of their PV values and their consistency in different APs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Auxin transport, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany
University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Haupt

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernd Fakler
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany


