### Accession
PXD046207

### Title
TMT-based proteomics analysis of optic nerve lysates from oligodendrocyte-specific Kir4.1 knockout mice

### Description
To study the role oligodendroglial Kir4.1 in regulating axonal energy metabolism, oligodendrocyte-specific Kir4.1 knockout mice and their littermate controls were used; optic nerve lysates were prepared for subsequent TMT-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT-based quantitative proteomics was conducted by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). Protein concentrations were determined using the Lunatic UV/Vis polychromatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). Samples were processed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). Samples were mixed with ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes, transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 120 minutes of incubation at 37 °C, the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of ‘Stop’ solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted and dried. 800 µg TMT10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110) was dissolved in 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and added to the peptides in 100 µl of 50mM TEAB, pH 8.5. The solution was gently mixed and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The combined TMT sample was created by mixing equal amounts of each TMT channel together. Labeled peptides were offline pre-fractionated using high pH reveres phase chromatography. With an 80 min linear gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile 9 mM NH4HCO2, peptides were separated on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 1 mm X 100 mm, Waters). Every minute a new fraction was collected and concatenated to 8 final fractions. These fractions were dried down and resuspended in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonirile for channel B. For each sample 0.6Abs (280nm) of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After an initial hold at 5% B for 3 min, a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 80 min and 32% B in 10 min was applied. The column was washed with 95% B for 10 min and afterwards the column was re-equilibrated to starting conditions for additional 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (375−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 400’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.7 Da and HCD fragmentation with 38% fragmentation energy. The Orbitrap was operated at 50’000 resolution with a target value of 100’000 and a maximum injection time of 105 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 50’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) (LIMS; Türker et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4), followed by protein identification using the integrated Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against the mus musculus reference proteome (downloaded from UniProt, 20190709), concatenated with common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation (C), TMT (+229.163Da; peptide N-term and K) were set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. PD default tolerance settings were applied. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides was set to 0.01. For reporter ion quantification the integration tolerance was 20 ppm for the most confident peak. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the Protein output. A set of functions implemented in the R package prolfqua (Wolski et al., 2021)was used to filter for proteins with two or more peptides. To normalize the data, we used a modified robust z-score transformation, which preserves the original variance of the data. To determine differences, we fitted the linear model to every protein, computed contrasts and moderated the variance, t-statistics, and p-values (Ritchie et al., 2015). False discovery rates were determined from p-values using Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment.

### Publication Abstract
The integrity of myelinated axons relies on homeostatic support from oligodendrocytes (OLs). To determine how OLs detect axonal spiking and how rapid axon-OL metabolic coupling is regulated in the white matter, we studied activity-dependent calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) and metabolite fluxes in the mouse optic nerve. We show that fast axonal spiking triggers Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling and glycolysis in OLs. OLs detect axonal activity through increases in extracellular potassium (K<sup>+</sup>) concentrations and activation of Kir4.1 channels, thereby regulating metabolite supply to axons. Both pharmacological inhibition and OL-specific inactivation of Kir4.1 reduce the activity-induced axonal lactate surge. Mice lacking oligodendroglial Kir4.1 exhibit lower resting lactate levels and altered glucose metabolism in axons. These early deficits in axonal energy metabolism are associated with late-onset axonopathy. Our findings reveal that OLs detect fast axonal spiking through K<sup>+</sup> signaling, making acute metabolic coupling possible and adjusting the axon-OL metabolic unit to promote axonal health.

### Keywords
Optic nerve, Lc-msms, Mouse, Oligodendrocytes, Kir4.1 knockout, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich, Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology

### Submitter
Aiman Saab

### Lab Head
Dr Aiman Saab
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Switzerland


