### Accession
PXD033102

### Title
Light Quality Modulates Plant Cold Response and Freezing Tolerance

### Description
The cold acclimation process is regulated by many factors like ambient temperature, day length, light intensity, or hormonal status. Experiments with plants grown under different light-quality conditions indicate that the plant response to cold is also a light-quality-dependent process. Here, the role of light quality in the cold response was studied in one-month-old Arabidopsis thaliana (Col‐0) plants exposed for one week to 4 °C at short‐day conditions under white (100 and 20 μmol m‐2s‐1), blue or red (20 μmol m‐2s‐1) light conditions. An upregulated expression of CBF1, an inhibition of photosynthesis, and an increase in membrane damage showed that blue light enhanced the effect of low temperature. Interestingly, cold-treated plants under blue and red light showed only limited freezing tolerance compared to white light cold-treated plants. Next, the specificity of the light quality signal in cold response was evaluated in Arabidopsis accessions originating from different and contrasting latitudes. In all but one Arabidopsis accessions, blue light increased the effect of cold on photosynthetic parameters and electrolyte leakage. This effect was not found for Ws-0, which lacks functional CRY2 protein, indicating its role in the cold response. Proteomics data confirmed significant differences between red and blue light treated plants at low temperature and showed that the cold response is highly accession specific. In general, blue light increased mainly the cold-stress related proteins and red light induced higher expression of chloroplast-related proteins, which correlated with higher photosynthetic parameters in red light cold-treated plants. Altogether, our data suggest that light modulates two distinct mechanisms during the cold treatment - red light driven cell function maintaining program and blue light activated specific cold response. The importance of mutual complementarity of these mechanisms was demonstrated by significantly higher freezing tolerance of cold-treated plants under white light.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as described by Valledor et al. (2014), then portions of samples corresponding to 5 μg peptide were analysed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the Araport 11 protein database following Berková et al. (2020). Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phytophthora infestans; late blight; resistance; proteome; metabolome; lipidome; resistance markers;

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ


