### Accession
PXD007624

### Title
Human aqueous humor of Primary open angle glaucoma  LC-MS/MS

### Description
The main objective of this study was to adopt discovery based approach and define quantitative expression of human AH samples of glaucoma (N= 5) and non-glaucoma subjects (N=5) by using a state-of-the-art high performance liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry, to establish the relative regulation of AH proteome in glaucomatous eye and affected cellular pathways, and their correlation with disease pathogenesis

### Sample Protocol
After protein estimation, 20 μg of protein samples were separated by SDS PAGE at 100V and bands were visualized using coomassie brilliant blue. Gel was further processed for in-gel protein digestion as described previously [33]. In brief, each lane was separately sliced into four sections and each section was further cut into pieces (approximately 1 mm2). The gel pieces were washed with buffer containing 75% acetonitrile and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). After detaining gel pieces were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) and then alkylated using iodoacetamide (55 mM) and then dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile. Then gel pieces were subjected to sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) digestion at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile/ 5% acetic acid, vacuum centrifuged to dryness.LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed using QExactive mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher, MA) coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
For MS data analysis, we adopted Thermo Scientific™ ProteomeDiscoverer™ (PD) 1.4 software. The MS/MS spectra were deisotoped using the MS2 spectrum processor. Protein identification was performed by comparing MS/MS spectra against Uniprot Human database (Released on 7/25/2016, 70,849 sequences, 23,964,784 residues) using Sequest HT and Mascot.  We used an automatic target-decoy search tactic along with the Percolator to score peptide spectral matches to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The Percolator parameters are set to maximum delta Cn = 0.05; false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%, validation based on q-value [34]. Maximum two missed cleavage for trypsin was used. The peptide precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da mass tolerance was used during data search. The fixed modification were carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues, while deamidation (+0.984 Da) of asparagine and glutamine residues and oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine residues were variable. Area under the curve (AUC) for each precursor ion peak was calculated using algorithm embedded in PD 1.4 by setting mass precision of 2 ppm. The resultant search output was exported to an Excel file for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is a complex disease and a leading cause of irreversible blindness, and its underlying pathophysiology remains poorly understood. Proteomic characterization of the protein composition of aqueous humor (AH) may identify prognostic candidate proteins involved in pathogenesis and progression of the disease. To delineate the possible mechanisms that lead to POAG, this study adopted state-of-art mass spectrometric technique and analyzed AH of POAG and their respective controls. In total, more than 1000 proteins were identified with false discovery rate of less than 1%. Numerous proteins of complement cascade, immunoglobulin, neuronal and amyloidogenic proteins, which were part of processes like acute-phase and inflammatory response, humoral immune and acute inflammatory response, regulation of complement activation and protein processing were identified. Proteins of complement system underwent significant changes, which correlate to pathogenic events characterizing POAG, including altered complement cascade, astrocyte activation, neural degeneration, and apoptosis. Further, protein modification such as deamidation of complement subcomponent was noted, particularly in POAG. Proteomic analysis of AH allows a better understanding of the mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of POAG.

### Keywords
Primary open angle glaucoma

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
Nanynag Technological Unievrsity

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sze S K
Nanynag Technological Unievrsity


