### Accession
PXD011632

### Title
Tks5 protein Interactome

### Description
Tks5 (SH3PXD2A) is essential for the formation of invadopodia – specialized membrane microdomains that are essential for breast cancer cell migration in extracellular matrix (mostly collagen type I) and invasion. Tks5 is a large scaffold protein and its function at invadopodia is believed to come from its interaction with other proteins. This project aimed at studying interacting partners of Tks5 and their role in invadopia formation and function.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spec analysis, cells stably expressing (MDA-Tks5GFP) or not (MDA wt) Tks5-GFP protein were plated on the layer of rat collagen type I for 90 min (four 100mm-dishes for each replicate, 3.7*107 cells per dish), then cells were collected, lysed in NP-40 buffer (50 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0,5 mM EDTA; 10mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol; 60 mM beta-glucoside; 1% NP-40) for 30 min at 4°C under constant agitation. The lysates were centrifuged at 15000g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernantant was incubated with 25 µl of equilibrated control magnetic agarose beads (ChromoTek) for 1h at 4°C under constant agitation. Pre-cleared lysate was then incubated with 25 µl of equilibrated magnetic agarose beads coupled to anti-GFP nanobodies (GFP-Trap, ChromoTek) for another 1h at 4°C. At the end of the procedure GFP-trap beads were washed three times with washing buffer (50 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0,5 mM EDTA; 10mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol; 0.7% NP-40), followed by four washes with dilution buffer (50 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 10mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol) and left overnigh at 4°C in 200 µl of the dilution buffer. Proteins on magnetic beads were washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and we performed on-beads digestion with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Sample were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 55°C with a linear gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the human SwisProt (downloaded on February 2017) database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.1). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.  The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with no missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Invadopodia, Breast cancer, Sh3pxd2a, Invasion, Tks5

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


