### Accession
PXD020189

### Title
A Protein Kinase G-interacting protein regulates critical calcium signals in malaria parasites (phosphoproteomic)

### Description
In malaria parasites, cGMP signalling is mediated by a single cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG). One of the major functions of PKG is to control calcium signals essential for the parasite to exit red blood cells or for the transmission of the gametocyte stages to the mosquito. However, how PKG controls these signals in the absence of known second messenger-dependent calcium channels or scaffolding proteins remains a mystery. Here we use pull-down approaches to identify a PKG partner protein in both Plasmodium falciparum schizonts and P. berghei gametocytes. This partner, named ICM1, is a polytopic membrane protein with homologies to transporters and calcium channels, raising the possibility of a direct functional link between PKG and calcium homeostasis. Phosphoproteomic analyses in both Plasmodium species highlight a densely phosphorylated region of ICM1 with multiple phosphorylation events dependent on PKG activity. Conditional disruption of the P. falciparum ICM1 gene results in reduced cGMP-dependent calcium mobilisation associated with defective egress and invasion. Stage-specific depletion of ICM1 in P. berghei gametocytes blocks gametogenesis due to the inability of mutant parasites to mobilise intracellular calcium upon PKG activation. These results provide us with new insights into the atypical calcium homeostasis in malaria parasites

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Samples (about 100 μl) were diluted with 25 μl of Laemmli 5x buffer, and sonicated 6 x 30 sec at 70% amplitude and 0.5 pulse (30 sec. on ice between each cycle). Samples were heated 5 min at 65°C and loaded onto a Novex Wedgewell 12% Tris-glycine gel (Invitrogen). Each sample was loaded on two different wells and protein’s migration was then performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were then stained with coomassie blue. For each lane, a band between 180 kDa and 220 kDa was cut and destained by incubation in 100 μl of 30% acetonitrile (AcN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were reduced by incubation of gel pieces for 35 min. at 56°C in 100 μl of 10 mM DTE in 50 mM AB. DTE solution was then replaced by 100 μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AB and proteins were alkylated by incubation of the gel pieces for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Gel pieces were then washed for 10 min with 100 μl of 50 mM AB and dehydrated for 10 min with 100 μl of 30% AcN. Gel pieces were then dried for 30 min in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried pieces of gel were rehydrated for 45 min at 4°C with 70 μl of trypsin (6.25 ng/μl in AB 50 mM) and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Supernatant was transferred to a new polypropylene tube and two additional peptide extraction were performed with respectively 70 μl of 1% TFA and 100 μl of 50% ACN; 0.1% TFA. Extractions were pooled and dried under speed vacuum. Titanium dioxide enrichment. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed as previously described (Rapid commun. mass. Spectrom. 2007, 21, 3635). Briefly, stage-tips were prepared using Glass Microfibre Filters (Whatman) and 5 μm TiO2 beads (GL SCIENCES). Beads were suspended with 0.1% TFA in 80% AcN and inserted onto a gel-loading tip to create a 5 mm long column. Peptides samples were dissolved in 1 M Glycolic Acid 2% TFA in 80% AcN and loaded onto dedicated TiO2 columns by centrifugation 1 min at 6000 rpm. Columns were then washed four times with 1M Glycolic Acid 2% TFA in 80% AcN and four times with 0.1% TFA in 80% AcN. Bounded peptides were eluted first with 3% NH4OH and then with 0.1% TFA in 80% AcN. Eluates were then acidified with 5% TFA and dried under speed-vacuum. Fe-NTA enrichment. Flow through from TiO2 beads were enriched using home-made stage-tips as described before but containing beads from High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Enrichment was performed according to Manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were diluted in 10 μl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 6 μl were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur from Dr. Maisch GmBH, 1.9 μm, 100 Å, home-made column. The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 80%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B in 60 min, and finally to 5% A and 95% B in 10 min with a stay for 15 min at this composition. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4 x 105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30’000 FWHM with an AGC target at 5 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Isolation windows was set at 1.6 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for HCD

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, spectra were extracted and searched against the Plasmodium berghei ANKA database (PlasmoDB.org, release 38, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminants using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches were validated using the target decoy PSM validator node with a target FDR of 0.01 and a Delta Cn of 0.5. For label-free quantification, features and chromatographic peaks were detected using the “Minora Feature Detector” Node with the default parameters. PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again an FDR of 1% and using only peptides with high confidence level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation and protein abundances are calculated as the average of the three most abundant distinct peptide groups. The abundances were normalised on the “Total Peptide Amount” and then “Protein abundance based” option was selected for protein ratio calculation and associated p-values were calculated with an ANOVA test (individual proteins).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Lc-msms, Gametocytes, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, CH-1211 Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, CH-1211 Switzerland


