### Accession
PXD026836

### Title
Proteomics of MRSA biofilms under Elasnin Treatment

### Description
Due to the great challenge in treating biofilms, there is an urgent need for novel and effective antibiofilm compounds. Through bioassay-guided isolation of bioactive compounds from Actinobacteria, we identified elasnin as a potent biofilm-targeting compound against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Elasnin effectively inhibited biofilm formation and eradicated pre-formed biofilms of MRSA. To gain more insights on how elasnin eradicate MRSA biofilms, we conducted proteomics study on MRSA biofilm cells under elasnin treatment compared to the untreated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Preformed biofilms were prepared the same way as the ones described for transcriptome analysis, and treated with 5 μg/mL elasnin (or media for control) for 2, 6, and 12 hr followed by rinsing for two times. Biofilm matrix and total proteins were extracted as previously described (Sugimoto et al. (2013) Journal of bacteriology 195, 1645-1655) with little modification. Briefly, biofilms were collected from the bottom of the dish and washed with washing buffer composed of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) followed by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 min. The pellet was dissolved in a matrix extraction buffer composed of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 M NaCl, and protease inhibitor cocktail followed by incubation at 25°C for 30 min with gentle rotation. The mixture was centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min after incubation and the supernatant was collected as the biofilm matrix protein. For extracting the total protein, the pellet was lysed by B-PER™ bacterial protein extraction reagent (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and sonicated with a Q125 Sonicator (Qsonica) set at 65% amplitude (five blasts each lasting 15s with 30-s pauses). The supernatant was collected as the total protein after centrifugation. For all proteomics experiments, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample.  Collected proteins were desalted with Thermo Pierce C18 spin tips and digested with trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade) before injecting into the Bruker timsTOF Pro Mass-spectrometer (Bruker Headquarters Billerica, Massachusetts, US) with Capitve Spray Ion source. Approximately 200 ng of the digested protein was injected into the Bruker nanoElute system and separated on a C18 column (ionoptiks Aurora UPLC column, Part no. AUR2-25075C18A-CSI) that was eluted with a 30 min gradient of 2–95% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The m/z range acquired in the MS full scan was 100 to 1700 Da.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw data were converted to mgf files by Bruker Compass DataAnalysis, and subsequently converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard. The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev.2) with a custom database. Briefly, the genome sequence of MRSA ATCC 43300 was converted into a protein database using GeneMark gene prediction tool. The proteins were then annotated using BLASTp from NCBI using MRSA NCTC 8325 as the protein database. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequences in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 15 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm is made up of microbes and their extracellular matrix, making microorganisms highly tolerant, resistant, and resilient to a wide range of antimicrobials. Biofilm treatment with conventional antimicrobial agents can accelerate the evolution and spread of resistance due to the reduced efficacy and increased gene transfer and differentiation within biofilms. Therefore, effective biofilm-targeting compounds are currently highly sought after. In the present study, we identified elasnin as a potent biofilm-targeting compound against methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (MRSA). Elasnin effectively inhibited biofilm formation and especially eradicated the pre-formed biofilms of MRSA with low cytotoxicity and low risk of resistance development and retains its activity in a chronic wound biofilms model. A comprehensive mechanistic study using multi-omics and confocal and scanning electron microscopy revealed that elasnin induced the biofilm matrix destruction in a time-dependent manner and interfered with the cell division during the exponential phase, primarily by repressing the expression of virulence factors. Cells released from the elasnin-treated biofilms exhibited a defective appearance and became more sensitive to beta-lactam antibiotic penicillin G. Through gene overexpression and deletion assay, we discovered the key role of <i>sarZ</i> during elasnin-induced biofilm eradication. Overall, the present study identified elasnin as a potent biofilm eradicator against MRSA that harbors potential to be developed for biofilm removal and chronic wound treatment, and provided new insights into the molecular targets for biofilm eradication in MRSA.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Proteomics, Biofilm, Elasnin

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


