### Accession
PXD019573

### Title
NSCLC Lung Adenocarcinoma Proteomics

### Description
Alterations in cellular antigen processing and presenting machinery has gained increased interest as a hallmark of cancer-related inflammation. Growing evidence suggest that proteasome composition and immunoproteasome expression can influence the efficacy of cancer therapies. By applying proteasome foot-printing to clinical samples of Non Small Cell lung Cancer (NSCLC), we found tumor specific alterations in degradation products and increased expression of the proteasome regulator, PA200. We show that increased levels of PA200 alter the cleavage specificities of proteasomal-cleaved peptides and reduce antigenicity. We found that smoking-induced expression of PA200 abrogated immunoproteasome activity and is associated with poor survival. As immunotherapy is becoming a common treatment of NSCLC, we hypothesized that PA200 expression may contribute to resistance mechanism to immunotherapy. Consistent with this possibility, we found that the ratio between PA200 and the immunoproteasome subunit PSMB10, and not their absolute levels, were significantly associated with poor response to Durvalamab. Induced reduction in PA200 in vivo was associated with increased immune infiltration and attenuated tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
NSCLC Tumors and Cell Lysates were processed using the MAPP protocol [PMID: 30346940] and whole cell extract proteomics

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) with the default parameters for the analysis of proteins and peptides (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 1, minimum peptide length for unspecific search of 6, maximum peptide length for unspecific search of 40, peptide FDR was set to 0.01 and match between runs enabled. Masses were searched against the human proteome database from UniprotKB

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mapp, Nsclc, Lung cancer, Degradome, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Aaron Javitt

### Lab Head
Dr Yifat Merbl
Weizmann Institute of Science


