### Accession
PXD029006

### Title
Respiratory complex I controls persister formation through regulation of intracellular acidity and protein synthesis

### Description
Respiratory complex I controls persister formation through regulation of intracellular acidity and protein synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 75min at a flow rate of 0.2μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS) and 50ms (MS/MS). The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. For all LC-MS measurements, singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
To determine changes in protein expressions across samples, a MS1 based label-free quantification was carried out. Therefore, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI for proteomics in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from E. coli (strain K12, Uniprot, download date: 19/03/2019, total of (9,482 entries) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (SafeQuant, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant, PubMed-ID: 27345528). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. All quantitative analyses were performed in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, E.coli, Persisters

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, Universitiy of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr ALexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, Universitiy of Basel, Switzerland


