### Accession
PXD024807

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Profiling of T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Identifies Targetable Kinases and Combination Treatments

### Description
Protein kinase inhibitors are amongst the most successful cancer treatments, but targetable kinases activated by gene fusions are rare in T-ALL (e.g., NUP214-ABL1). Nevertheless, leukemic blasts rely on enhanced kinase signaling to sustain dysregulated proliferation. Protein kinases can be hyper-activated  in the absence of defects in their genes. Thus, phospho-proteomics can provide information on pathway activation, signaling networks and aberrant kinases activities that offer important opportunities for targeted therapies. Here, we performed mass spectrometry-based global profiling of tyrosine, serine, and threonine phosphorylation in a panel of 11 T-ALL cell lines to identify potential targetable kinases. We report a comprehensive dataset consisting of 21,000 phosphosites on 4896 phosphoproteins, including 217 kinases. We identify several Src-family members (LCK, SRC, FYN, YES1) as well as the cyclin-dependent kinases CDK1 and CDK2 as broadly activated in our panel. We  validate highly active kinases as putative target for therapy in vitro and propose potential novel combination treatment strategies, such as the inhibition of the insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R) signaling pathway to increase the sensitivity to dasatinib treatment in T-ALL.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were purchased from DSMZ (Germany) or ATCC (USA) and maintained in RPMI1640 + GlutaMax® (Gibco) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Gibco) and antibiotics at a density of 0.2-2 x 10^6 cells/ml in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 at 37°C. Cells (5 mg protein) were lysed in lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycero- phosphate) and were sonicated followed by centrifugation. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (500mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA, eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN and lyophillized . pTyr peptides (5 mg) were enriched using pTyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Techniologies) according to the protocol of the manufacturer with volumes proportionally scaled-down. Eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using a STAGE tip containing SDB-XC material (3M). Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 500 µg peptides of the flow through of the pTyr IP experiment using TiO2 beads. For TiO2-mediated phosphopeptide enrichment, 2.5 mg of TiO2 beads (GL sciences, 10 µm) were packed in Stage-tip fitted with a 16G-needle punch of C8 material at the narrow end and were washed with 200 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 200 µl of 300 mM acid lactic solution. Desalted peptides were diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/ml lactic acid, 0.07% TFA, 53% ACN) and were loaded in the tips centrifuged at 1500 G for 4 min. Tips were washed with 200 µl lactic acid solution, and secondly with 200 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps with 50 µl 0.5% piperidine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50 µl 5% piperidine, and quenched in 100 µl 20% H3PO4. Eluted phosphopeptides were desalted with SDB-XC STAGE tips as described for pTyrIP.  Phosphopeptides (pTyr and IMAC) were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (125 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. This results in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against theoretical spectra from the UniProt complete human proteome FASTA file (release January 2018, 42258 entries) using the MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 software. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). phosphopeptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The Ptyr IP, Lysate and TiO2 fraction were searched separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Ptyr, Label-free, T-all, Single-shot, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


