### Accession
PXD031141

### Title
Antibodies to protozoan variable surface antigens induce antigenic variation

### Description
The genomes of most protozoa encode families of variant surface antigens, whose mutually exclusive changes in expression allow parasitic microorganisms to evade the host immune response1. It is widely assumed that antigenic variation in protozoan parasites is accomplished by the spontaneous appearance within the population of cells expressing antigenic variants that escape antibody-mediated cytotoxicity1,2. Here we show, both in vitro and in animal infections, that antibodies to Variant-specific Surface Proteins (VSPs) of the intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia are not cytotoxic; instead, anti-VSP antibodies induce VSP clustering into microdomains, triggering a massive release of microvesicles carrying the original VSP and switching in expression to different VSPs by a calcium-dependent process. Surface microvesiculization and antigenic switching are also stimulated when Trypanosoma brucei and Tetrahymena thermophila are confronted to antibodies directed to their GPI-anchored variable surface glycoproteins. This novel mechanism of antigen clearance throughout its release into microvesicles coupled to the stochastic induction of new phenotypic variants not only changes the current paradigm of spontaneous antigenic switching but also provides a new framework for understanding the course of infections as a host/parasite adaptive process.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing trophozoites (1.5x108) of clone VSP417 were washed twice with filtered PBS at 37 °C and incubated 4 h at 37 °C in the absence or the presence of mAb 7C2 (50 nM) in microvesicle purification medium (ultrafiltrated TYI-S-33 medium, 100 kDa MWCO, supplemented with 3% adult bovine serum previously ultracentrifuged overnight at 250,000 g). Tubes were ice cooled and then centrifuged in a SW41Ti rotor (Beckman) at 4 °C for 10 min. Supernatants were collected in 50-ml centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 3,000 g at 4 °C for 40 min; this step was repeated once. Then, the supernatants were concentrated 10X in a centrifugal filter device (Centricon® Plus-70-100K, Millipore, Cat. # UFC710008) and ultracentrifuged in a SW41Ti rotor (25,000 rpm, 2 h, at 4 °C). Pellets were washed in an equal amount of filtered ice-cold PBS and ultracentrifuged again to recover the MVs. In the absence of mAb, no MVs were detected and, consequently, untreated samples were discarded for subsequent analysis. Purification of MVs was validated by TEM and subjected to SDS-GAGE.

### Data Protocol
Monoclonal antibody 7C2-induced microvesicles from three independent Giardia clones expressing VSP417 and treated with the mAb 7C2 were analysed with MS/MS. Purified microvesicles were lysed in RIPA buffer with cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck®, Cat. # 11836145001). Fifteen µg of each sample were run 1 cm in SDS-PAGE under non-reducing conditions. The following procedure and analysis was done by MSBioworks.com: In-gel digestion was then performed on each sample using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 4 h and quenched with formic acid. Half of each digested sample was analysed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75-μm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). Total instrument time used was 2 h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The 15 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. Data were processed using both Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: Enzyme, Trypsin/P; Database, NCBI Giardia lamblia RefSeq 2.1 proteome (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); Fixed modification, Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q); Mass values, Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance, 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance, 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages, 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The genomes of most protozoa encode families of variant surface antigens. In some parasitic microorganisms, it has been demonstrated that mutually exclusive changes in the expression of these antigens allow parasites to evade the host's immune response. It is widely assumed that antigenic variation in protozoan parasites is accomplished by the spontaneous appearance within the population of cells expressing antigenic variants that escape antibody-mediated cytotoxicity. Here we show, both in vitro and in animal infections, that antibodies to Variant-specific Surface Proteins (VSPs) of the intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia are not cytotoxic, inducing instead VSP clustering into liquid-ordered phase membrane microdomains that trigger a massive release of microvesicles carrying the original VSP and switch in expression to different VSPs by a calcium-dependent mechanism. This novel mechanism of surface antigen clearance throughout its release into microvesicles coupled to the stochastic induction of new phenotypic variants not only changes current paradigms of antigenic switching but also provides a new framework for understanding the course of protozoan infections as a host/parasite adaptive process.

### Keywords
Antigenic variation, Giardia, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Inmunología y Enfermedades Infecciosas (CIDIE), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)/Universidad Católica de Córdoba (UCC). Córdoba, Argentina. Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Católica de Córdoba (UCC). Córdoba, Argentina.
CIDIE (CONICET/UCC)

### Submitter
Hugo Lujan

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo D. Lujan
Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Inmunología y Enfermedades Infecciosas (CIDIE), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)/Universidad Católica de Córdoba (UCC). Córdoba, Argentina. Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Católica de Córdoba (UCC). Córdoba, Argentina.


