### Accession
PXD002930

### Title
Proteome of Microcystis aeruginosa PCC7806 in continuous growth conditions under iron stress

### Description
M. aeruginosa PCC7806 was cultured in iron-limiting Fraquil media under chemostat conditions. Four dilution rates were chosen to study the organism’s response to iron limitation at different stages of the growth curve.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested, resuspended in protein extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% Triton X-100) and the cells were broken using a combination of freeze/thaw cycles and sonication. Protein extracts were precipitated overnight at -20oC with acetone. The protein pellets were resuspended in a dissolving buffer (500 mM NaHCO3, 2% SDS, Milli Q) and 100μg was of protein was reduced and alkylated as per iTRAQ kit manufacturer’s protocol, substituting iodoacetamide (37mg IAA/ml) as the alkylating agent. Samples were digested with trypsin (1:10) overnight at 37oC. Labeling was done as per manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled peptides were pooled, followed by ICAT cation exchange and C18 clean up. The resulting eluant was dried and stored at -20oC until mass spectrometry analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on QStar Elite ESI by Dr Anne Poljak at Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of New South Wales.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation was performed using ProteinPilot software v4.0 with the paragon search algorithm. The search database used consisted of protein sequences of M. aeruginosa strains NIES-843 and PCC 7806 downloaded from NCBI with a decoy database created by ProteinPilot software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microcystis aeruginosa, Cyanobacteria, Microcystin, Iron stress, Itraq

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
University of New South Wales, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences

### Submitter
Paul D'Agostino

### Lab Head
Dr Brett A Neilan
University of New South Wales, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences


