### Accession
PXD027087

### Title
Analysis of fulvestrant-treated breast cancer cells by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Identification of a novel variant of estrogen receptor alpha in breast cancer cells

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from MCF-7 FR and MDA-MB-231 (fulvestrant treated) were obtained using IP buffer and immunoprecipitated using anti-ERα antibody. IP samples were run on electrophoresis gel, stained with SimplyBlue Safe Stain and processed for band extraction. In-gel digestion was performed using the method by Shevchenko et al. (2006). Digested peptides were collected and further extracted from gel slices in extraction buffer (5% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile, 1:2 vol/vol) at high speed mixing. Extractions were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were desalted with C18 resin-packed stage-tips, lyophilized to dryness, then re-constituted in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS was performed using a Waters NanoAcquity LC system (with a 100 mm inner diameter x 10 cm length C18 column (1.7 mm BEH130; Waters, USA) configured with a 180 mm x 2 cm trap column coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 15 ml/min 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A) for 1 min. The LC gradient was 0.5% to 50% B (100% acetonitrile; 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min at 300 nl/min. MS data were collected in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode utilizing a top ten precursor ion selection for HCD fragmentation. Full MS scans were performed with the following parameters: Resolution: 70,000; AGC target: 1e6; Maximum IT: 50 ms; Scan Range: 400 to 1600 m/z. DDA parameters were as follows: Resolution: 17,500; AGC target 5e4; Maximum IT: 50 ms; Isolation window: 1.5 m/z; NCE: 27; Minimum AGC target: 2e3; IntensityThreshold: 4e4; Dynamic Exclusion: 15 s; Charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 6-8, >8. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot.

### Data Protocol
Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt_sprot_20170705_20180523 database (selected for Homo sapiens, unknown version, 20215 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.080 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Mass spectrometry data were further processed using Scaffold software.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) drives mammary gland development and breast cancer (BC) growth through an evolutionarily conserved linkage of DNA binding and hormone activation functions. Therapeutic targeting of the hormone binding pocket is a widely utilized and successful strategy for breast cancer prevention and treatment. However, resistance to this endocrine therapy is frequently encountered and may occur through bypass or reactivation of ER-regulated transcriptional programs. We now identify the induction of an ER&#x3b1; isoform, ER&#x3b1;-LBD, that is encoded by an alternative ESR1 transcript and lacks the activation function and DNA binding domains. Despite lacking the transcriptional activity, ER&#x3b1;-LBD is found to promote breast cancer growth and resistance to the ER&#x3b1; antagonist fulvestrant. ER&#x3b1;-LBD is predominantly localized to the cytoplasm and mitochondria of BC cells and leads to enhanced glycolysis, respiration and stem-like features. Intriguingly, ER&#x3b1;-LBD expression and function does not appear to be restricted to cancers that express full length ER&#x3b1; but also promotes growth of triple-negative breast cancers and ER&#x3b1;-LBD transcript (ESR1-LBD) is also present in BC samples from both ER&#x3b1;(+) and ER&#x3b1;(-) human tumors. These findings point to ER&#x3b1;-LBD as a potential mediator of breast cancer progression and therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Eralpha, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
Memorial Sloan-Ketterin Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Antonio Strillacci

### Lab Head
Dr Jacqueline Bromberg
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.


