### Accession
PXD029717

### Title
Venoms for all occasions: the functional toxin profiles of different anatomical regions in sea anemones are related to their ecological function

### Description
Phylum Cnidaria is the oldest extant venomous group and is defined by the presence of nematocysts, specialised organelles responsible for venom production and delivery. While nematocysts and toxin peptides are distributed across the entire animal, nematocyst and venom profiles have been shown to differ across morphological structures in actiniarians. In this study, we explore the relationship between patterns of toxin expression and the ecological roles of discrete anatomical structures in Telmatactis stephensoni. Specifically, using a combination of proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we examined whether there is a direct correlation between the functional similarity of regions and the similarity of their associated toxin expression profiles. We report that the regionalisation of toxin production is consistent with the partitioning of the ecological roles of venom across envenomating structures, and that three major functional regions are present in T. stephensoni— tentacles, epidermis and gastrodermis. Additionally, we find that structures which serve similar functions not only have comparable toxin profiles but also similar nematocyst types. There was no overlap in the toxins identified using proteomics and transcriptomics, however, the expression patterns of specific milked venom peptides were conserved across RNA-seq and mass spectrometry imaging datasets. Furthermore, based on our data, it appears that acontia of T. stephensoni may be transcriptionally inactive and only mature nematocyst are present in the distal portions of the threads. Overall, we find that the venom profile of different anatomical regions in sea anemones varies according to its ecological functions.

### Sample Protocol
After a starvation period of 48 h, venom was obtained from T. stephensoni specimens by electrical stimulation. Reversed‐phase HPLC (RP‐HPLC) was then used to generate venom fractions. Proteins present in the milked venom were identified from digested RP-HPLC fractions. Proteins were reduced and alkylated as per Hale et al. (Hale et al., 2004), prior to trypsin digestion. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an AB SCIEX 5600 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS mass spectra were searched against predicted coding sequences from an unpublished T. stephensoni transcriptome using ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
The phylum Cnidaria is the oldest extant venomous group and is defined by the presence of nematocysts, specialized organelles responsible for venom production and delivery. Although toxin peptides and the cells housing nematocysts are distributed across the entire animal, nematocyte and venom profiles have been shown to differ across morphological structures in actiniarians. In this study, we explore the relationship between patterns of toxin expression and the ecological roles of discrete anatomical structures in Telmatactis stephensoni. Specifically, using a combination of proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we examined whether there is a direct correlation between the functional similarity of regions and the similarity of their associated toxin expression profiles. We report that the regionalization of toxin production is consistent with the partitioning of the ecological roles of venom across envenomating structures, and that three major functional regions are present in T.&#xa0;stephensoni: tentacles, epidermis and gastrodermis. Additionally, we find that most structures that serve similar functions not only have comparable putative toxin profiles but also similar nematocyst types. There was no overlap in the putative toxins identified using proteomics and transcriptomics, but the expression patterns of specific milked venom peptides were conserved across RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry imaging data sets. Furthermore, based on our data, it appears that acontia of T.&#xa0;stephensoni may be transcriptionally inactive and only mature nematocysts are present in the distal portions of the threads. Overall, we find that the venom profile of different anatomical regions in sea anemones varies according to its ecological functions.

### Keywords
Actiniaria; venom; toxins; transcriptomics; proteomics; spatiotemporal expression

### Affiliations
University of Oslo, department of biosciences
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind Undheim
University of Oslo, department of biosciences


