### Accession
PXD009466

### Title
Nup133 is required for proper nuclear pore basket assembly and dynamics in embryonic stem cells

### Description
Nup133 belongs to the Y-complex, a key component of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) scaffold. Studies on a null mutation in mice previously revealed that Nup133 is essential for embryonic development but not for mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) proliferation. Using single pore detection and average NE-fluorescence intensity, we find that Nup133 is dispensable for interphase and postmitotic NPC scaffold assembly in pluripotent mESCs. However, loss of Nup133 specifically perturbs the formation of the nuclear basket as manifested by the absence of Tpr in about half of the NPCs combined with altered dynamics of Nup153.   Nup153 is a large multifunctional protein that interacts with both the Y-complex and Tpr through its N-terminal NPC-targeting domain (NTD, [aa 1-339]) (Hase and Cordes, 2003; Vasu et al., 2001). To explore the possibility that the interaction between Nup153-NTD and the Y-complex or Tpr requires Nup133, we performed pull down assays on whole protein extracts from WT and Nup133-/- mESCs using recombinant Nup153-NTD [aa 1-339] as bait. Nup153 [aa 1-245], lacking the binding domains for the Y-complex and Tpr served as control. Western blot and quantitative mass spectrometry analyses detected Nup133 only in WT samples and documented its specific enrichment, along with other tested Y-Nups and Tpr, in the Nup153-NTD [aa 1-339] bound fraction. These analyses also revealed a similar enrichment of Tpr and Y-complex proteins in Nup153-NTD [aa 1-339]-purified extracts from either WT or Nup133-/- mESCs. These data show that in the context of whole cell lysates containing NPCs as dissociated subcomplexes, the lack of Nup133 neither precludes nor appreciably affects the biochemical interaction between Nup153-NTD and the Y-complex or Tpr. This differs from the in vivo situation that revealed a measurable impact of Nup133 on Nup153 dynamics and Tpr localization in the context of assembled NPCs. This apparent discrepancy between our in vitro and in vivo data indicates that the structural integrity of the NPC is likely required to visualize the contribution of Nup133 to the binding of Nup153 to Tpr or to the Y-complex.     Hase, M.E., and Cordes, V.C. (2003). Direct interaction with nup153 mediates binding of Tpr to the periphery of the nuclear pore complex. Mol Biol Cell 14, 1923-1940. Vasu, S., Shah, S., Orjalo, A., Park, M., Fischer, W.H., and Forbes, D.J. (2001). Novel vertebrate nucleoporins Nup133 and Nup160 play a role in mRNA export. J Cell Biol 155, 339-354.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown experiment: Rosetta bacteria transformed with the pET28a-zz-hNup153 vectors (Vasu et al., 2001) were used to produce the His6-ProtA-Nup153-NTD-His6 recombinant proteins ([aa 1-245]: Negative control, "Neg", or [aa 1-339]: "Bait"). Following induction, clarified bacterial lysates were incubated with nickel beads (30 µl – QIAGEN GmbH Ni-NTA Agarose Beads per mL of bacterial lysate) for 1 hour at 4°C. Nickel beads were then washed 3 times with high salt mESC lysis buffer (400mM NaCl, 20mM TRIS pH 7.5, 1mM DTT, 1.2% TritonX100, 0.5% Tween20, 1mM MgCl2, Pi solution) + 20mM imidazole, once with PBS and saturated by a 30-min incubation in PBS + 1% BSA, followed by two washes in Washing buffer (100mM NaCl, 20mM TRIS pH 7,5 + 1mM DTT + 0.3% triton Tx100 + 0.5% Tween20, 1mM MgCl2) + 20mM imidazole.  In the meantime, wild type (WT) or Nup133-/- (KO) mESC lysates were prepared by resuspending a frozen pellet of 4x106 mESCs (~500µg total proteins) in 200 µl of high salt mESC lysis buffer + 10mM imidazole. Following 10 min incubation at 4°C, lysates were centrifuged at 16.000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was diluted four times in a low-salt buffer (20 mM TRIS pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT, 10mM imidazole, 0.5% Tween20, Pi solution) and pre-cleared by a 30-min incubation with nickel beads equilibrated with washing buffer + 10mM imidazole. The resulting cleared WT and KO mESC supernatants were then incubated for 2 hours at 4°C with 30µL of the His6-ProtA-Nup153-NTD-His6) coated nickel beads ("Neg", one sample, or "Bait" two distinct samples, labeled A and B). After incubation, beads were extensively washed with Washing buffer +20 mM imidazol. The beads were then split into three replicates of 10 µL each that were washed with 20 mM  (NH4)2CO3. The resulting 18 samples were processed for mass-spectrometry analysis.   Vasu, S., Shah, S., Orjalo, A., Park, M., Fischer, W.H., and Forbes, D.J. (2001). Novel vertebrate nucleoporins Nup133 and Nup160 play a role in mRNA export. J Cell Biol 155, 339-354.   LC-MS/MS acquisition and analysis: Proteins on beads were incubated overnight at 37°C with 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/mL; Promega). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) and analyzed in technical triplicates by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 98 minutes, followed by a column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3 x106. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2x105, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data processing  Raw LC-MS/MS data from the Q-Exactive Plus were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.0.1, which includes the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Spectra were matched to peptides from the mouse proteome database downloaded from Uniprot to which the His6-ProtA-hNup153-NTD-His6 sequence was included (File provided as:"Mouse-proteome-with-ProteinA-Nup153.fasta"). Quantifications were performed using MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) on proteins identified with at least two peptides with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.05. LFQ values were further analyzed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.2). . Results are presented as Volcano-plots (Hubner and Mann, 2011) with a threshold set with an FDR < 0.05 and an S0 of 2.  Cox, J., Hein, M.Y., Luber, C.A., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics 13, 2513-2526. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J.V., and Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10, 1794-1805. Hubner, N.C., and Mann, M. (2011). Extracting gene function from protein-protein interactions using Quantitative BAC InteraCtomics (QUBIC). Methods 53, 453-459.

### Publication Abstract
Nup133 belongs to the Y-complex, a key component of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) scaffold. Studies on a null mutation in mice previously revealed that Nup133 is essential for embryonic development but&#xa0;not for mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) proliferation. Using single-pore detection and average NE-fluorescence intensity, we find that Nup133 is dispensable for interphase and postmitotic NPC scaffold assembly in pluripotent mESCs. However, loss of Nup133 specifically perturbs the formation of the nuclear basket as manifested by the absence of Tpr in about half of the NPCs combined with altered dynamics of Nup153. We further demonstrate that its central domain mediates Nup133's role in assembling Tpr and Nup153 into a properly configured nuclear basket. Our findings thus revisit the role of the Y-complex in pore biogenesis and provide insights into the interplay between NPC scaffold architecture, nuclear basket assembly, and the generation of heterogeneity among NPCs.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Nucleoporins, Pulldown, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-75205 Paris, France
EHESP/LERES

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Valerie Doye
Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-75205 Paris, France


