### Accession
PXD018580

### Title
Tranylcypromine specificity for monoamine oxidase is limited by promiscuous protein labelling and lysosomal trapping

### Description
Monoamine oxidases MAOA and MAOB catalyze important cellular functions such as the deamination of neurotransmitters. Correspondingly, MAO inhibitors are used for the treatment of severe neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression. A commonly prescribed drug against refractory depression is tranylcypromine, however, the side effects are poorly understood. In order to decipher putative off-targets, we synthesized two tranylcypromine probes equipped with either an alkyne moiety or an alkyne-diazirine minimal photocrosslinker for in situ proteome profiling. Surprisingly, LC-MS/MS analysis revealed low enrichment of MAOA and relatively promiscuous labeling of proteins.  Photoprobe labeling paired with fluorescent imaging studies revealed lysosomal trapping which could be largely reverted by the addition of lysosomotropic drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were plated on a 15 cm dish and grown to 80-90% confluence. The cells were washed with 10 mL PBS and treated with 10 mL PBS containing the respective probe FBP1/2 (final concentration 100 µM) and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. For control experiments, cells were treated with DMSO. Then, the cells were scraped off the dish, subsequently pelletized, washed with 10 mL PBS and pelletized again. For lysis, the cells were resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer (1% NP40, 1% sodium deoxycholate in PBS) and incubated for 15 min on ice, followed by mild sonication (10% intensitiy, 15 sec on ice). Protein concentration of each sample was determined by BCA-assay and samples were adjusted to the same protein concentration using PBS. The total volume was then adjusted to 1880 µL with PBS and the samples were further subjected to the following click-reaction by adding 40 µL Biotin-PEG3-N3 (10 mM in DMSO), 20 µL TCEP (52 mM in ddH2O), 60 µL 1×TBTA ligand (1.67 mM) and 20 µL CuSO4 (50 mM in ddH2O). After incubation for 1 h at RT, the proteins were precipitated by adding 8 mL of cold acetone and incubation overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation the pellet was washed twice with 200 µL cold methanol (-80 °C) and the proteins were resuspended in 500 µL PBS + 0.4% SDS by sonication at RT. For enrichment, the protein solution was added to 50 µL pre-washed avidin-agarose bead suspension (1.1 mg/mL in glycerol, washed 3 times with 1 mL PBS + 0.4% SDS) and incubated for 1 h under continuous gentle mixing. To remove unbound proteins, the beads were washed three times with 1 mL PBS + 0.4% SDS, two times with urea (6 M in ddH2O) and three times with 1 mL PBS. Afterwards, the beads were carefully resuspended in 200 µL capping-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES). Reduction was performed by adding 0.2 µL dithiothreitol (DTT) (1 M in ddH2O) and shaking the reaction mixture (450 rpm) for 45 min at RT. On addition of 2 µL iodoacetamide (IAA) (550 mM in ddH2O) the proteins were alkylated for 30 min under continuous shaking (450 rpm) at RT and exclusion of light. The reaction was stopped by adding 0.8 µL DTT (1 M in ddH2O) and incubation for 30 min at RT. To digest the proteins, 1 µL of endoproteinase Lys-C (LysC) (1 M in ddH2O) was added to each sample and incubated for 2 h at RT under continuous shaking (450 rpm) and exclusion of light. Afterwards, 600 µL of tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) (50 mM in ddH2O) and 1.5 µL of Trypsin (0.5 µg/µL in ddH2O) were added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C under continuous shaking (450 rpm). The digestion was stopped by adding 8 µL formic acid (FA) and the suspension was then centrifuged (13000 rpm, 3 min, RT) to pelletize the beads. The supernatant was loaded on 50 mg SepPak C 18 columns (Waters) equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were washed three times with 1 mL 0.1% TFA and 250 µL 0.5% FA. Afterwards, the peptides were eluted three times with 250 µL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% FA), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until further usage. Before MS measurements, the lyophilized peptides were resolved in 30 µL 1% FA and filtered through centrifugal filters (0.45 µm, VWR), which were equilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA. The filtrate was transferred into MS-vials and stored at -20 °C until the measurements were performed.  Samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 (75 ?m ID x 2 cm) trap and an Aurora Series Emitter Column with Gen2 nanoZero fitting (75 ?m ID x 25 cm, 1.6 µm FSC C18) separation columns (both heated to 40 °C) in an EASY-spray setting coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). 1-10 ?L of peptide samples were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 0.4 ?L/min, gradient: 5% B for 7 min, from 5% to 22% B in 105 min, then to 32% B in 10 min, to 90% B in 10 min and hold at 90% B for 10 min, then to 5% B in 0.1 min and hold 5% B for 9.9 min) and ionized at spray voltage of 2.0 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode with full scan acquisition in the orbitrap at a resolution of R = 140,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300 - 1500 m/z with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (dynamic exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states >1 and intensities greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were analyzed in a scan range of 200 - 2000 m/z to an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Peptide fragments were generated by higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27% and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10).[1] The following settings were applied: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine); variable modification: oxidation (methionine), acetylation (N-terminus), NH (aspartate); proteolytic enzyme: trypsin/P; missed cleavages: 2; main search tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; false discovery rates: 0.01. The options "LFQ" and "match between runs" (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time windows) were enabled.[2] Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens. Statistical analysis of the data was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3.).[3] Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site were deleted. Data was filtered for three valid values in at least one group and a missing value imputation was performed over the total matrix. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and -log10 (p-values) were obtained by a two-sided two sample Student's t-test. [1] Cox, J.; Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature biotechnology 2008, 26 (12), 1367-1372. [2] Cox, J.; Hein, M. Y.; Luber, C. A.; Paron, I.; Nagaraj, N.; Mann, M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 2014, 13 (9), 2513-2526. [3] Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M. Y.; Geiger, T.; Mann, M.; Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature methods 2016, 13 (9), 731-740.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Abpp

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
TU Munich

### Submitter
Jonas Drechsel

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Sieber
Technical University of Munich


