### Accession
PXD014231

### Title
VAMP7-dependent autophagic secretion allows for axonal resilience in growth restricting conditions.VAMP7-dependent autophagic secretion allows for axonal resilience in growth restricting conditions.

### Description
VAMP7 is involved in autophagy and exocytosis mediating neurite growth, two yet unconnected cellular pathways. Here we show the occurrence of combined VAMP7/ATG9 secretory events. VAMP7 localized, together with LC3 and ATG9, in vesicles moving anterogradely along the axon towards growth cones. VAMP7 knockout disrupted the autophagy response to drugs and starvation. Release of extracellular vesicles triggered by autophagy was impaired in VAMP7-knockout cells and autophagy-deficient cells were impaired in VAMP7 exocytosis. Secretomics showed that VAMP7-knockout cells were impaired in unconventional secretion of cytoplasmic, exosomal and mitochondrial proteins. We further found that autophagy stimulated neurite growth in a VAMP7-dependent manner. Furthermore, neurons still grew long axons in nutrient-restricted conditions and when treated with autophagy-inducing drugs. A nanobody directed against VAMP7 inhibited the effect of nutrient restriction. We propose that VAMP7-dependent autophagic secretion contributes to a resilience mechanism to preserve axonal growth in restriction conditions, as part of brain sparing occurring in growth restriction.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, PC12 secretome and proteome was analyzed in three independent biological replicates for the secretome and two biological replicates for the total proteome. Each sample was run in three technical replicates. An estimated xx ug of proteins for each biological replicates were digested following a FASP protocol (31). Prior nanoLC-MS/MS analysis samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water and injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B for 120 min (secretome) and 190 min (total proteome). Two blanks were run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 60 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B for 120 min (secretome) and 190 min (total proteome). Two blanks were run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 60 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Rattus Norvegicus database database (release 03-2018, 8042 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) were set as variable modifications (only for phosphoproteomics analysis). The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (32). For statistical analysis we compared WT  vs VAMP7 KO using Perseus 1.6.2.3.  For secretome analysis we compared we kept only proteins identified in all three biological replicates in at least one group (KO-VAMP and/or WT). Missing values were imputed using width=0.2 and down-shift=2.5.  For volcano plot we used t-test, S0=0.1, FDR=0.01. We performed Fisher exact test (FDR=0.02) to select enriched class of proteins according to GOCC database. “Mitochondrial proteins” regroups the following GOCC names : « mitochondrial membrane part »,    « mitochondrial inner membrane », « mitochondrial part », « mitochondrial membrane »; “Cytoplasmic proteins” corresponds to GOCC name « cytoplasm »; “Exosomal proteins” corresponds to GOCC name « extracellular vesicular exosome». “Secreted proteins” and “glycoproteins” were selected according to “keywords” database, where they are reported as such. For the volcano plot of proteome, we also used t-test, S0=0.1, FDR=0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroscience, Secretome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
University of Paris, Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr GUERRERA Ida Chiara
University of Paris, Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.


