### Accession
PXD008358

### Title
Systematic quantitative analysis of H2A and H2B variants by targeted proteomics

### Description
Background: Histones organize DNA into chromatin through a variety of processes. Among them, a vast diversity of histone variants can be incorporated into chromatin to finely modulate its organization and functionality. Classically, the study of histone variants has largely relied on antibody-based assays. However, antibodies have a limited efficiency to discriminate between highly similar histone variants.  Results: In this study, we established a mass spectrometry-based analysis to address this challenge. We developed a targeted proteomics method, using Single Reaction Monitoring (SRM) or Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM), to quantify a maximum number of histone variants in a single multiplexed assay, even when histones are present in a crude extract. This strategy was developed on H2A and H2B variants, using 55 peptides corresponding to 25 different histone sequences, among which a few differ by a single amino acid. The methodology was then applied to mouse testis extracts in which almost all histone variants are expressed. It confirmed the abundance profiles of several testis-specific histones during successive stages of spermatogenesis and the existence of predicted H2A.L.1 isoforms. This methodology was also used to explore the over-expression pattern of H2A.L.1 isoforms in a mouse model of male infertility.  Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that targeted proteomics is a powerful method to quantify highly similar histone variants and isoforms. The developed method can be easily transposed to the study of human histone variants, whose abundance can be deregulated in various diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Suspensions of whole testis cells were obtained from >2-month-old mice. Enriched fractions of spermatocytes, round spermatids and elongated spermatids were obtained. The purification of histones was obtained by resuspending washed cell pellets in 0.2 M sulfuric acid.  The solution was sonicated to shear DNA and was placed on ice for 30 min. Non-soluble proteins were pelleted by 15 min centrifugation at 20 000 g. The supernatant with solubilized histones was collected and proteins were precipitated with Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 20 % v/v. After 90 min incubation on ice, proteins were pelleted by 15 min centrifugation at 16 000 g. They were then washed with acidified acetone (HCl 0.1 %) and then with pure acetone. Pellets were air dried at room temperature and resuspended in 1x protein loading buffer. The quality of the purification was then analyzed by Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gels.  For targeted proteomic analyses, histones were only migrated over about 5 mm in the stacking region of the gel, before reduction, alkylation of Cys residues with iodoacetamide and trypsin digestion. For the in-depth search for PTMs on signature peptides, histone samples were fully migrated, 7 gel slices corresponding to histones were cut, individually digested and analyzed by discovery LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific): the lower complexity of the resulting samples indeed allowed more exhaustive characterization of the modified peptides.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW files were submitted to Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1). MS/MS data acquired on histones were matched to the mouse MS_HistoneDB and to a list of about 500 contaminants including keratins, trypsin, etc. The following modifications were considered as variable ones: N-terminal protein acetylation; Lys acetylation; Lys and Arg mono- and di-methylations, Ser and Thr phosphorylation, Met oxidation. Cys carbamydomethyl was considered as a fixed modification. For RAW files of full MS/MS spectra acquired on the Qtrap and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instruments, the tolerance on mass measurement was set to 5 ppm for peptides and to 0.8 Da (Qtrap) and 0.6 Da (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos) for fragment ions. For analysis performed on The Q-Exactive instrument, 5 ppm for peptides and 0.025 Da for fragment ions were considered. For all MS/MS data interpretations using Mascot, the enzyme trypsin was specified, while allowing up to five tryptic missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Targeted proteomics, Spermatogenesis, Histone variants, Proteomics, Prm, Srm

### Affiliations
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSERM U1038, CEA, BIG-BGE, Grenoble, France.
CEA

### Submitter
Sara EL KENNANI

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSERM U1038, CEA, BIG-BGE, Grenoble, France.


