### Accession
PXD043374

### Title
Heterozygous variants in MGP lead to endoplasmic reticulum stress causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia

### Description
Matrix Gla protein (MGP) is a vitamin K-dependent post-translationally modified protein, highly expressed in vascular and cartilaginous tissues. It is a potent inhibitor of extracellular matrix mineralization. Biallelic loss of function variants in the MGP gene cause Keutel syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by widespread calcification of various cartilaginous tissues and skeletal and vascular anomalies. In this study, we report four individuals from two unrelated families with two heterozygous variants in MGP, both altering the Cysteine 19 residue to phenylalanine or tyrosine. These individuals presented with a spondyloepiphyseal skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature with a short trunk, diffuse platyspondyly, midface retrusion, progressive epiphyseal anomalies and brachytelephalangism. We investigated the cellular and molecular effects of one of the heterozygous deleterious variants (C19F) using both cell and genetically modified mouse models. Heterozygous ‘knock-in’ mice expressing C19F MGP recapitulated most of the skeletal anomalies observed in the affected individuals. We demonstrated that the main underlying mechanism leading to the observed skeletal dysplasia is endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis of the growth plate chondrocytes. Our findings support that heterozygous variants in MGP altering Cys19 residue cause autosomal dominant spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, a condition distinct from Keutel syndrome both clinically and molecularly.

### Sample Protocol
After running into a single SDS PAGE stacking gel band containing all proteins for each sample, the gel band was reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin (mass spec sequencing grade, ProMega).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) precolumn and the onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray analytical column (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2uM C18 beads) separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000  uHPLC at 220 nl/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 3 hours . Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution ( FWHM in MS1, 15,000 for MS/MS) with HCD sequencing all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater. The raw data were converted into *.mgf format (Mascot generic format) searched using Mascot 2.6.2 against Uniprot human sequences . The database search results were loaded onto Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.8.9 (Proteome Sciences) for spectral counting, statistical treatment and data visualization. Some peptides were quantified using Pinnacle (Optys Technologies)  method " Targeted Quantification - Label Free DDA" by combining the Mascot*dat files with the Thermo *.raw files inside Pinnacle

### Publication Abstract
Matrix Gla protein (MGP) is a vitamin K-dependent post-translationally modified protein, highly expressed in vascular and cartilaginous tissues. It is a potent inhibitor of extracellular matrix mineralization. Biallelic loss-of-function variants in the MGP gene cause Keutel syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by widespread calcification of various cartilaginous tissues and skeletal and vascular anomalies. In this study, we report four individuals from two unrelated families with two heterozygous variants in MGP, both altering the cysteine 19 residue to phenylalanine or tyrosine. These individuals present with a spondyloepiphyseal skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature with a short trunk, diffuse platyspondyly, midface retrusion, progressive epiphyseal anomalies and brachytelephalangism. We investigated the cellular and molecular effects of one of the heterozygous deleterious variants (C19F) using both cell and genetically modified mouse models. Heterozygous 'knock-in' mice expressing C19F MGP recapitulate most of the skeletal anomalies observed in the affected individuals. Our results suggest that the main underlying mechanism leading to the observed skeletal dysplasia is endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis of the growth plate chondrocytes. Overall, our findings support that heterozygous variants in MGP altering the Cys19 residue cause autosomal dominant spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, a condition distinct from Keutel syndrome both clinically and molecularly.

### Keywords
Mgp, Skeletal dysplasia, Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Medicine and Faculty of Dental Medicine and Oral Health Sciences Principal Investigator; Shriners Hospital for Children, Canada 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montreal, QC H3G 1A6, Canada
McGill univeristy 

### Submitter
Sultanah Alshahrani

### Lab Head
Dr Monzur Murshed
Professor, Department of Medicine and Faculty of Dental Medicine and Oral Health Sciences Principal Investigator; Shriners Hospital for Children, Canada 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montreal, QC H3G 1A6, Canada


