### Accession
PXD035686

### Title
Small molecule-mediated O-GlcNAcase activation for precise control of O-GlcNAcylation in live cells

### Description
O-GlcNAc is a nutritionally and metabolically relevant post-translational modification on thousands of nucleocytoplas-mic proteins. O-GlcNAcylation level dynamically responds to environmental cues in temporal and spatial dimensions, leading to discrete signaling transductions and physiological effects. Spatiotemporal regulation of O-GlcNAcylation level is essential for O-GlcNAc functional interrogation and manipulation of cell behaviors for desired outcomes, which is yet challenging owing to limited approaches. Here we achieved spatiotemporal O-GlcNAc reduction in live cells by designing a 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT)-triggered O-GlcNAcase (OGA) activation strategy. After rational engineering and optimiza-tion, OGA variants bearing an intein located to different subcellular regions were generated and validated, whose deglyco-sidase activity can be turned on by 4-HT in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Finally, we demonstrated the dual func-tionality of 4-HT on breast cancer cells expressing the engineered OGA, which accelerated cell death with a lower dosage and thus mitigated the likelihood of acquiring drug resistance. Altogether, our strategy facilitates the precise regulation and functional understandings of O-GlcNAcylation in live cells.

### Sample Protocol
Chemoenzymatic labeling of O-GlcNAcylated proteins. Purification of GalT1 (Y289L) enzyme and labeling of O-GlcNAcylated proteins with GalNAz were performed according to the procedure of Hsieh-Wilson and co-workers3. Briefly, cell samples in 15-cm dishes were harvested and washed by PBS once. The lysis buffer (PBS with 2%SDS) was added into cell pellets and heated for 5 min at 95 ˚C, followed by the sonication to sheer DNA. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Cell lysates were reduced and alkylated with 25 mM DTT at 95 ˚C for 5 min and 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 h respectively. Proteins were precipitated by the methanol/chloroform solution (aqueous phase : CH3OH : CHCl3 = 4 : 4 :1) and resuspended in 1% SDS, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9) buffer with a concentration of 3.75 mg/mL. For 150 µg proteins, H2O (49 µL), 2.5× GalT labeling buffer (80 µL, final concentrations: 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 2% NP-40, pH 7.9), 100 mM MnCl2 (11 µL), 500 µM UDP-GalNAz (10 µL), 2 mg/mL GalT (Y289L) (10 µL) were added into cell lysates orderly. The reaction was gently rotated at 4 °C for at least 20 h and the proteins were precipitated as described above. For mass spectrometry analysis, the procedures were scaled up with the starting material of 3 mg input proteins.  Quantitative chemical proteomics. For enrichment and identification of the O-GlcNAcylated proteins, experiments were performed based on the procedure of Woo and co-workers4. Briefly, the proteins in PBS containing 1% SDS were diluted with PBS and incubated with 100 µM THPTA, 0.5 mM CuSO4, 200 µM Biotin-Alkyne probe and 2.5 mM fresh sodium ascorbate for click chemistry at 37 ˚C for 4 h, followed by protein precipitation and resuspension into 400 µL PBS containing 2% SDS. The protein solutions were diluted with PBS to lower the final concentration of SDS into 0.2% and incubated with 400 µL of prewashed streptavidin beads slurry. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 4 h with gentle rotation. The beads were transferred into the Bio-Spin column and washed with 1 mL 8M urea, 5 mL 0.2%SDS/PBS, 5 mL PBS and 5 mL Milli-Q water sequentially with the help of a vacuum manifold. After changing buffer with 500 µL of 500 mM urea, 1 mM CaCl2 in PBS, 2 µg trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added, and the resulting mixture was incubated at 37˚C for 16 h. The eluant containing trypsin digested peptides were collected as the trypsin fraction for protein identifications. The peptides were desalted by C18 Tips following the manufacturer’s instructions and resuspended in 20 µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer. For each sample, 5 µL the corresponding amine-based TMT 16-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, A44520; 11.9 µg/µL) was added and reacted for 1 h at room temperature. The reactions were quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated using Eppendorf Vacufuge to dryness. The mixture was then resuspended and fractionated into six samples using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, 84868) and concentrated to dryness. All samples were stored at −20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis. The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the trypsin fraction, the data was searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (19 August 2016, 20,156 total entries) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT algorithm. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (15.995 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.021 Da), static TMT labeling (304.207 Da) at lysine residues and peptide N-termini; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions, and 0.02 Da mass error on fragment ions. Data were filtered with a peptide-to-spectrum match of 1% FDR using Percolator. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier without normalization. For the obtained proteome, the data was further filtered with the following guidelines: protein FDR confidence is high, unique peptides are greater than 2, master protein only and exclude all contaminant proteins. For P-value and fold change calculations, the data were further processed using a custom algorithm as described before. Cellular component analysis was performed with an online GO Enrichment Analysis tool powered by PANTHER (http://geneontology.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The nutrient sensor O-linked <i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine (<i>O</i>-GlcNAc) is a post-translational modification found on thousands of nucleocytoplasmic proteins. <i>O</i>-GlcNAc levels in cells dynamically respond to environmental cues in a temporal and spatial manner, leading to altered signal transduction and functional effects. The spatiotemporal regulation of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc levels would accelerate functional interrogation of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc and manipulation of cell behaviors for desired outcomes. Here, we report a strategy for spatiotemporal reduction of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc in live cells by designing an <i>O</i>-GlcNAcase (OGA) fused to an intein triggered by 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT). After rational protein engineering and optimization, we identified an OGA-intein variant whose deglycosidase activity can be triggered in the desired subcellular compartments by 4-HT in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Finally, we demonstrated that 4-HT activation of the OGA-intein fusion can likewise potentiate inhibitory effects in breast cancer cells by virtue of the reduction of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc. The spatiotemporal control of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc through the chemically activatable OGA-intein fusion will facilitate the manipulation and functional understanding of <i>O</i>-GlcNAc in live cells.

### Keywords
O-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
harvard University
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr christina woo
harvard University


