### Accession
PXD002848

### Title
Genomic and Proteomic Studies on the Mode of Action of Oxaboroles against the African Trypanosome

### Description
SCYX-7158, an oxaborole, is currently in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis.  Here we investigate possible modes of action against Trypanosoma brucei using a chemo-proteomic approach.  SILAC-based proteomic studies using an oxaborole analogue immobilised onto a resin was used either in competition with a soluble oxaborole or an immobilised inactive control to identify thirteen proteins common to both strategies. The diverse list of binding partners from the proteomic studies suggest a degree of polypharmacology that should reduce the risk of resistance to this compound class emerging in the field.

### Sample Protocol
SCYX-7158, an oxaborole, and an inactive analogue were chemicaly coupled to magnetic beads. In the competition experiment, SILAC labelled bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei cell lysates were incubated with immobilised SCYX-7158 in the absence (R0K0) or presence (R6K4) of soluble compound. In the control binding experiment, SILAC labelled bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei cell lysates were incubated with immobilised SCYX-7158 (R0K0) or an immobilised analogue (R6K4). The beads were washed, protein eluted in SDS loading buffer, run 1cm into a SDS-PAGE gel and the entire section excised and subjected to in gel tryptic digest.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 searching a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 4.0, downloaded from TriTrypDB, http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with the VSG221 sequence and frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumin and mammalian keratins) that contains a total of 10,081 protein sequences.  Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications.  Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length and a MaxQuant score >5, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.  SILAC ratios were calculated using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein group, and required a minimum of two SILAC pairs.

### Publication Abstract
SCYX-7158, an oxaborole, is currently in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis. Here we investigate possible modes of action against Trypanosoma brucei using orthogonal chemo-proteomic and genomic approaches. SILAC-based proteomic studies using an oxaborole analogue immobilised onto a resin was used either in competition with a soluble oxaborole or an immobilised inactive control to identify thirteen proteins common to both strategies. Cell-cycle analysis of cells incubated with sub-lethal concentrations of an oxaborole identified a subtle but significant accumulation of G2 and &gt;G2 cells. Given the possibility of compromised DNA fidelity, we investigated long-term exposure of T. brucei to oxaboroles by generating resistant cell lines in vitro. Resistance proved more difficult to generate than for drugs currently used in the field, and in one of our three cell lines was unstable. Whole-genome sequencing of the resistant cell lines revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms in 66 genes and several large-scale genomic aberrations. The absence of a simple consistent mechanism among resistant cell lines and the diverse list of binding partners from the proteomic studies suggest a degree of polypharmacology that should reduce the risk of resistance to this compound class emerging in the field. The combined genetic and chemical biology approaches have provided lists of candidates to be investigated for more detailed information on the mode of action of this promising new drug class.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Lancaster University
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery University of Dundee

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Fairlamb
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery University of Dundee


