### Accession
PXD009726

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum salivary gland sporozoites

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum salivary gland sporozoites

### Sample Protocol
P. falciparum (NF54 strain) cultures were maintained in vitro through infections of O+ erythrocytes grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 50µm hypoxanthine and 10% A+ human serum in a gas mixture consisting of 5% CO2, 5% O2, and 90% N2. Gametocyte cultures were initiated at 5% hematocrit and 0.8-1% parasitaemia and were maintained for up to 17 days with daily media changes. Adult female An. stephensi mosquitoes were allowed to feed through Parafilm for up to 20 minutes upon gametocyte cultures. Salivary gland sporozoites were isolated by micro-dissection 14-19 days post-blood meal and purified first over an Accudenz cushion, then by passage through DEAE cellulose. Purified salivary gland sporozoites were pelleted and lysed by addition of 2xSample Buffer and heating at 70°C for 5 minutes. Lysate was electrophoresed through a 4-20% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, post-stained with Imperial Stain and destained in ddH2O. The gel was cut into 28 fractions, fractions 1 through 26 being 2 mm sections of the gel beginning ~2mm below the loading section, fraction 27 being the top ~2 mm of the gel (loading portion) and fraction 28 being the bottom ~1 mm of the gel (dye front). In-gel tryptic digestion of proteins was automated with a TECAN Freedom Evo. Briefly, gel fractions were cut into pieces ~1-3 mm on a side and placed in 96-well plates, destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% methanol (MeOH) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (ACN). Disulfide bonds were disrupted with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ABC and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC. Gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ABC in 50% MeOH and dehydrated with ACN as above, then rehydrated with 50 µL of 6.25 ng/mL trypsin in 50 mM ABC and incubated 4.5 hours at 36°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 3% ACN/1% formic acid (FA), then with ACN, then once again with 3% ACN/1% FA. The extractions of these fractions were pooled (fractions 1 & 2, 3 & 4, etc.).  Samples were evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 µL of 3% ACN/0.1% FA. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS in triplicate. Peptide separation was performed on an Agilent 1100 Nano system with an electronically-controlled split flow. A separate capillary pump was used for loading the trap column. Separation and trap columns were prepared in-house by packing Picofrit (New Objective) fritted, pulled-tip capillaries (360 µm O.D., 75 µm I.D., 15 µm I.D. tip) with a 20 cm bed of Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 3µm 120Å stationary phase. Trapping columns consisted of an in-house manufactured fritted capillary (360 µm O.D., 150 µm I.D) packed with a 1 cm bed of the same stationary phase. For each LC run, sample was injected on the trap and washed for 5 minutes at 5 µL/min with loading buffer (2% ACN/0.2% v/v trifluoroacetic acid). Sample was separated by a linear gradient changing from 95% A (0.1formic acid in H2O) and 5% B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 35% B in 90 minutes at 0.5 µL/min. Mass spectral analyses was performed on a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite. MS1 data were collected over the range of 300 - 1600 m/z  in the Orbitrap set at resolution = 60,000. MS2 data were collected in the LTQ. The 20 most intense peaks from a preview scan of each full Orbitrap scan were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) with wide-band activation. Dynamic exclusion was enabled. Monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state rejection were enabled to reject precursors with z = +1 or unassigned charge state.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer output files were converted to mzML format using msConvert version 3.0.6002 (PMID:18606607) and searched with Comet version 2015.02 rev.0 (PMID:23148064). The precursor mass tolerance was ±20 ppm, and fragment ions bins were set to a tolerance of 1.0005 m/z and a monoisotopic mass offset of 0.4 m/z. Semi-tryptic peptides and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The search parameters included a static modification of +57.021464 Da at Cys for formation of S-carboxamidomethyl Cys by iodoacetamide and potential modifications of +15.994915 Da at Met for oxidation, -17.026549 Da at peptide N terminal Gln for deamidation from formation of pyroGlu, -18.010565 Da at peptide N terminal Glu for loss of water from formation of pyroGlu, -17.026549 Da at peptide N-terminal Cys for deamidation from formation of cyclized N-terminal S-carboxamidomethyl Cys, and +42.010565 for acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein, either at N-terminal Met or the N-terminal residue after cleavage of N-terminal Met. The spectra were searched against a database comprising P. falciparum 3D7 (PMID:12368864) (PlasmoDB v.30, www.plasmodb.org (PMID:18957442)) appended with Anopheles stephensi Indian AsteI2.3 (PMID:25244985) (VectorBase, www.vectorbase.org (PMID:25510499)), and a modified version of the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (v.2012.01.01, The Global Proteome Machine, www.thegpm.org/cRAP) with the Sigma Universal Standard Proteins removed and the LC calibration standard peptide [Glu-1] fibrinopeptide B appended. Decoy proteins with the residues between tryptic residues randomly shuffled were generated using a tool included in the TPP and interleaved among the real entries. The MS/MS data were analyzed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (PMID:25631240) version 5.0.0 Typhoon. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were assigned scores in PeptideProphet (PMID:124035970), peptide-level scores were assigned in iProphet (PMID:23720762), and Protein identifications were inferred with ProteinProphet (PMID:14632076). In the case that multiple proteins were inferred at equal confidence by a set of peptides, the inference was counted as a single identification and all relevant protein IDs were listed. Only proteins with ProteinProphet probabilities corresponding to a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0 % (as determined from the ProteinProphet mixture models) were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium sporozoites are transmitted from infected mosquitoes to mammals, and must navigate the host skin and vasculature to infect the liver. This journey requires distinct proteomes. Here, we report the dynamic transcriptomes and proteomes of both oocyst sporozoites and salivary gland sporozoites in both rodent-infectious Plasmodium yoelii parasites and human-infectious Plasmodium falciparum parasites. The data robustly define mRNAs and proteins that are upregulated in oocyst sporozoites (UOS) or upregulated in infectious sporozoites (UIS) within the salivary glands, including many that are essential for sporozoite functions in the vector and host. Moreover, we find that malaria parasites use two overlapping, extensive, and independent programs of translational repression across sporozoite maturation to temporally regulate protein expression. Together with gene-specific validation experiments, these data indicate that two waves of translational repression are implemented and relieved at different times during sporozoite maturation, migration and infection, thus promoting their successful development and vector-to-host transition.

### Keywords
Salivary gland sporozoite, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Kristian Swearingen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


