### Accession
PXD018000

### Title
MALT-1 mediates IL-17 neural signaling to regulate C. elegans behavior, immunity and longevity

### Description
The interaction partners of C. elegans soluble IL-17 signaling components were profiled using IP/MS. In vivo interactions were profiled for ACTL-1-FLAG, PIK-1-Myc, MALT-1::GFP, NFKI-1::GFP and their respective controls. Quantification of NFKI-1::GFP interactions was performed by labelling immunoprecipitated proteins using tandem mass tags.

### Sample Protocol
For co-IP experiments analyzed by LC-MS/MS, C. elegans lysis and affinity purification was performed as previously described83 with minor modification. Lysis buffer A was prepared with 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 0.05% NP40, 1mM DTT, 0.1 M PMSF and 1 complete EDTA-free proteinase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science) per 12 ml. Unsynchronized worms grown in liquid were washed twice in M9 and once in ice-cold lysis buffer A, then snap-frozen by dropwise addition to LN2 in preparation for cryogenic grinding. Worm popcorn was pulverized using a Freezer/Mill (SPEX SamplePrep). Crude extract was clarified at 4°C for 10 min at 20,000g, and again for 20 min at 100,000g with a TLA-100 rotor (Beckman Coulter). For IP, roughly equal volumes of sample and control lysate were incubated with 100 µl GFP-Trap MA (ChromoTek gtma), Myc-Trap MA (ChromoTek ytma), or anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma M8823) for 3-4h at 4°C, then washed twice with 50mM HEPES, 100mM KCl. Purified complexes were eluted in SDS-sample buffer at 95°C and fractionated by SDS-PAGE prior to characterization by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt KB database using Mascot (Matrix Science), with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Two missed enzyme cleavages and variable modifications for oxidised methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine were included. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold programme (Proteome Software Inc). For TMT experiments the acquired MSMS raw files were processed using MaxQuant84 with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.5.1). MSMS spectra were searched against the Caenorhabditis elegans UniProt Fasta database (July 2017). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation (protein) were set as variable modifications. Protein quantification required 1 (unique+ razor) peptide. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. MaxQuant output file, proteinGroups.txt was then processed with Perseus software (v 1.5.5.0). After uploading the matrix, the data was filtered, to remove identifications from reverse database, modified peptide only, and common contaminants. Each peptide channel was normalized to the median and log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Besides pro-inflammatory roles, the ancient cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17) modulates neural circuit function. We investigate IL-17 signaling in neurons, and the extent it can alter organismal phenotypes. We combine immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to biochemically characterize endogenous signaling complexes that function downstream of IL-17 receptors in C. elegans neurons. We identify the paracaspase MALT-1 as a critical output of the pathway. MALT1 mediates signaling from many immune receptors in mammals, but was not previously implicated in IL-17 signaling or nervous system function. C. elegans MALT-1 forms a complex with homologs of Act1 and IRAK and appears to function both as a scaffold and a protease. MALT-1 is expressed broadly in the C. elegans nervous system, and neuronal IL-17-MALT-1 signaling regulates multiple phenotypes, including escape behavior, associative learning, immunity and longevity. Our data suggest MALT1 has an ancient role modulating neural circuit function downstream of IL-17 to remodel physiology and behavior.

### Keywords
Signaling, C. elegans, Behaviour, Proteomics, Neuroimmune communication

### Affiliations
Genes, Circuits and Behaviour, IST Austria
MRC LMB

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Mario de Bono
Genes, Circuits and Behaviour, IST Austria


