### Accession
PXD004167

### Title
Pellicule proteome in Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
The present data set provides the first description of the whole proteome of A. baumannii cells grown as pellicle using a label-free mass spectrometry approach. Results accord with the general findings reporting that sessile bacteria are far more resistant to detrimental conditions than their planktonic counterparts, by the accumulation of stress proteins. The present investigation also confirmed previous studies suggesting a correlation between the pellicle forming ability and the bacterial virulence.

### Sample Protocol
1/ Planktonic and pellicle growth 2/ Protein extraction 3/ Enzymatic digestion of protein extracts 4/ Tandem mass spectrometry 5/  Protein quantification: Label free experiment was performed.. Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported and analysed in Progenesis LC-MS software.

### Data Protocol
Label free experiment was performed as previously described by Obry et al. (2014). Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics). For comparison, one sample was set as a reference and the retention times of all other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalization, statistical analysis was performed for one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculations. For quantitation, peptide features presenting a p-value and a q-value less than 0.05, and a power greater than 0.8_were retained. MS/MS spectra from selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the database restricted to A. baumannii ATCC 17978 containing 4071 protein sequences (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: 1 missed trypsin cleavage site allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. Peptides with scores above identity threshold (score = 20) were considered and re-imported into Progenesis. For each growth condition, the total cumulative abundance of the protein was calculated by summing the abundances of peptides. Proteins identified with less than 3 peptides were discarded. Only the proteins which varied by 2-fold in these average normalized abundances between growth conditions were retained. In this study, protein expressions in 1-day and 4-days pellicle states were systematically compared to those in planktonic state.

### Publication Abstract
For several decades, many bacteria, among which A. baumannii, have shown their ability to colonize the upper surface of static liquids, forming a biofilm at the air-liquid interface named pellicle. Despite the ubiquity of these pellicles in both natural and artificial environments, few studies have investigated this biofilm type. The present data set provides the first description of the whole proteome of A. baumannii cells grown as pellicle, using a label-free mass spectrometry approach. Results are in accord with the general findings reporting that sessile bacteria are far more resistant to detrimental conditions than their planktonic counterparts, by the accumulation of stress proteins. The present investigation also confirmed previous studies suggesting a correlation between the pellicle forming ability and the bacterial virulence. Indeed, we showed the up-regulation of numerous virulence factors during the pellicle growth, e.g. phospholipases, adhesion factors, as well as those of the GacAS Two-Component System (TCS) and Type 6 Secretion System (T6SS). We also highlighted that Bam and Tam systems, both related to the OM insertion machinery, play a critical role during pellicle biogenesis. Moreover, sessile bacteria activate several pathways, e.g. iron, magnesium, phosphate pathways, which allows for increasing the panel of nutrient sources.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Proteomics, Pellicle, Label-free

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Université de Rouen - Laboratoire PBS - UMR 6270 CNRS

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Université de Rouen - Laboratoire PBS - UMR 6270 CNRS


