### Accession
PXD044388

### Title
Proteomic profiling of two commonly used laboratory yeast strains: W303 and BY4742

### Description
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a powerful model system that is often used to expand our understanding of cellular processes and biological functions. Although many genetically well-characterized laboratory strains of S. cerevisiae are available, they may have different genetic backgrounds which can confound data interpretation. Here, we profile and compare the proteomes of two common laboratory yeast background strains, W303 and BY4742, in both exponential and stationary growth phases using isobaric tag-based mass spectrometry. We quantified over 4,400 proteins, hundreds of which showed differences in abundance between strains and/or growth phases. Moreover, we used proteome-wide abundance to profile the mating type of the strains used in the experiment, the auxotrophic markers and associated metabolic pathways, as well as to investigate differences in particular classes of proteins, such as the pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) proteins. This study is a valuable resource that offers insight into mechanistic differences between two common yeast background strains and can be used as a guide to select a background that is best suited for addressing a particular biological question.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested using Lys-C (overnight at 24°C) and trypsin (6 h at 37°C). 1 µg of each enzyme was used per 100 µg of protein [10]. A final volume of 30% acetonitrile was added to each digest followed by the addition of specified tandem mass tag (TMTpro) labeling reagents. 50 µg of peptide for each sample were labeled with 100 µg of the appropriate TMTpro reagent as follows: W303 triplicates in stationary phase: 126, 127n, 127c; BY4742 triplicates in stationary phase: 128n, 128c, 129n; W303 triplicates in exponential phase:129c, 130n, 130c; BY4742 triplicates in exponential phase: 131, 131c, 132n. Samples were incubated for one hour at room temperature. Before continuing sample processing, ~1 µg of peptide was collected from each sample, mixed, and desalted via StageTip to verify labelling efficiency (ensuring that it was > 97%).

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt (the same database as used for RTS, above). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, also as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is a powerful model system that is often used to expand our understanding of cellular processes and biological functions. Although many genetically well-characterized laboratory strains of <i>S. cerevisiae</i> are available, they may have different genetic backgrounds which can confound data interpretation. Here, we report a comparative whole-proteome analysis of two common laboratory yeast background strains, W303 and BY4742, in both exponential and stationary growth phases using isobaric-tag-based mass spectrometry to highlight differences in proteome complexity. We quantified over 4400 proteins, hundreds of which showed differences in abundance between strains and/or growth phases. Moreover, we used proteome-wide protein abundance to profile the mating type of the strains used in the experiment, the auxotrophic markers, and associated metabolic pathways, as well as to investigate differences in particular classes of proteins, such as the pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) proteins. This study is a valuable resource that offers insight into mechanistic differences between two common yeast background strains and can be used as a guide to select a background that is best suited for addressing a particular biological question.

### Keywords
Genetic background, Yeast, Stationary phase, Proteome analysis, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


