### Accession
PXD011242

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics analysis of LX-2 Responses to Irradiation and TGF-β1 Description

### Description
The human hepatic stellate cell line LX2 was treated with 8 Gy X-ray irradiation and/or 2ng/ml recombinant human TGF-β1. The iTRAQ-based high throughput quantitative proteomic approach was used to obtain a comprehensive view of the protein ensembles affected by irradiation and/or TGF-β1 treatment on LX2. This study provides clues for further investigation of the mechanisms behind radiation-induced liver fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
LX2 cells were harvested following exposure to irradiation and/or TGF-β1 and resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and proteinase inhibitors), and then ultrasonic crushed to extract total proteins. The cell lysates were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. Protein samples (200 μg) were denatured with dithiothreitol at 37°C for 1 h and alkylated with iodoacetamide in the dark for 1h. The samples were loaded onto filter devices and centrifuged. After washing twice with UA (8 M urea in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and three times with 0.5M Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer volatile buffer (TEAB), the samples were digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50) at 37°C overnight. The peptide mixtures were desalted and vacuum dried. Protein peptides (100 μg) from each trypsin-digested sample were labeled using the iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (ABSCIEX, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reagents 113 and 117 were used to treat biological duplicates from untreated control cells, reagents 114 and 118 to treat biological duplicates from radiation-stimulated cells, reagents 115 and 119 to treat biological duplicates from TGF-β1-stimulated cells, and reagents 116 and 121 to treat biological duplicates from cells following exposure to radiation and TGF-β1. All samples were analyzed with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) or an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) nano liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass data were searched against the uniprot- human_170221.fasta database for peptide identification and quantification using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.01. The following parameters were set to identify the proteins: peptide mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 20 mmu, maximum missed cleavages = 2, Variable modifications: Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ-8plex (N-term), iTRAQ-8plex (K), iTRAQ-8plex (Y). Fold change of ≥ 1.20 or ≤ 0.83 was set as the meaningful cut-off value to designate upregulated and downregulated proteins respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are the main target of radiation damage and primarily contribute to the development of radiation-induced liver fibrosis. However, the molecular events underlying the radiation-induced activation of HSCs are not fully elucidated. In the present study, human HSC line LX2 was treated with X-ray irradiation and/or TGF-&#x3b2;1, and profibrogenic molecules were evaluated. The iTRAQ LC-MS/MS technology was performed to identify global protein expression profiles in LX2 following exposure to different stimuli. Irradiation or TGF-&#x3b2;1 alone increased expression of &#x3b1;-SMA, collagen 1, CTGF, PAI-1, and fibronectin. Irradiation and TGF-&#x3b2;1 cooperatively induced expression of these profibrotic markers. In total, 102, 137, 155 dysregulated proteins were identified in LX2 cell samples affected by irradiation, TGF-&#x3b2;1, or cotreatment, respectively. Bioinformatic analyses showed that the three differentially expressed protein sets were commonly associated with cell cycle and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum. The expression of a set of proteins was properly validated: CDC20, PRC1, KIF20A, CCNB1, SHCBP, TACC3 were upregulated upon irradiation or irradiation and TGF-&#x3b2;1 costimulation, whereas SPARC and THBS1 were elevated by TGF-&#x3b2;1 or TGF-&#x3b2;1 plus irradiation treatment. Furthermore, CDC20 inhibition suppressed expression of profibrotic markers in irradiated and TGF-&#x3b2;1-stimulated LX2 cells. Detailed data on potential molecular mechanisms causing the radiation-induced HSC activation presented here would be instrumental in developing radiotherapy strategies that minimize radiation-induced liver fibrosis.

### Keywords
Irradiation, Hepatic stellate cell, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University

### Submitter
Baoying Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaochong Zeng
Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University


