### Accession
PXD047816

### Title
Proteomic analysis of purified extracellular vesicles and crude migrasome from U87MG cells

### Description
This project has been performed to unveil the proteome of both purified extracellular vesicles (EVs) and crude migrasomes produced from U87MG gliolbastoma cells. Retraction fibers and migrasomes (R&Ms) are newly discovered membranous structures which are revealed to be generated by traction forces of migrating or deviding cells. However, it is still unknown what sorts of proteins are existed within these cellular structures. Thus, we performed the purification of both extracellular vesicles (EVs) and R&Ms (i.e., crude migrasome) from glioblastoma cells to validate the difference between EVs and R&Ms in terms of their protein components.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of EV and R&M EVs were purified using Total Exosome Isolation Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. # 4478359) according to manufacturer’s instruction. Also, crude migrasome extraction was performed based on Li Yu group’s method [PMID: 25342562]. In brief, U87MG and LN229 cells seeded on FN-coated 100-mm culture dishes were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% EV-free FBS. The EV-free FBS was obtained from FBS (Hyclone) by ultracentrifuge at 100,000×g for 18 h at 4℃, followed by filtration of supernatant FBS through a syringe filter (0.1 μm pore size; Satorius, Cat # 16553-K, Goettingen, DEU). The medium was collected and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 4 min 4℃ to remove cell bodies, and then 4,000 rpm for 20 min 4℃ to remove cell debris for obtaining EVs. Remaining cells on culture dishes were detached by 0.015% Trypsin/EDTA or scrapping and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 4 min 4℃ to remove cell bodies, and then 4,000 rpm for 20 min 4℃ to remove cell debris for obtaining R&Ms. The supernatant was mixed in a ratio 2:1 with Total Exosome Isolation Reagent. The mixture was incubated for overnight at 4℃. Next day, the mixture was centrifuged at 10,000×g or 18,000×g for 1 h at 4℃ to collect EV or R&M, respectively. The pellet was washed by PBS twice, then resuspended in 100-200 μL of PBS and prepared for nanoparticle tracking analysis, electron microscope sampling, and western blot analysis.  Sample preparation for proteomics EV and R&M samples were resuspended in 400 μL of 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.55), and dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM for 10 min at 95 °C to reduce disulfide bonds. Reduced samples were then incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. By a 10-fold dilution of 12% phosphoric acid, acidified samples were loaded onto S-Trap macro (EV) or mini (R&M) columns (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA; Cat. No: CO2-macro-80 or CO2-mini-80). We treated suspension-trapping (S-trap) proteolysis according to the manufacturer’s protocol, followed by the addition of 1:20 Lys-C/trypsin mixture and incubation for 16 h at 37 °C. The eluted peptide mixture was lyophilized using a cold trap and stored at -80 °C until use.  Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis The LC system was an Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO and 80% acetonitrile in water. Samples were reconstituted with 25 µL of mobile phase A, injected with a full sample loop injection of 5 µL into a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 × 100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and separated in EASY-Spray column (500 × 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) over 200 min (250 nL/min) at 50 °C. The column was priory equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A and 5% mobile phase B. A gradient of 5–40% B for 150 min, 40–95% for 2 min, 95% for 23 min, 95–5% B for 10 min, and 5% B for 15 min were applied. The LC system was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano EASY-Spray™ source. For all experiments, spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 290 °C, and a radio frequency funnel level to 40%. Full scans were made at a resolution of 60,000. MS1 AGC target was set to 3,000,000 charges, with a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Scan ranges used (in m/z) were as follows; 350–1600. Precursor fragmentation was achieved through higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30, and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z. Full scans were made at a resolution of 15,000. MS2 AGC target was set to 2,000,000. Charges 2–5 were considered for MS/MS, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 ms. Loop counts were set to 12. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000. Maximum MS2 injection times were as follows: 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Individual raw files acquired MS analysis and were retrieved against the reviewed Human Uniprot-SwissProt protein database (released on June 2019) using the SEQUEST-HT on Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search parameters used were as follows: 10-ppm tolerance for precursor ion mass and 0.02 Da for fragmentation mass. Trypsin peptides tolerate up to two false cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was calculated using the target-decoy search strategy, and the peptides within 1% of the FDR were selected using the post-processing semi-supervised learning tool Percolator based on the SEQUEST result. Label-free quantitation of proteins was calculated using the precursor ion peak intensity for unique and razor peptides of each protein and excluded peptides with methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Er stress, Lc-msms, Cell death, Retraction fiber, Migrasome, Itga5, Autophagosome

### Affiliations
Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea; Department of Digital Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Hee-Sung Ahn

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea; Department of Digital Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.


