### Accession
PXD023531

### Title
Time-series proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of human airway epithelial cells in the absence or presence of a specific IKK inhibitor

### Description
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a critical role in airway injury, repair, and structural remodeling. Although NFkB/RelA subnit is involved in late EMT-associated gene expression, RelA translocation is occurs later than early phases of IκB kinase (IKK)-depenedent gene expression. To investigate the hypothesis that IKK  plays an independent mechanism in TGF-induced EMT, we conducted time-series proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of human airway epithelial cells in the absence or presence of a specific IKK inhibitor, BMS -345541.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were extracted from small airway epithelial cells with Trizol reagent.  The protein pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of 8 M Guanidine HCl. The protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. One milligram of proteins from each sample was processed for digestion. The proteins were first reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for two hours.  Then, the sample was diluted with 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). An aliquot of Lys-C/Trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each sample at the 50:1 protein: enzyme ratio. The samples were incubated at 37 ºC overnight, and the solutions were further diluted with 500 µL of 100 µM of triethylammonium.  An aliquot of Trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each sample at the 50:1 protein: enzyme ratio. The samples were incubated at 37 ºC for 16 h. The phosphopeptides were extracted with TiO2 beads. The samples were desalted with C18 cartridge before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 using the Andromeda search engine. The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. For identification and quantification of protein phosphorylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was set as variable modification. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Human SWISSPORT sequence database (containing 20,193 human protein entries) combined with 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms in Maxquant. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a critical role in airway injury, repair, and structural remodeling. I&#x3ba;B kinase (IKK)-NF&#x3ba;B signaling regulates late EMT-associated gene expression. However, IKK-mediated mesenchymal transition occurs earlier than NF&#x3ba;B/RelA subunit-dependent EMT gene expression, leading us to investigate the hypothesis that IKK plays an independent mechanism in transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;)-induced EMT. Time-resolved dissection of early proteome and phosphoproteome changes in response to TGF&#x3b2; and a specific IKK inhibitor, BMS-345541, revealed that IKK regulates cascades of 23 signaling pathways essential in EMT, including TGF&#x3b2; signaling, p38 mitogen associate protein kinase (MAPK), Toll receptor signaling, and integrin pathways. We identified early IKK-dependent phosphorylation of core regulatory proteins in essential EMT signaling cassettes, including ATF2, JUN, NFKB1/p105, and others. Interestingly, we found that IKK&#x3b2; directly complexes with and phosphorylates the spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1s). XBP1s is an arm of the unfolded protein response (UPR) that activates the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP), a pathway that mediates protein N-glycosylation and survival from ER stress-induced apoptosis in EMT. We found that inhibition of IKK activity abolishes the phosphorylation of XBP1-T48, blocks XBP1s nuclear translocation, and inhibits the activation of HBP. Our study elucidates a previously unrecognized IKK&#x3b2;-XBP1s-HBP crosstalk pathway that couples inflammation and glucose metabolic reprogramming in ETM. Because XBP1-HBP controls N-glycosylation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in EMT, this novel IKK&#x3b2;-XBP1-HBP pathway may contain therapeutic targets whose inhibition could prevent ECM remodeling in lung fibrosis or other airway remodeling diseases.

### Keywords
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, And hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, Proteomics, Iκb kinase-nfκb, Extracellular matrix, N-glycosylation, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Yingxin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxin Zhao, Ph.D.
University of Texas Medical Branch


