### Accession
PXD026037

### Title
Multiplexed isobaric quantitative Protein Interaction Reporter (iqPIR) cross-linking on standard proteins

### Description
Initial demonstration of multiplexed isobaric quantitative Protein Interaction Reporter technology using two multiplexed samples consisting of 5 cross-linked standard proteins including alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1_YEAST), albumin (ALBU_BOVIN), cytochrome c (CYC_BOVIN), hemoglobin (HBA_HUMAN), and myoglobin (MYG_HORSE).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved separately at 1 mg/mL into a buffered solution of 170 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.  A final concentration of 1 mM of each iqPIR (2 μl from 50 mM stock in DMSO) was added to 100 μL aliquots of each protein, corresponding to 100 μg.  The reaction was allowed to proceed for 30 min at room temperature with constant mixing.  Disulfide bonds in the proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room tem-perature followed by alkylation of thiols with 10 mM iodo-acetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature.  Proteins were digested by adding a 1:200 ratio of trypsin to protein and incubating the samples at 37 oC overnight with constant mixing.  Resulting peptide samples were acidified to 1% (v/v) TFA prior to desalting with 1cc (50 mg) sized C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) loaded onto a vacuum manifold.  After equilibrating the SepPak with 1 mL of ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by 3 mL of H2O, 0.1% TFA the acidified samples were loaded onto the SepPak cartridges.  Salt was removed by washing bound peptides with 3 mL H2O, 0.1% TFA.  Peptides were eluted into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes with 1 mL of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA.  Desalted samples were concentrated to ~100 μL by vacu-um centrifugation.  Samples were adjusted to a peptide concentration of 0.3 μg/μL with H20, 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS analysis on a Easy-nLC coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML format.  Mango was used to identify MS2 spectra containing a PIR mass relationship indicating a cross-linked peptide pair.  MS2 spectra containing PIR mass relationships were searched using Comet, followed by analsyis with PeptideProphet, iProphet and validation with XLinkProphet.  Results were filtered to an estimated false discovery rate of less than 1%.  Quantification of iqPIR signal was performed with custom developed software.  Resulting data was uploaded into XLinkDB

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has emerged as a useful technique for interrogating protein structures and interactions. When combined with quantitative proteomics strategies, protein conformational and interaction dynamics can be probed. Quantitative XL-MS has been demonstrated with the use of stable isotopes incorporated metabolically or into the cross-linker molecules. Isotope-labeled cross-linkers have primarily utilized deuterium and rely on MS1-based quantitation of precursor ion extracted ion chromatograms. Recently the development and application of isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter (iqPIR) cross-linkers were reported, which utilize <sup>13</sup>C and <sup>15</sup>N isotope labels. Quantitation is accomplished using relative fragment ion isotope abundances in tandem mass spectra. Here we describe the synthesis and initial evaluation of a multiplexed set of iqPIR molecules, allowing for up to six cross-linked samples to be quantified simultaneously. To analyze data for such cross-linkers, the two-channel mode of iqPIR quantitative analysis was adapted to accommodate any number of channels with defined ion isotope peak mass offsets. The summed ion peak intensities in the overlapping channel isotope envelopes are apportioned among the channels to minimize the difference with respect to the predicted ion isotope envelopes. The result is accurate and reproducible relative quantitation enabling direct comparison among six differentially labeled cross-linked samples. The approach described here is generally extensible for the iqPIR strategy, accommodating future iqPIR reagent design, and enables large-scale <i>in vivo</i> quantitative XL-MS investigation of the interactome.

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Multiplexed quantitation

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle Washington, USA.

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle Washington, USA.


