### Accession
PXD012708

### Title
Comprehensive Arabidopsis Proteome Spectral Library

### Description
We constructed a comprehensive Arabidopsis Spectral Assay library that is useful for DIA/SWATH-MS quantitative proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted proteins from a total of 10 different Arabidopsis organs (including seed, root, root cell culture, cotyledon, rosette, cauline, stem, pollen, flower with fertilization, and silique). The peptides from these proteins were analyzed using UHPLC-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mascot generic file (mgf) using proteome discoverer. These mgf files were then searched with mascot against Arabidopsis proteome database (Tair10) and the potential novel protein sequences (which were identified by searching against the six-frame translation of Tair9 genome).  The search results were filtered using Scaffold and mzIdent files were exported.  The spectral library file (in excel) were generated directly using Spectranaut Pulsar X.

### Publication Abstract
Arabidopsis is an important model organism and the first plant with its genome completely sequenced. Knowledge from studying this species has either direct or indirect applications for agriculture and human health. Quantitative proteomics by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (SWATH/DIA-MS) was recently developed and is considered as a high-throughput, massively parallel targeted approach for accurate proteome quantification. In this approach, a high-quality and comprehensive spectral library is a prerequisite. Here, we generated an expression atlas of 10 organs of Arabidopsis and created a library consisting of 15,514 protein groups, 187,265 unique peptide sequences, and 278,278 precursors. The identified protein groups correspond to ~56.5% of the predicted proteome. Further proteogenomics analysis identified 28 novel proteins. We applied DIA-MS using this library to quantify the effect of abscisic acid on Arabidopsis. We were able to recover 8,793 protein groups of which 1,787 were differentially expressed. MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012708 and PXD012710 for data-dependent acquisition and PXD014032 for DIA analyses.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Arabidopsis, Swath, Dia

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Bioscience Core Laboratory King Abdullah University of Science & Technology Saudi Arabia  Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huoming Zhang
Bioscience Core Laboratory King Abdullah University of Science & Technology Saudi Arabia  Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


