### Accession
PXD009757

### Title
Proteome and transcriptome analyses reveal key molecular differences between quality parameters of commercial-ripe and tree-ripe fig (Ficus carica L.)

### Description
Fig fruit are highly perishable at the tree-ripe (TR) stage. Commercial-ripe (CR) fruit, which are harvested before the TR stage for their postharvest transportability and shelf-life advantage, are inferior to TR fruit in size, color and sugar content. The succulent urn-shaped receptacle serves as the protective structure and edible part of the fruit, and determines fruit quality. Quantitative iTRAQ reveal the proteins and transcripts that are differentially expressed in fig receptacle at the two harvest stages. We annotated 691 proteins against uni_Moraceae_3487, of which 59 showed ≤1.3 -fold change—in TR vs CR fruit. Ficin was the most abundant soluble protein in the fig receptacle. A high abundance of aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase was identified.

### Sample Protocol
The fig receptacle tissue samples were thoroughly ground to a very fine powder in liquid nitrogen, and soluble proteins were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)–ice-cold acetone precipitation method (1.0 g sample powder was combined with 4 mL of 10% w/v TCA in acetone) as described in our previous publication. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method, and 10 μg protein from each sample was separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE); gels of each sample were cut into eight strips according to protein abundance, and respectively placed in centrifuge tubes, digested for 24 h at 37 °C after decolorization [1 μg/μL trypsin stock solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) diluted 15 times with 25 mM triethylamine borane (TEAB)], with 3.3 μg of trypsin for 100 μg protein. The digested peptides were lyophilized and then reconstituted in 50% (w/v) TEAB. Six samples were labeled with iTRAQ Reagent-8PLEX Multiplex Kit (ABSciex Inc., MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. CR1, CR2 and CR3, TR1, TR2 and TR3 were labeled with iTRAQ reagents of 115, 116 and 117, 118, 119 and 121 Da, respectively. All labeled samples were lyophilized, then redissolved in Milli-Q water and desalted using a Strata-X-C cartridge (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA).  The protein samples were dissolved in 50 μL of mobile phase A (H2O, 0.1% w/v FA (Formic acid)) and loaded onto an Acclaim PePmap C18-reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) column (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and then separated with a reversed-phase C18 column (75 μm × 10 cm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Agela Technologies) mounted on a Dionex ultimate 3000 nano LC system. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a gradient of 5–80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% FA. The eluates were injected directly into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set in positive ion mode and a data-dependent manner with full MS scan 350–2000 m/z, full scan resolution at 70,000, MS/MS scan resolution at 17,500, MS/MS scan with minimum signal threshold 1E+5, isolation width at 2 Da. To evaluate the performance of this MS on the iTRAQ-labeled samples, two MS/MS acquisition modes and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) were employed. To optimize the MS/MS acquisition efficiency of HCD, normalized collision energy (NCE) was systemically examined 28%.

### Data Protocol
The MS results were input into Proteome Discoverer 1.3, with the following parameters: master ion mass range of 350–6000 Da; minimum number of peaks in the second mass spectrum, 10; signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) S/N threshold of 1.5. The identification and quantitation of the selected peptides were performed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.01 Matrix Science, London) against uni_Moraceae_3487 (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/3487). The false-positive rate (FDR) was controlled at <1%. The user-defined search parameters were fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: oxidation (M), Gln→Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), iTRAQ 8PLEX (K), iTRAQ 8PLEX (Y), iTRAQ 8PLEX (N-term); peptide tol: 15 ppm; MS/MS tol: 20 mmu; max missed cleavages: 1. Quantitative analysis parameters were protein ratio type: median; minimum peptides: 1; normalization method median: 1. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were determined based on iTRAQ-2DLC-MS/MS triplicate peak area measurements (115, 116, 117 Da for CR, and 118, 119, 121 Da for TR), and the averaged prior-to-calculating ratios. iTRAQ ratios below the low range (≤0.77) or above the high range (≥1.3) were considered to be downregulated or upregulated, respectively, with fold change p-value (p-FDR) ≤ 0.05. Gene ontology (GO)-enrichment analysis was conducted by Goatools with Fisher’s precise test, the p-values were corrected by multiple testing to control the FDR. GO enrichment was considered significant when the corrected p-value (p-FDR) ≤ 0.05. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)-pathway enrichment analysis was performed by KOBAS (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do) with Fisher’s precise test and the significance analysis was the same as for GO enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fruit, Commercial ripe, Proteome, Tree ripe

### Affiliations
Department of Fruit Tree Sciences, College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yuanyuan Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Huiqin Ma
Department of Fruit Tree Sciences, College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China


