### Accession
PXD028957

### Title
Comparative secretome analyses of Trichoderma/-Arabidopsis co-cultures identify proteins for salt stress, plant growth promotion and root colonization

### Description
Numerous Trichoderma strains are beneficial for plants, promote their growth and confer stress tolerance. A recently described novel Trichoderma strain strongly promotes growth of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings on media with 50 mM NaCl, while 150 mM NaCl strongly stimulated root colonization and induced salt-stress tolerance in the host without growth promotion. To understand the dynamics of plant-fungus interaction, we examined the secretome from both sides, and revealed a substantial change under different salt regimes, and during co-cultivation. Stress-related proteins, such as fungal Kp4-, WSC- and CFEM-domain-containing proteins, the plant calreticulin and cell-wall modifying enzymes, disappear when the two symbionts are co-cultured under high salt concentrations. More proteins involved in plant and fungal cell wall modifications and the battle of root colonization are found in the co-cultures under salt stress, while the number of plant antioxidant proteins decreased. We identified symbiosis- and salt concentration-specific proteins for both partners. The Arabidopsis PYK10 and a fungal prenylcysteine lyase are only found in the co-culture which promoted plant growth. The comparative analysis of the secretomes suggests that both partners profit from the interaction under salt stress but have to invest more in balancing the symbiosis. We discuss the role of the identified stage- and symbiosis-specific fungal and plant proteins for salt-stress and conditions promoting root colonization and plant growth.

### Sample Protocol
Co-cultivation of A. thaliana and Trichoderma (or growth of the partners alone) was performed in liquid PNM with 0, 50, 100, or 150 mM NaCl for five days. After centrifugation, the remaining culture media were filtered and proteins were isolated by solid-phase extraction. The culture supernatant was filtered through 3 kDa MWCO spin filters at 16,000 X g for 10 min. The protein retentate was resolubilized in 25 µl 100 mM TEAB and the solution was mixed with 25 µl 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol. Reduction and alkylation of cycsteine thiols was performed by addition of each 1 µL of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide incubated at 70°C for 30 min. The proteins were further cleaned up using C4 spin columns (Thermo): Acetonitrile (ACN) for reconstitution, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for equilibration, loading, and washing, 0.1% TFA in 80:20 ACN/H2O (v/v) for elution. Proteins were dried in a vacuum evaporator, resolubilized in 50 µl of 100 mM TEAB and digested overnight (18 h) with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Samples were vacuum-evaporated, resolubilized in 25 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) and filtered through Ultrafree-MC 0.2 µm PTFE membrane spin filters (Merck-Millipore) at 14 000 × g for 15 min. The filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Each sample was measured in triplicate (3 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates of 16 different conditions). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0 min at 4% B, 4 min at 5% B, 6 min at 6% B, 14 min at 10% B, 20 min at 14% B, 35 min at 20% B, 42 min at 26 %B, 46 min at 32% B, 52 min at 42% B, 55 min at 50% B 58 min at 65% B, 60-64.9 min at 96% B, 65-90 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1 ∙ 106. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2 ∙ 105) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s and the underfill ratio was set to 1.0%. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 6.8, QExactive Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt databases of A. thaliana and T. harzianum  by using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and protein N-term acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) was required for positive protein hits. If only 1 peptide per protein has been identified the hit was accepted if the Mascot score was >30 or the MS Amanda score was >300 or the Sequest score was >4. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by setting the abundance to 75% of the lowest abundance identified for each sample. Significantly different abundances were based on a fold change >4, a ratio-adjusted significance level < 0.05, which is the p-value calculated by the 2s t-test divided by the log2 ratio, and the proteins have to be identified at least in 2 of 3 biological replicates of the sample group with the highest abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Trichoderma, Salt stress, Root colonisation, Arabidopsis, Endophyte, Secretome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute


