### Accession
PXD004457

### Title
Shotgun proteomics analysis of Desulfovibrio alaskensis in response to Platinum and Palladium.

### Description
Platinum and palladium are highly sought-after noble metals that due to their low abundance have high value and because of their stability and their roles in catalytic processes are very desirable for industrial purposes. Bacteria are able to produce nanoparticles of platinum and palladium at low temperatures and from low concentration feedstocks contrary to  chemical methods and so pose a potentially untapped ‘green’ resource for nanoparticle synthesis. We have used the bacterium Desulfovibrio alaskensis G20 to reduce Pt and Pd ions to zero-valent nanoparticle forms and used differential shotgun proteomics to identify   proteins responsible for this reduction . There was found to be a core set of 13 proteins common to both datasets as well as 7 proteins specific to Pt and Pd individually. Over expression of one of Pt-specific genes; the NiFe hydrogenase small subunit, resulted in the formation of larger nanoparticles. For the first time the proteins involved in the metal reduction pathway have been pinpointed and it is our hope that these target genes can then be used for nanoparticle production to tailor specific properties for industrial purposes at the genetic level rather than post-production.

### Sample Protocol
D. alaskensis G20 was purchased from DSMZ and grown on Postgate Media C (PGMC) using lactate as a carbon source. All growth and manipulation of the Desulfovibrio was carried out at 30°C in an anaerobic hood fed with 10% CO2, 10% H2 in nitrogen.  Cells were disrupted in 8M urea, and total protein was assayed. One milligram of protein per sample was used for trypsin digestion. Each sample was diluted up to 2M Urea, a final concentration in ammonium bicarbonate of 25 mM, 5 mM DTT incubation period of 30 min at RT before adding 12.5 mM iodoacetamide. A 10 µg trypsin (Worthington) was added to the sample and digestion was performed at room temperature and overnight. The samples were cleaned on Bond Elut LMS 25 mg (Agilent Technologies). After elution, peptides were eluted with acetonitrille aliquoted and dry under low pressure and stored at -20°C until analysis. Prior to LC-MS analysis, 4 µg of the samples were reconstituted in 12 µl loading buffer (0.05% TFA in water). Capillary-HPLC-MS/MS analysis was done on an on-line system consisting of a 1200 binary HPLC micro-pump system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo-Fisher) on a 140 minutes gradient.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MM data was analysed using MASCOT Versions 2.4 (Matrix Science Ltd, UK) against the D. alaskensis G20 genome from http://genome.ornl.gov/microbial/ddes (Hauser et al 2001) with 3258 sequences.The Mascot  search parameters were two missed-cut, we consider variable methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation in all searches. The precursor mass tolerance was fixed at 7 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.4 amu. The significance threshold was set at 0.05 which correspond to an average identity score of 14 for this study. We use an additional cut off peptide score of 20.  Label-free quantitation was performed using Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Quantitation was performed on non-conflicting peptide (peptides not shared between different proteins). The total number of Features (i.e. intensity signal at a given retention time and m/z) was reduced to MS/MS peaks with charge of 2, 3, or 4+. The subset of multi-charged ions (2+, 3+, 4+) was extracted from each LC-MS run and the global ion intensities median was extracted for normalization. Protein quantitation was done as follows; for a given protein, the representative unique peptides intensity were summed to generate a normalised abundance value.  The calculated protein abundances were transformed using an ArcSinH function as the method of detection can generate a significant amount of near zero measurements for which a standard log transform is not ideal.  The within group means were calculated to evaluate the fold change and the ArcSinH transformed data was then used to calculate the p-values using one way ANOVA. Differentially expressed proteins were considered meaningful under the following conditions: Only proteins detected by two or more peptides, with an absolute ratio of at least 1.5 (i.e. 1.5 fold up-regulated or 0.667 down-regulated) and p <0.05 associated with the protein change.

### Publication Abstract
Platinum and palladium are much sought-after metals of critical global importance in terms of abundance and availability. At the nano-scale these metals are of even higher value due to their catalytic abilities for industrial applications. <i>Desulfovibrio alaskensis</i> is able to capture ionic forms of both of these metals, reduce them and synthesize elemental nanoparticles. Despite this ability, very little is known about the biological pathways involved in the formation of these nanoparticles. Proteomic analysis of <i>D. alaskensis</i> in response to platinum and palladium has highlighted those proteins involved in both the reductive pathways and the wider stress-response system. A core set of 13 proteins was found in both treatments and consisted of proteins involved in metal transport and reduction. There were also seven proteins that were specific to either platinum or palladium. Overexpression of one of these platinum-specific genes, a NiFe hydrogenase small subunit (Dde_2137), resulted in the formation of larger nanoparticles. This study improves our understanding of the pathways involved in the metal resistance mechanism of <i>Desulfovibrio</i> and is informative regarding how we can tailor the bacterium for nanoparticle production, enhancing its application as a bioremediation tool and as a way to capture contaminant metals from the environment.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Desulfovibrio alaskensis, Platinum, Proteomics, Palladium, Label-free

### Affiliations
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology
Dr Thierry Le Bihan Quantitative Proteomics lecturer and technology lead Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF  Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk

### Submitter
Thierry Le Bihan

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Le Bihan
Dr Thierry Le Bihan Quantitative Proteomics lecturer and technology lead Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF  Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk


