### Accession
PXD015810

### Title
Pacific oyster phagosome LC-MSMS

### Description
Phagosomes are task-force organelles of innate immune systems responsible for the recognition, processing, and ultimately destruction of invading microorganisms. Among invertebrate and vertebrate species, evolutionary diversity and continuity abound in the protein machinery executing this coordinately regulated process, though its dynamics and full scope of regulators remain incompletely understood. In order to clarify molecular mechanisms underlying phagocytosis, we studied phagocyte response to beads and Vibrio species, using hemocytes of the Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) as a marine invertebrate model. Phagosomes from different stages of phagocytosis were isolated by density-gradient centrifugation, and more than 400 phagosome-associated proteins were subsequently identified via high-throughput quantitative proteomics. In modeling key networks of phagosomal protein-protein interactions, our results support the essential roles of several processes driving phagosome formation and maturation, including actin cytoskeleton remodeling, and signal transduction by myosin and Rab proteins. In further quantitative proteomic analysis, trends of both upregulation and downregulation of protein expression were observed proteins during phagosome formation and maturation. Notably, the signal transducers CgRhoGDI and CgPI4K were implicated. In addition, six Rab proteins including Rab1, Rab2, Rab7, Rab11, RaB21, and Rab33 were also identified as active regulators or mediators in hemocyte phagocytosis. Our current work illustrates the diversity and dynamic interplay of phagosomal proteins, providing a framework for better understanding host-microbe interactions during phagosome formation and maturation in under-examined invertebrate species.

### Sample Protocol
To identify phagosome proteins of Pacific oysters, we undertook comparative MS analysis on phagosome extracts from two groups with different time points in endocytosis (15 min and 60 min), corresponding to early phagosomes and late phagosomes. Three biological replicates per group (each in 2 technical replicates) were used. We applied the methods by Desjardins et al. as described previously [18] for phagosome isolation with some modifications. Briefly, 0.8 µm latex beads (L1273, Sigma) were washed twice to remove detergent and sodium, re-suspended in Sørensen buffer (SB) (15 mM KH2PO4, 2 mM Na2HPO4, pH 6.0) and kept on ice. Oyster hemocytes were collected and maintained on ice. Latex beads were then added to the hemocytes and mixed by inverting tubes for internalization into the cells. Phagosomes formed upon internalization of blue latex beads for 15min and 60min are referred to the early phagosomes and late phagosomes, respectively. Cells were subsequently collected and lysed in homogenization buffer as per the methods described by Desjardins et al. Unbroken cells were separated by centrifugation at 1,200 rpm for 5 min at 4 ℃ and the supernatant containing phagosomes were subsequently isolated by flotation on a sucrose gradient for yielding enriched phagosomal protein extracts. Next, protein extracts were visualized by SDS-PAGE as detectable bands. Tandem mass tags (TMTs) was used as isotopomer labels for the accurate quantification of peptides and proteins. These tags and their analytical methods allow peptides from different samples to be identified by their relative abundance. Equal amounts of proteins of labeled samples were mixed, followed by tryptic digestion. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was then performed to identify phagosomal proteins and compare their abundance across biological replicates (n = 3) of early phagosomes and late phagosomes in Pacific oysters.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were converted into .mgf files using Proteome Discovery 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Finnigan, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Phagosomes are task-force organelles of innate immune systems, and evolutionary diversity and continuity abound in the protein machinery executing this coordinately regulated process. In order to clarify molecular mechanisms underlying phagocytosis, we studied phagocyte response to beads and Vibrio species, using hemocytes of the Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) as a marine invertebrate model. Phagosomes from different stages of phagocytosis were isolated by density-gradient centrifugation, and more than 400 phagosome-associated proteins were subsequently identified via high-throughput quantitative proteomics. In modeling key networks of phagosomal proteins, our results support the essential roles of several processes driving phagosome formation and maturation, including cytoskeleton remodeling and signal transduction by Rab proteins. Several endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated proteins were identified, while live cell imaging confirms an apparent intimate interaction between the ER and phagosomes. In further quantitative proteomic analysis, the signal transducers CgRhoGDI and CgPI4K were implicated. Through experimental validation, CgRhoGDI was shown to negatively regulate actin cytoskeleton remodeling in the formation of oyster phagosomes, while CgPI4K signaling drives phagosome maturation and bacterial killing. Our current work illustrates the diversity and dynamic interplay of phagosomal proteins, providing a framework for better understanding host-microbe interactions during phagosome activities in under-examined invertebrate species.

### Keywords
Oyster, Innate immunity, Phagosome, Actin remodeling

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China.
USTC

### Submitter
Huawei MU

### Lab Head
Dr Ziniu Yu
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China.


