### Accession
PXD002007

### Title
Temperature dependence of the proteome profile of the psychrotolerant pathogenic food spoiler Bacillus weihenstephanensis type strain WSBC 10204

### Description
Bacillus weihenstephanensis is a subspecies of the Bacillus cereus sensu lato group of spore forming bacteria known to cause food spoilage or food poisoning. The key distinguishing phenotype of B. weihenstephanensis is its ability to grow below 7°C or, from a food safety perspective, to grow and potentially produce toxins in a refrigerated environment. In order to gain insight into to the mechanistic basis of its psychrotolerant phenotype, as well as elucidate relevant aspects of its toxigenic profile, the proteome profiles of cells grown at either 6°C or 30°C were compared.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in rich medium at either 6 or 30˚C to late exponential phase. Cells were harvested and freeze dried, secreted proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid. Secreted proteins were washed with aceton and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. Cellular proteins were extracted by sonication in 100 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, freeze dried and loaded onto a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Gel lanes were cut into +/- 20 bands of equal size and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. LC-MS/MS data were acquired with an Bruker ApexUltra Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometer equipped with a 7 T magnet and a nano-electrospray Apollo II DualSource™ coupled to an Ultimate 3000 High-Performance Liquid Chromatography system. For each digest, samples containing up to 200 ng of tryptic peptides were injected as a 20 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 3% acetonitril aqueous solution and loaded onto a PepMap100 C18 (5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm length) precolumn at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. Following injection, the peptides were eluted via an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter x 250 mm length.) analytical column to the nano-electrospray source. For the third biological replicate analyses a similar 500 mm column at 60°C was used. LC Gradient profiles of up to 120 minutes were obtained usinged from 0.1% formic acid / 3% acetonitril / 99.97% H2O (A) andto 0.1% formic acid / 580% acetonitril / 5019.9% H2O (B) (0 min 97%A/3%B, 2 min 94%A/6%B, 110 min 70%A/30%B, 120 min 60%A/40%B, 125 min 100%B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Data dependent Q-selected peptide ions were fragmented in the hexapole collision cell at an Argon pressure of 6x10-6 mbar (measured at the ion gauge) and the fragment ions were detected in the ICR cell at a resolution of up to 60000. In the MS/MS duty cycle, 3 different precursor peptide ions were selected from each survey MS. The MS/MS duty cycle time for 1 survey MS and 3 MS/MS acquisitions was about 2 s. Instrument mass calibration was better than 5 ppm over an m/z range of 250 to 1500.

### Data Protocol
Raw FT-MS/MS data were processed with the MASCOT DISTILLER program, version 2.4.3.1 (64bits), MDRO 2.4.3.0, including the Search toolbox and the Quantification toolbox. Peak-picking for both MS and MS/MS spectra were optimized for the mass resolution of up to 60000. Peaks were fitted to a simulated isotope distribution with a correlation threshold of 0.7, with minimum signal to noise of 2. For each replicate, the combined processed data of gel fraction digests were combined and searched in a MudPIT (Multidimensional Protein Identification Technique) scoring approach with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 (MATRIX science, London, UK) against a newly created B. weihenstephanensis WSBC 10204 predicted proteome database. Processed data from the secretome digests were searched separately. The database was complemented with its corresponding decoy database for statistical analyses of peptide false discovery rate. Trypsin/P was used as enzyme and 1 missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm and the peptide fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.03 Dalton. MASCOT MudPIT peptide identification score was set to a cut-off of 20. At this cut-off and based on the number of assigned decoy peptide sequences, the significance threshold was adjusted to obtain a peptide false discovery rate of 2% for all analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus weihenstephanensis is a subspecies of the Bacillus cereus sensu lato group of spore-forming bacteria known to cause food spoilage or food poisoning. The key distinguishing phenotype of B. weihenstephanensis is its ability to grow below 7 &#xb0;C or, from a food safety perspective, to grow and potentially produce toxins in a refrigerated environment. Comparison of the proteome profile of B. weihenstephanensis upon its exposure to different culturing conditions can reveal clues to the mechanistic basis of its psychrotolerant phenotype as well as elucidate relevant aspects of its toxigenic profile. To this end, the genome of the type strain B. weihenstephanensis WSBC 10204 was sequenced and annotated. Subsequently, the proteome profiles of cells grown at either 6 or 30 &#xb0;C were compared, which revealed considerable differences and indicated several hundred (uncharacterized) proteins as being subproteome- and/or temperature-specific. In this manner, several processes were newly indicated to be dependent on growth temperature, such as varying carbon flux routes and a different role for the urea cycle. Furthermore, a possible post-translational regulatory function for acetylation was suggested. Toxin production was determined to be largely independent of growth temperature.

### Keywords
Bacillus weihenstephanensis, Psychrotolerance, Food pathogen, Toxigenicity

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sacha Stelder

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Gerdinus de Koster
Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


