### Accession
PXD018588

### Title
Label free proteomics analysis of differentiating human muscle cells.

### Description
We have carried out systematic analysis of protein expression changes during differentiation of human myoblasts into myotubes over 6 days period in cell culture.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle differentiation. Immortalized human satellite cells (KM155C25) were differentiated into myoblasts following procedures established before [PMID: 22040608]. Biological triplicate protein extracts were prepared at 6 time points: proliferating activated myoblasts (Day -1) and 5 days following the initiation of differentiation into mature myocytes (Day 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4). Protein extraction and sample preparation was performed following previously published protocols [PMID: 30159003 and PMID 30373789]. Mass spectrometry. Each sample was analyzed in technical triplicates. The desalted peptides were captured on a µ-precolumn (5µm, 5mm x 300 µm, 100 Å pore size, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being separated using a home-packed fused silica column (50cm x 100 µm, 120 Å pore size) of 2 µm InertSil ODS-3 beads (GLSciences). Peptides were separated using a 120 mins gradient of 8 to 35% buffer B (99.99% ACN, 0.01% FA), at 200 nl/min flow with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed by MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A full MS scan across the mass range 350-1800 m/z was performed within the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target of 5 x 105 ions, with a maximum injection time (IT) of 60ms, a dynamic exclusion window of 40 sec was used. This was followed by fragmentation of selected top 20 ions with charge states of +2-6 by HCD within the ion trap. MS/MS scans were performed at a rapid ion trap scan rate, with a collision energy of 35%, a maximum IT of 35ms and an AGC target of 1 x 104. An isolation window of 0.7 m/z was used, with an isolation offset of 0.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Generated data was analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.5.1) and the in-built Andromeda search engine. The human UniProt Reference Proteome database, containing Swiss-Prot proteins including isoforms (downloaded 26 April 2017, containing 20,198 entries) was used for identification. Data was searched with the following parameters; trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a fixed modification of Carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications of Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term) and Deamidation (NQ). Label-Free Quantitation was performed with “match between runs” and disabled “second peptide search”. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both PSM and protein identification was set at 0.01 %. All other parameters remained as default including a mass tolerance for precursor ions of 20 ppm and a mass tolerance for fragment ions of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Statistical testing remains one of the main challenges for high-confidence detection of differentially regulated proteins or peptides in large-scale quantitative proteomics experiments by mass spectrometry. Statistical tests need to be sufficiently robust to deal with experiment intrinsic data structures and variations and often also reduced feature coverage across different biological samples due to ubiquitous missing values. A robust statistical test provides accurate confidence scores of large-scale proteomics results, regardless of instrument platform, experimental protocol and software tools. However, the multitude of different combinations of experimental strategies, mass spectrometry techniques and informatics methods complicate the decision of choosing appropriate statistical approaches. We address this challenge by introducing PolySTest, a user-friendly web service for statistical testing, data browsing and data visualization. We introduce a new method, Miss test, that simultaneously tests for missingness and feature abundance, thereby complementing common statistical tests by rescuing otherwise discarded data features. We demonstrate that PolySTest with integrated Miss test achieves higher confidence and higher sensitivity for artificial and experimental proteomics data sets with known ground truth. Application of PolySTest to mass spectrometry based large-scale proteomics data obtained from differentiating muscle cells resulted in the rescue of 10-20% additional proteins in the identified molecular networks relevant to muscle differentiation. We conclude that PolySTest is a valuable addition to existing tools and instrument enhancements that improve coverage and depth of large-scale proteomics experiments. A fully functional demo version of PolySTest and Miss test is available via http://computproteomics.bmb.sdu.dk/Apps/PolySTest.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Lc-ms/ms, Label free, Muscle

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
University of Southern Denmark


