### Accession
PXD010340

### Title
Heat-adaptive proteome in filling wheat grain

### Description
Wheat (T. aestivum L. Chinese Spring) plants were cultured in 25-cm buckets at a density of 16 plants per bucket in a greenhouse at a temperature of 15–30 °C. Plants were watered once a week, and artificial light was applied when there was fewer than 12 h of natural daylight. The flowering date of each spike was recorded when the first flower appeared on the spike. Comparable wheat plants were selected depending on the flowering time and growth status and were transferred into growth chambers 12 DAF for a three-day adaptation period to the growth chamber environment (24/17 °C, 14/10 h day/night cycle). Wheat plants were illuminated with a photosynthetic photon flux density of 360 µmol m˗2 s˗1 at canopy height, and relative humidity ranged from 40% to 70%. Half of the wheat plants (about 50 plants) were transferred to heated conditions (37/17 °C, 14/10 h day/night cycle, 40% to 70% humidity), while the others were maintained under the standard conditions described above as a control. After three day/night cycles, the heated samples were collected after the plants had been exposed to heat for 4 h, and the control samples from the unheated chambers were collected at the same time for and proteomic analyses. A minimum of 20 spikes were collected from each condition, immediately immersed in liquid nitrogen and stored at ˗80 °C until further analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Isobaric TMT-labelled quantitative proteomic analysis Protein extraction was performed for 12 to 15 filling grains (about 500 mg) from one spike. Three spikes (one spike per replicate) from each condition were analysed for proteomic analysis. Samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and collected in a 5-mL centrifuge tube, then sonicated three times on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Finally, protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid-acetone for 2 h at ˗20 °C. After centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0). The protein concentration was determined using a 2-D Quant kit following the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Trypsin digestion and TMT labelling.  The protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 (trypsin:protein mass ratio) for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 (trypsin:protein mass ratio) for the second 4-h digestion at 37 °C. Approximately 100 μg of protein for each sample was digested with trypsin (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) for the following experiments. After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for a 6-plex TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC fractionation The peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Peptides were separated by a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 10, over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and database searches.  The collected fractions dissolved in 0.1% formic acid were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Firstly, the reconstituted samples were applied to a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Fisher Scientific), then separated on a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was as follows: 7%-20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) (24 min), 20%-35% solvent B (8 min), 35%-80% solvent B (3 min), and 80% solvent B (4 min).  The resulting peptides were subjected to nanospray source and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC system. A resolution of 70,000 in the orbitrap was used to detect intact peptides, and peptides were selected for MS/MS using 33% normalized collision energy. MS data was obtained using a data-dependent “top 20” procedure, which alternatively chooses the most abundant precursor ions with a threshold ion count above 2E4 in the MS survey scan (350-1800 m/z). The dynamic exclusion duration was 10 s. A resolution of 17,500 was set for ion fragments detection. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was applied to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated to generate MS/MS spectra. The fixed first mass was adjusted to 100 m/z. Database searching The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.2) and searched against Triticum_aestivum.TGACv1.pep.all.fa (downloaded from Ensembl Plants http://plants.ensembl.org/index.html, May 2018). Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme with two maximum missing cleavages. Mass error of precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. TMT6plex (N-term), TMT6plex (K) were specified as fixed modification. False discovery rate was adjusted to ≤ 1% and the peptide ion score was set to ≥20. Proteins with at least three unique peptides presented at all samples were further analyzed. Bioinformatics analysis For proteomic data, HRPs were assigned to different biological processes with reference to the UniProt-GOA database (www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). For enrichment analysis, the number of (a) HRPs and (b) all proteins in each pathway were calculated, along with the total number (c) of HRPs annotated for the pathway and (d) of all proteins annotated for the pathway. The four numbers (a, b, c, d) were used to calculate Fisher’s exact test p values and fold enrichment according to the equation: fold enrichment = (a/c) / (b/d). For the metabolomic data, metabolites were assigned to different pathways following the KEGG pathway reference (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway). Enrichment analysis was performed using the software Metaboanalyst 2.0 (www.metaboanalyst.ca).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grain, Heat stress, Tmt proteomics, Wheat

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China

### Submitter
Yunze Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Shengbao Xu
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China


