### Accession
PXD022903

### Title
Combined Peptide array screen and proximity labeling proteomics fine map C/EBPa protein interactions

### Description
The pioneering transcription factor C/EBPα coordinates cell fate and cell differentiation. The structure of C/EBPα comprises intrinsically disordered regions, multiple short linear motifs, and extensive post-translational side chain modifications (PTM), reflecting its modularity and functional plasticity. Here, we combined peptide matrix screening with biotin ligase proximity labeling proteomics to generate a PTM-dependent comprehensive protein interaction map of C/EBPα in myeloid cells. We found that protein interactions hotspots coincide with homologous conserved regions of the C/EBP family. PTMs alter the interaction spectrum of multi-valent C/EBP-motifs to configure a dynamic C/EBPα hub that selects co-regulatory components such as of the BAF/SWI-SNF complexes in an C/EBPα arginine-methylation and isoform state specific fashion. Our data suggest that the functional plasticity of C/EBPs is based on promiscuous interactions with protein machineries involved in gene regulation, epigenetics, genome organization, DNA replication, RNA processing and transport. The experimental strategy opens new avenues to systematically examine the PTM-dependent interactome of intrinsically disordered proteins as a basis to explore their multi-modal functions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Interaction Screen on a peptide Matrix(PRISMA): Custom PepSpot cellulose membranes were ordered from JPT and PRISMA was performed as described before (Dittmar et al., 2019) with slight adaptations. All washing and incubation steps were performed at 4°C on a rocking platform set to 700 rpm. Membranes were wetted in membrane binding buffer for 15 min, followed by a blocking step with 1 mg/ml yeast tRNA in membrane binding buffer for 10 min. Membranes were washed 5 x for 5 min with membrane binding buffer and incubated with nuclear extracts on ice for 30 min. The protein extract was removed and the membranes were washed 3 x 5 min with membrane binding buffer. The individual peptide spots were punched out with a biopsy puncher and placed into single wells of a 96 well plate containing 20µl denaturation buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM HEPES pH 8). The samples were digested with an in solution digestion protocol implemented on a PAL robot system. In brief, proteins were reduced with 1mM TCEP for 30 min followed by alkylation with 5mM CAA for 20 min. To each sample 0.5 µg of sequencing grade lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) was added. Samples were digested for 2h before being diluted with four volumes of 50mM ammonium-bi-carbonate and continuation of the digestion over night at room temperature. Digested samples were acidified with TFA and desalted with C18 stage tips as described before (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  NB4 stable BioID cell lines were grown in RPMI supplemented with tetracycline free FCS. CeBioID : cells were seeded in exponential growth phase in media supplemented with 1mM biotin and 1µg/ml doxycline. Cells were harvested after 24h by centrifugation and washed twice with ice cold PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in modified RIPA buffer (lysis buffer: 50 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 150 mM, NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% sodium deoxycholate, freshly added protease inhibitors) and incubated on ice for 20 min. Samples were sonicated with a probe sonicator for 5 pulses and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C, 20 000g. For each pulldown (1x 15 cm dish), 80µl neutravidin-agarose bead slurry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Beads were washed twice in lysis buffe and added to the protein extracts. The samples incubated rotating at 4°C for 2.5 h. Beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer, 1x with 1M KCl, 1x 2M Urea in 50mM Tris pH8 and 3x with 50mM Tris pH8. Washing buffers were kept on ice and each washing step was performed with 1ml, inverting the tube 5 times and then centrifuging for 1 min at 2000g to pellet the beads. Washed beads were resuspended in 80µl urea/trypsin buffer (2M urea, 50mM Tris pH7.5, 1mM DTT, 5µg/ml trypsin) and incubated 1h at RT on a tubeshaker at 1000rpm. The supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, the beads washed twice with 60µl 2M urea/50mM Tris pH7.5 and the supernatant combined with the supernatant from the previous step. Residual beads were removed by an additional centrifugation (1 min, 5000g) and sample transfer step. Eluted proteins were reduced with 4mM DTT for 30 min on a tubeshaker (RT, 1000 rpm). Proteins were alkylated with 10mM IAA in the dark for 45 min (RT, 1000 rpm) and digested over night with 0.5µg trypsin at RT on a thermoshaker at 700 rpm. Desalted and dried peptides were resuspended in MS sample buffer (3% ACN/ 0.1% FA) and separated online with a Easy-nLCTM 1200 coupled to a Q-exactive+ or a Q exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with an orbitrap electrospray ion source. Samples were separated on line on a 20 cm reverse-phase column (inner diameter 75µm) packed in house with 3 µm C18-Reprosil beads with a linear gradient ramping from 3% to 76% acetonitrile. PRISMA samples were separated with a 1h gradient and MS data was acquired on a Q-exactive+ in data dependent acquisition mode with a top10 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 in the scan range from 300 to 1700 m/z, automated gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 120ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500, AGC target of 1e5 and maximum IT of 60 ms. Ions were isolated with a 2 m/z isolation window and normalized collision energy was set to 26. Unassigned charge states and single charged precursors were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. BioID pulldowns were separated on with a 2h gradient and MS data was acquired on a Q-exactive HF-X in data dependent acquisition mode with a top20 method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) searching against a human protein database containing isoforms downloaded from uniprot (June 2017) and a database including common contaminants. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. For BioID experiments, lysine biotinylation was added as an additional variable modification. Depending on digestion mode (trypsin or LysC only), enzyme specificity was selected with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 6 ppm and 20 ppm for fragments. False-discovery rate was set to 1% on protein and peptide level. For SILAC measurements, the requantify option was enabled and minimum ratio count was set to 2. For LFQ analysis the match between run and fast LFQ option was used with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
C/EBP&#x3b1; represents a paradigm intrinsically disordered transcription factor containing short linear motifs and post-translational modifications (PTM). Unraveling C/EBP&#x3b1; protein interaction networks is a prerequisite for understanding the multi-modal functions of C/EBP&#x3b1; in hematopoiesis and leukemia. Here, we combined arrayed peptide matrix screening (PRISMA) with BioID to generate an <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> validated and isoform specific interaction map of C/EBP&#x3b1;. The myeloid C/EBP&#x3b1; interactome comprises promiscuous and PTM-regulated interactions with protein machineries involved in gene expression, epigenetics, genome organization, DNA replication, RNA processing, and nuclear transport. C/EBP&#x3b1; interaction hotspots coincide with homologous conserved regions of the C/EBP family that also score as molecular recognition features. PTMs alter the interaction spectrum of C/EBP-motifs to configure a multi-valent transcription factor hub that interacts with multiple co-regulatory components, including BAF/SWI-SNF or Mediator complexes. Combining PRISMA and BioID is a powerful strategy to systematically explore the PTM-regulated interactomes of intrinsically disordered transcription factors.

### Keywords
Bioid, Ptm, Peptide pulldowns, Cebpa

### Affiliations
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin
Head Proteomics Platform, MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Evelyn Ramberger

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Head Proteomics Platform, MDC Berlin


