### Accession
PXD045407

### Title
URI alleviates tyrosine kinase inhibitors-induced ferroptosis by reprogramming lipid metabolism in p53 wild-type liver cancers. HEK293T cells were transfected with His-URI plasmid before anti-His immunoprecipitation and gel cutting. LC-MS/MS was performed to identify URI potential binding proteins.

### Description
URI keeps low levels of p53 in a TRIM28-MDM2 dependent manner, maintains SCD1 activity and accumulation of MUFAs, and subsequently promotes resistance to TKIs in cancer cell. URI-p53-SCD1 axis mediates resistance of TKIs and may explain why p53-wild type HCC still showed intrinsic resistance to TKIs. Moreover, the combination therapy identified here may represent a promising strategy for the approximately 41% of patients with advanced HCC who have wild-type p53 and high levels of URI/SCD1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with His-URI plasmid before anti-His immunoprecipitation and gel cutting. LC-MS/MS was performed to identify URI potential binding proteins. For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μL of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 37°C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μL trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uri

### Affiliations
National Center for Liver Cancer, Naval Medical University, Shanghai 201805, P.R. China
Fudan University

### Submitter
Zhiwen Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Liwei Dong
National Center for Liver Cancer, Naval Medical University, Shanghai 201805, P.R. China


