### Accession
PXD015375

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from human plasma and serum are carriers of extravesicular cargo - implications for biomarker discovery

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) may serve as biomarkers for multiple purposes, samples of plasma and serum offer in the form of liquid biopsy a relatively non-invasive means to obtain EV-mediated molecular information. High throughput sampling and analytics for the search of EV-borne biomarkers is facilitated by the availability of biobanks, but the samples in biobanks have not been collected with EVs in mind. In addition to anticoagulation, pre-analytical steps of EV-research as e.g. agitation and prolonged incubation cause ex vivo platelet activation and vesiculation. This study analyses the effects of common anticoagulation (citrate, EDTA and ACD) and clotting on EV-samples from plasma/serum pools that had been equally treated during the blood collection and utilizing the currently approved preanalytical steps. Blood samples were obtained from healthy, fasting volunteers. Volunteers had not used any medication for the previous 7 days. Pools of samples were analyzed with quantitative label-free proteomics using ultra-definition MSE. Statistical analyzes were performed to identify proteins distinguishing different sample types. With two or more unique proteins per identification, 163 proteins were quantified. A clear separation between sample types was seen in principal component analysis. 42 proteins showed statistically significant difference between sample types. The set of proteins was studied further with network, pathway and protein-protein interaction analyses, and found to participate in e.g. cell growth and maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
EV pellet corresponding to 100 µg of total protein was adjusted to 25mM Tris, 75mM NaCl; pH 7.5 and applied to 50 µL of albumin depletion resin slurry (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Rockform, IL, USA) previously washed with same buffer. Flow through and three washes were collected by centrifugation and deemed to be albumin depleted EV proteins. The protein concentration was measured by bicinchonic acid assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Rockform, IL, USA) for the total protein concentration. Equal amount of protein for each sample was dried in speed vacuum (Savant, Thermofisher), and then dissolved in 6 M urea and 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Reconstitution was performed with 10mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at room temperature (RT), and thereafter 30mM iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark at room temperature (RT). Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (18 h at +37°C) after the consumption of abundant iodoacetamide (30mM DTT, 60 min at RT) and 1:10 dilution with high-purity Milli-Q water (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Finally, the samples were cleaned up with C18 spin columns, and dried in speed vacuum following the dissolution in 0.1% formic acid containing 12.5 fmol Hi3 peptide mixture (Waters) per µl. All the procedures described were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, wherever applicable. Liquid chromatography: Four microlitre samples corresponding to 1.4 µg of total protein were injected to the ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA) (Distler et al, 2014). TRIZAIC nanoTile 85 µm x 100mm HSS-T3u wTRAP was applied as a separating device before mass spectrometry (MS). After loading and trapping, the samples were washed for 2 min at 8.0 µL/min with 1% buffer B. The analytical gradient was used as follows: 0–1 min 1% B; at 2 min 5% B; at 65 min 30% B; at 78 min 50% B; at 80 min 85% B; at 83 min 85% B; at 84 min 1% B; and at 90 min 1% B with 450 nL/min. Buffer A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich). The data was acquired with UDMSE with Synapt G2-S UDMS (Waters Corporation) including ion mobility spectroscopy (IMS). The data range was 100–2000m/z, scan time 1 s, IMS wave velocity 650ms_1. Calibration was performed by Glu1- fibrinopeptide B MS2 fragments and Glu1- fibrinopeptide B precursor ion, used during the acquisitions as a lock mass. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Version 3, Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for processing of raw files. Peptide identification was run with Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries), and label-free protein quantification performed with Hi-N method (Protein Lynx Global Server) (Silva et al, 2006). The samples were spiked with 12.5 fmol/µL of CLPB_ECOLI (P63285, ClpB protein) peptides (Hi3 E. Coli Standard, Waters). Digesting reagent was trypsin and 2 missclevages were allowed. The peptide identification parameters were: fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable modification of methionine (oxidation). The peptide error tolerance was set to maximally 10ppm and the false discovery rate limited to less than 1% and default values (in Progenesis QI for Proteomics) were used for the rest of the parameters. The quantified proteins in all comparisons were compared by ANOVA on a protein-to-protein basis and their expression levels were considered significantly different, if ANOVA p-value was less than 0.05. Principal component analysis (PCA), offering the visualization of the main axes of variation in the data groups, was performed by Progenesis QI for proteomics.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis is described previously in detail (Saraswat et al, 2017a). Briefly, Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Version 3, Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for processing of raw files. Peptide identification was run with Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries), and label-free protein quantification performed with Hi-N method (Protein Lynx Global Server) (Silva et al, 2006). The samples were spiked with 12.5 fmol/µL of CLPB_ECOLI (P63285, ClpB protein) peptides (Hi3 E. Coli Standard, Waters). The peptide identification parameters were: fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable modification of methionine (oxidation). The peptide error tolerance was set to maximally 10ppm and the false discovery rate limited to less than 2% and default values (in Progenesis QI for Proteomics) were used for the rest of the parameters. The quantified proteins in all comparisons were compared by ANOVA on a protein-to-protein basis and their expression levels were considered significantly different, if ANOVA p-value was less than 0.05. Principal component analysis (PCA), offering the visualization of the main axes of variation in the data groups, was performed by Progenesis QI for proteomics. Sample runs in the final analysis were as follows ACD (02, 05 and 08), citrate (11, 14 and 17), EDTA (20, 23, 26) and serum (29, 32 and 35). Samples were acquired as triplicates e.g 01, 02 and 03 etc and middle run was used in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum. plasma, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Isolation

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Academy of Finland Postdoctoral Researcher EV Core and Research Faculty of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Viikinkaari 9 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Mari Palviainen, PhD
Academy of Finland Postdoctoral Researcher EV Core and Research Faculty of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Viikinkaari 9 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland


