### Accession
PXD025277

### Title
DIA-based proteome profiling of nasopharyngeal swabs from COVID-19 patients

### Description
We sought to characterize the host response through proteome profiling of nasopharyngeal swab specimens. A mass spectrometer combining trapped ion mobility spectrometry and high-resolution QTOF mass spectrometer with a parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) was deployed for unbiased proteome profiling. First, deep proteome profiling of nasopharyngeal swabs was performed in PASEF-DDA mode, which identified 7,723 proteins and 102,392 peptides that were then used for constructing a spectral library. Subsequently, quantitative proteome profiling was carried out for 90 nasopharyngeal swab samples in diaPASEF mode which resulted in 5,023 protein identifications. Functional analysis revealed two significant features of biological processes of innate immune response and viral life cycle. Overall, we provide the in-depth proteome record from nasopharyngeal swab samples and suggest relevant host response along with proteins playing a pivotal role against viral infection, which would assist for mining promising drug targets in the future.

### Sample Protocol
All of NP swabs used in this study were inactivated at 70 °C for 30 minutes. Protein precipitation was performed by addition of 9 times of methanol and pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 minutes. Precipitants were reconstituted in 8M urea in 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). Protein lysates were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at dark condition. Protein digestion was carried out using trypsin overnight at 37 °C with 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. Individual samples were analyzed with diaPASEF mode by injecting 1µg of peptides. nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was operated with two column separation mode connected to an analytical column (25 cm × 75 μm, 1.6 μm C18, Ionopticks) and a trap column (2 cm × 100 μm, Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column was kept at 50 °C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was prepared with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were separated over 130 minutes at 300 nl/min using the gradients; from 3 to 35% sol B in 120 min, from 35% to 80% sol B in 5 min, maintaining at 80% for 10 min and equilibrating 3% sol B for 5 min. Eluted peptide were analyzed on timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) with diaPASEF mode. TIMS was enabled with 100 ms of ramp time and 100 % of duty cycle. Isolation width was set as 25 m/z, and precursor ions of 400-1,200 m/z and ion mobility of 0.69-1.47 Vs cm-2 were monitored with 64 windows. iRT peptides (Biognosys, Ki-3002-1) were injected for all the samples analyzed in this study.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Spectonaut 14 against the spectral library generated from DDA data using the BGS factory default settings. The identifications were filtered at FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. PASEF-DDA data for spectral library generation were searched against combined protein database of Uniprot human protein database, SARS-CoV-2 proteins, SARS-Co-V proteins, and common coronaviruses proteins (OC43, HKU1, NL63 and L229E). The maximum of two missed cleavages were considered with trypsin as the enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Since the recent outbreak of COVID-19, there have been intense efforts to understand viral pathogenesis and host immune response to combat SARS-CoV-2. It has become evident that different host alterations can be identified in SARS-CoV-2 infection based on whether infected cells, animal models or clinical samples are studied. Although nasopharyngeal swabs are routinely collected for SARS-CoV-2 detection by RT-PCR testing, host alterations in the nasopharynx at the proteomic level have not been systematically investigated. Thus, we sought to characterize the host response through global proteome profiling of nasopharyngeal swab specimens. A mass spectrometer combining trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) and high-resolution QTOF mass spectrometer with parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) was deployed for unbiased proteome profiling. First, deep proteome profiling of pooled nasopharyngeal swab samples was performed in the PASEF enabled DDA mode, which identified 7723 proteins that were then used to generate a spectral library. This approach provided peptide level evidence of five missing proteins for which MS/MS spectrum and mobilograms were validated with synthetic peptides. Subsequently, quantitative proteomic profiling was carried out for 90 individual nasopharyngeal swab samples (45 positive and 45 negative) in DIA combined with PASEF, termed as diaPASEF mode, which resulted in a total of 5023 protein identifications. Of these, 577 proteins were found to be upregulated in SARS-CoV-2 positive samples. Functional analysis of these upregulated proteins revealed alterations in several biological processes including innate immune response, viral protein assembly, and exocytosis. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to deploy diaPASEF for quantitative proteomic profiling of clinical samples and shows the feasibility of adopting such an approach to understand mechanisms and pathways altered in diseases.

### Keywords
Host response, Nasopharyngeal swabs, Covd-19, Dia, Timstof

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA


