### Accession
PXD012850

### Title
Pathologic alteration in the proteome of synaptosomes from the mouse model of spinal muscular atrophy

### Description
In this study, label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using the Smn 2B/- mouse model to identify and investigate significant changes in protein abundance that may be related to the pathogenesis and neurodegeneration oberved in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome were prepared, as described by Dunkley et al. 2008, from the spinal cords of six biological replicates which consisted of 3 wild-type mice and 3 Smn2B/- mis (SMA phenotype). Synaptosome enriched fractions were resuspended in 6X SDS loading dye and separated using a 15% SDS-PAGE gel prior to in-gel trypsin digestion. Following an overnight incubation, peptide extracts were collected and grouped into 4 separate fractions per each biological replicate. In order to perform label-free quantitative analysis, a Hi3 internal peptide standard was added to each fraction. The peptide mixture from each biological replicate, which was conmprised of 4 fractions, were measured in triplicate using Waters Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis Q1 (Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for peptide identification analysis against the UniprotKB/SwissProt database of Mus musculus. The processing parameters for protein identification required a minimum of 3 fragment ions per peptide, a minimum of 7 fragment ion matches per protein, 2 missed cleavages (Trypsin), fall below a false discovery rate of 1%, and a variable modification for oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a human genetic disorder characterized by muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, and death of motor neurons. SMA is caused by mutations or deletions in a gene called <i>survival motor neuron 1</i> (<i>SMN1</i>). <i>SMN1</i> is a housekeeping gene, but the most prominent pathologies in SMA are atrophy of myofibers and death of motor neurons. Further, degeneration of neuromuscular junctions, of synapses, and of axonal regions are features of SMA disease. Here, we have investigated the proteome dynamics of central synapses in P14 <i>Smn</i><sup><i>2B/-</i></sup> mice, a model of SMA. Label-free quantitative proteomics on isolated synaptosomes from spinal cords of these animals identified 2030 protein groups. Statistical data analysis revealed 65 specific alterations in the proteome of the central synapses at the early onset stage of disease. Functional analysis of the dysregulated proteins indicated a significant enrichment of proteins associated with mitochondrial dynamics, cholesterol biogenesis, and protein clearance. These pathways represent potential targets for therapy development with the goal of providing stability to the central synapses, thereby preserving neuronal integrity in the context of SMA disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012850.

### Keywords
Ion-mobility, Synapt, Sma, Synaptosomes, Label-free

### Affiliations
University of Windsor
Chemistry and biochemistry, University of Windsor, Canada

### Submitter
Robert Gombar

### Lab Head
Dr Panayiotis O. Vacratsis
Chemistry and biochemistry, University of Windsor, Canada


