### Accession
PXD001485

### Title
FOXP1 is a transcriptional Coactivator of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma

### Description
We used a mass spectrometry-coupled lentiviral ‘CD-tagging’ mutagenesis approach to identify genes that activate Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Human A375 melanoma cells containing a β-catenin-driven GFP (green fluorescent protein) transcriptional reporter were transduced with CDBF lentivirus. When integrated near an expressed and spliced gene, the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter of the CDBF vector drives constitutive BFP (blue fluorescence protein) expression and by virtue of the splice donor (SD) sequence, an overexpressed FLAG-tagged fusion of the targeted gene. Depending on where within the gene locus the CDBP vector integrates, the resulting overexpressed gene product may be full length or amino-terminal trunctated. Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) was used to isolate BFP+/GFP+ (Wnt active) or BFP+/GFP- (Wnt inactive) A375 cells. We reasoned that if successful, FLAG epitope tag immunopurification and mass spectrometry-based identification of the overexpressed fusion proteins would be cheaper, faster and provide more information than traditional PCR-based detection. Five FLAG immunopurification followed by a series of high salt washes, on-bead tryptic digestion and shotgun mass spectrometry (MS) identified 20 high-confidence proteins specific to Wnt-active cells. The high-salt washes removed associated proteins from the FLAG-tagged bait proteins. The FOXP1 transcription factor ranked as the top screen hit, as determined by spectral count abundance and the CompPASS WD-score.

### Sample Protocol
CDt/MS vector virus was made using equal amounts of CDBF, CDBF +1, and CDBF+2 and titered using Lenti-X p24 rapid titer kit. 1x10^7 A375 BAR-Venus cells were infected at MOI of 0.5 in a 15cm plate overnight. Three-five days post infection, GFP/BFP positive cells were obtained using Fluorescence Automated Cell Sorting. A BFP only population was also sorted as a negative control. The GFP/BFP population was sorted 2 additional times to ensure a highly pure population. The initial sort yielded few cells (~1000), while each additional sort increased the BFP/GFP positive population.  Purity was determined on the LSRII Flow Cytometer. All FACS and Flow Cytometry experiments were done at UNC-Chapel Hill – Flow Cytometry core facility.   After three sorts, five - 15cm plates were grown up for each condition. Cells were washed twice on ice with cold PBS.  Cells were lysed in cold RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and immunoprecipitated for 1 hour at 4°C with FLAG M2 beads from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cells were washed 3x with cold RIPA buffer and then washed 3x with cold RIPA buffer with 1M NaCl. All spins were done at 4°C and 2,000RPM for 5 minutes. The resulting beads were then prepared for MS using the FASP purification system from Expedon (San Diego, CA) per manufacturer’s instruction.  After overnight digestion at 37 °C, tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 0.5% TFA. After SpeedVac concentration, tryptic peptides were saved at -20 °C before mass spectrometric analysis. The peptide mixture was analyzed in positive mode using a nanoAquity UPLC coupled LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation used a 2-cm trapping column and a self-packed 25-cm analytical column (75-μm ID, Michrom Magic C18 beads of 5.0-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size). The HPLC flow rate was set to 350 nl/min over a gradient of 1% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 35% buffer B in 200 min. The full mass scan (300 to 2000 m/z) was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with a maximum injection time of 500 ms, and MS/MS was performed in a data-dependent manner for the top 15 intense ions in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were converted to mzXML format before a search of the resultant spectra with Sorcerer-SEQUEST (build 4.3.0, Sage-N Research) and the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.6.2). Data were searched against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot sequence database (Release 2013_07) supplemented with common contaminants, such as porcine and bovine trypsin, and further concatenated with its reversed copy as a decoy (40,526 total sequences). Search parameters used were a precursor mass between 400 and 4500 atomic mass units (amu), up to 2 missed cleavages, a precursor-ion tolerance of 3 amu, accurate mass binning within PeptideProphet, semi-tryptic digestion, a static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, and variable methionine oxidation. False discovery rates (FDRs) were determined by ProteinProphet, and minimum protein probability cutoffs resulting in a 1% FDR were selected individually for each experiment.  Proteins were scored by two methods. The CompPASS WD-score was used to determine which proteins were bona fide hits in the CDt/MS experiments as compared to other FLAG APMS experiments from the Major Lab(31). Fold change was calculated for each hit by taking the ratio of total spectral counts between CDt/MS and control experiments, using a pseudo-count of 1 for unobserved proteins. High confidence hits had a top 5% CompPASS score and a fold change above 3.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor FOXP1 (forkhead box protein P1) is a master regulator of stem and progenitor cell biology. In diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), copy number amplifications and chromosomal translocations result in overexpression of FOXP1. Increased abundance of FOXP1 in DLBCL is a predictor of poor prognosis and resistance to therapy. We developed a genome-wide, mass spectrometry-coupled, gain-of-function genetic screen, which revealed that FOXP1 potentiates &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent, Wnt-dependent gene expression. Gain- and loss-of-function studies in cell models and zebrafish confirmed that FOXP1 was a general and conserved enhancer of Wnt signaling. In a Wnt-dependent fashion, FOXP1 formed a complex with &#x3b2;-catenin, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2), and the acetyltransferase CBP [CREB (adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element-binding protein)-binding protein], and this complex bound the promoters of Wnt target genes. FOXP1 promoted the acetylation of &#x3b2;-catenin by CBP, and acetylation was required for FOXP1-mediated potentiation of &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent transcription. In DLBCL, we found that FOXP1 promoted sensitivity to Wnt pathway inhibitors, and knockdown of FOXP1 or blocking &#x3b2;-catenin transcriptional activity slowed xenograft tumor growth. These data connect excessive FOXP1 with &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent signal transduction and provide a molecular rationale for Wnt-directed therapy in DLBCL.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Gain-of-function screening, Flag apms, Foxp1

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.


