### Accession
PXD011309

### Title
Identification of potential plasma biomarkers for abdominal aortic aneurysm using tandem mass tag quantitative proteomics

### Description
Plasma biomarkers that identify abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) rupture risk would greatly assist in stratifying patients with small aneurysms. Identification of such biomarkers has hitherto been unsuccessful over a range of studies using different methods. The present study used an alternative proteomic approach to find new, potential plasma AAA biomarker candidates. Pre-fractionated plasma samples from twelve patients with AAA and eight matched controls without aneurysm were analyzed by mass spectrometry applying a tandem mass tag (TMT) technique. Eight proteins were differentially regulated in patients compared to controls, including decreased levels of the enzyme bleomycin hydrolase. The down-regulation of this enzyme was confirmed in an extended validation study using an ELISA assay. The TMT-based proteomic approach thus identified novel potential plasma biomarkers for AAA.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were depleted of high abundance plasma proteins (albumin and IgG) using the ProteaPrep Albumin and IgG Depletion kit (Protea Biosciences, Inc., Morgantown, WV, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.  For relative quantification (performed using 6-plex TMT-labeling, Pierce Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL, USA), 10 µL aliquots from 20 randomly selected samples were pooled to create a standard protein mix. This standard pool was depleted in the same way as the samples and included as a reference in each prepared TMT-set (details on the TMT-sets are provided in Supplementary Table S1).  The elution from the depletion step was evaporated to dryness (Savant SpeedVac™, Thermo Scientific) before proceeding with the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol for tryptic digestion. In brief, samples were solubilized in 50 µL of 4 % SDS, 250 mM triehtylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Fluka, Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) with 0.1 mM DTT. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce 660 nm protein kit (Thermo Scientific, Basel, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. For each sample, 100 µg of total protein was digested using a 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio in a two-step digestion approach (sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA).  TMT labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations with minor modifications. Specifically, reactions were quenched after 1 hr by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.25 %. Labeled samples were combined into one set of samples prior to SCX-fractionation (100 x 2.1 mm PolySULFOETHYL A column, 5 µm particles, 300 Å pore size, PolyLc Inc., Columbia, MD) using an ÄKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden).  At a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min the following gradient was applied: 100 % A (25 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8 in 25 % acetonitrile) for 10 min; 0-20 % B (500 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8 in 25 % acetonitrile) for 20 min; 20-40 % B for 10 min and 40-100 % B for 10 min and 100 % B held for 10 min. UV absorbance at 280 nm was monitored while fractions were collected in tubes at 0.5 mL intervals. Per TMT-set, 18 fractions were collected for analysis by nano LC-MS/MS. Prior to this analysis, the SCX-fractions were desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files from all 18 SCX fractions (including re-injection/exclusion list runs) for each TMT set were merged for relative quantification and identification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). A database search for each set was performed with the Mascot search engine version 2.3 (Matrix Science LTD., London, United Kingdom) using the UniProtKB/Trembl database (downloaded 2012-11-19, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland) with MS peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 100 millimass units (mmu). Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, cysteine methylthiolation and fixed modifications of N-terminal TMT6plex and lysine TMT6plex were selected.  The detected peptide threshold in the software was set to 1% False Discovery Rate by searching against a reversed database and the corresponding result was filtered by selecting proteins with at least one unique peptide per protein. Identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. For TMT quantification, the ratios of the TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra ([M+H]+ m/z 126-131) from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes between samples. The ratios were derived by Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 using the following criteria: fragment ion tolerance as 100 mmu for the most confident centroid peak, TMT reagent purity corrections factors were used and missing values were replaced with minimum intensity. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for relative quantitation, excluding those common to other isoforms or proteins of the same family. The quantification was normalized using the protein median.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma biomarkers that identify abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) rupture risk would greatly assist in stratifying patients with small aneurysms. Identification of such biomarkers has hitherto been unsuccessful over a range of studies using different methods. The present study used an alternative proteomic approach to find new, potential plasma AAA biomarker candidates. Pre-fractionated plasma samples from twelve patients with AAA and eight matched controls without aneurysm were analyzed by mass spectrometry applying a tandem mass tag (TMT) technique. Eight proteins were differentially regulated in patients compared to controls, including decreased levels of the enzyme bleomycin hydrolase. The down-regulation of this enzyme was confirmed in an extended validation study using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The TMT-based proteomic approach thus identified novel potential plasma biomarkers for AAA.

### Keywords
Plasma proteomics; immunodepletion; tandem mass tags; tmt; abdominal aortic aneurysm; cardiovascular diseases

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sundsvall County Hospital, Sundsvall, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Anders E. Henriksson
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sundsvall County Hospital, Sundsvall, Sweden


