### Accession
PXD008881

### Title
Bottom-up and top-down LC-MS/MS of ribosomal purifications

### Description
Ribosomal purifications of spinach 70S ribosome and human 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits were analyzed with bottom-up LC-MS/MS to identify proteins comprising purified complexes as well as co-purified proteins. In order to assess and quantify proteoforms of ribosomal proteins in ribosomal purifications we employed top-down LC-MS/MS techniques with optimized methods, wherein apart from standard parameters (e.g. collision voltage and dynamic exclusion time) high-resolution and low-resolution were alternately employed in full MS mode.

### Sample Protocol
For bottom-up, ribosome preparations were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 minutes and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The excess of iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT. Digestion of intact proteins was performed at 37 °C with Lys-C for 4 hours followed by overnight digestion with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein-ratio of 1:100 (w/w). All proteolytic digests were desalted, dried and dissolved in 40 µL of 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For top-down LC-MS/MS experiments, ribosomal proteins and ribosome associated proteins were separated from the ribosomal RNA by glacial acetic acid precipitation and buffer exchanged into 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Bottom-up data was searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics) node in Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388). Following parameters were used for data searches: precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; product ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fixed modification: Cys carbamidomethyl; variable modification: Met oxida-tion. Enzymatic specificity was set to trypsin.  Automatic searches for top-down LC-MS/MS raw data were made in Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388) with use of ProSightPD nodes for Medium-High and High-High experimental workflows. Parameters for Medium-High method were set as follows. ReSpect parameters: precursor m/z tolerance – 0.2 Th; relative abundance threshold – 10%; precursor mass range – 5-100 kDa; precursor mass tolerance – 30 ppm; charge state range – 5-100. Xtract parameters: signal-to-noise (S/N) threshold – 3; m/z range – 200-2000 Th. Absolute mass search parameters: precursor mass tolerance – 500 Da; fragment mass tolerance – 10 ppm. For High-High searches ReSpect parameters were not defined, instead Xtract with identical parameters was used to deconvolute spectra in both full MS and dd-MS/MS scans. Final search results are merged for each ribosome purification.

### Publication Abstract
Biomolecular mass spectrometry has matured strongly over the past decades and has now reached a stage where it can provide deep insights into the structure and composition of large cellular assemblies. Here, we describe a three-tiered hybrid mass spectrometry approach that enables the dissection of macromolecular complexes in order to complement structural studies. To demonstrate the capabilities of the approach, we investigate ribosomes, large ribonucleoprotein particles consisting of a multitude of protein and RNA subunits. We identify sites of sequence processing, protein post-translational modifications, and the assembly and stoichiometry of individual ribosomal proteins in four distinct ribosomal particles of bacterial, plant and human origin. Amongst others, we report extensive cysteine methylation in the zinc finger domain of the human S27 protein, the heptameric stoichiometry of the chloroplastic stalk complex, the heterogeneous composition of human 40S ribosomal subunits and their association to the CrPV, and HCV internal ribosome entry site RNAs.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Top-down, Bottom-up

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Sem Tamara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands


