### Accession
PXD002625

### Title
StoS and SreKRS iTRAQ profiling

### Description
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) is a notorious rice pathogen that causes the destructive rice disease bacterial blight. Two-component signal transduction systems (TCSs) are widely used by bacteria to sense and adapt to the environment. However, the profound mechanism how the TCSs execute the environmental adaption remains elusive. In this study, genome-wide TCSs gene knockout in Xoo PXO99A found that StoS (stress tolerance-related oxygen sensor) and SreKRS (salt response kinase, regulator, and sensor) positively regulate EPS production and swarming. Surprisingly, the compromise of two important virulence traits and stress resistance did not attenuate the virulence. To better understand intrinsic function of StoS and SreKRS, quantitative proteomic isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was employed. iTRAQ data indicated that carbohydrate metabolisms proteins and chemotaxis proteins, which could be responsible for the EPS and swarming regulation, respectively, were down-regulated in stoS and sreK mutants. Consistent with stoS and sreK mutants exhibiting similar phenotype, the signaling circuits of StoS and SreKRS were found to overlap each other. Moreover, StoS and SreKRS were revealed to moderate expression of the major virulence factor, hypersensitive response and pathogenicity (Hrp) proteins by HrpG-HrpX circuit. Most important, we found that the Xoo strain equipped with StoS and SreKRS outcompete the strain without StoS or SreKRS co-infecting rice and growing outside host. Our findings imply the two TCSs, StoS and SreKRS, could confer environmental fitness on Xoo. Therefore, here we proposed that StoS and SreKRS adopt a novel strategy by moderating Hrp protein expression together with promoting the EPS and motility to adapt to environment.

### Sample Protocol
Xoo strains were grown in XOM2 (27) (D-xylose, 0.18%; D,L-methionine, 670 µM; sodium L(+)-glutamate, 10 mM; KH2PO4, 14.7 mM; MnSO4, 40 µM; Fe(III)-EDTA, 240 µM; MgCl2, 5 mM) to middle logarithmic phase (OD600 = 0.9). Harvested cultures were washed two times with PBS (NaCl, 137 mM; KCl, 2.7 mM; Na2HPO4, 10 mM; KH2PO4, 2 mM; pH 7.4). The pellets were then resuspended in 10 mL of PBS containing a Tablet of protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) per 100 mL culture, followed by cell disruption using a low temperature ultra-high pressure continuous cell disrupter. The disrupted cells were centrifuged at 12000 rpm and 4 °C for 20 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant containing soluble proteins was precipitated by precooling acetone (25 mL per 5 mL of supernatant) overnight at −20 °C. Precipitates were washed twice by cold acetone, and proteins were dissolved in 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea. Reductive alkylation reaction was then applied to each protein sample, followed by acetone precipitation and dissolution in 0.5 M Tetraethylammonium bromide. Finally, the protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were carried out using Mascot 2.3.02 against the genome of PXO99A from NCBI (RefSeq accession number NC_010717.1). Other search parameters were as follows: type of search, MS/MS ion search; enzyme, trypsin; fragment mass tolerance, ±0.05 Da; mass values, monoisotopic; variable modifications, Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y); peptide mass tolerance, ±0.1 Da; instrument type, default; max missed cleavages, 1; and fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (K). For protein identification and quantification, P ≤ 0.05 (with 95% confidence) was considered statistically significant. The results obtained were exported as a Microsoft Excel file for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Two-component signal transduction systems (TCSs) are widely used by bacteria to adapt to the environment. In the present study, StoS (stress tolerance-related oxygen sensor) and SreKRS (salt response kinase, regulator, and sensor) were found to positively regulate extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) production and swarming in the rice pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo). Surprisingly, the absence of stoS or sreKRS did not attenuate virulence. To better understand the intrinsic functions of StoS and SreKRS, quantitative proteomics isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was employed. Consistent with stoS and sreK mutants exhibiting a similar phenotype, the signalling circuits of StoS and SreKRS overlapped. Carbohydrate metabolism proteins and chemotaxis proteins, which could be responsible for EPS and swarming regulation, respectively, were reprogrammed in stoS and sreK mutants. Moreover, StoS and SreKRS demonstrated moderate expression of the major virulence factor, hypersensitive response and pathogenicity (Hrp) proteins through the HrpG-HrpX circuit. Most importantly, Xoo equipped with StoS and SreKRS outcompetes strains without StoS or SreKRS in co-infected rice and grows outside the host. Therefore, we propose that StoS and SreKRS adopt a novel strategy involving the moderation of Hrp protein expression and the promotion of EPS and motility to adapt to the environment.

### Keywords
Xanthomonas itraq tcs

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
lifang ruan

### Lab Head
Dr Lifang Ruan
Huazhong Agricultural University


