### Accession
PXD003029

### Title
CD147 mutants affinity purification mass spectrometry from human T cells

### Description
CD147 is known as tumor and regulatory T cell marker and as regulator of chemotaxis, stress response or immune cell function; however, the mode of action of CD147 remains incompletely understood. Using affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) of HA-tagged CD147 swap and deletion mutants, we examined the CD147 microenvironment. We found previously published interaction partners of CD147 and also identified two highly significant new ones: the plasma membrane calcium ATPase 4 (PMCA4) and moesin. The use of CD147 mutants allowed determining of the respective CD147 parts essential for interaction. Finally, we performed AP-MS of endogenous CD147 from primary human CD4+ T cells and again found CD147 associated with PMCA4.

### Sample Protocol
For the AP-MS experiments with the human leukemic T cell line Jurkat E6.1, cells were generated expressing either HA-tagged mutants: full-length CD147 (HACD147etc) or HA-tagged mutants containing either the IgII and the transmembrane domain (HACD147IgIIt), or the IgI, a surrogate IgII domain from CD16 and the transmembrane domain (HACD147IgIt), or the extracellular domain and a surrogate CD7 transmembrane domain (HACD147e). Jurkat T cells, wildtype and exogenously expressing HA-tagged CD147 mutants, lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 µM PMSF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% lauryl-maltoside, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) and the lysate was incubated with agarose coated with anti-HA mAb (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). After three washing steps with lysis buffer, the pull-down was eluted with urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) and digested in-solution for 3 h with 1 µg LysC / 50 µg of protein and overnight with 1 µg trypsin / 50 µg protein (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at room temperature. The next day the peptides were desalted on a C18 stage tip. A chromatographic separation was performed using an Agilent 1200 nanoflow system (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany), coupled with a reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 15-cm silica emitter (75 µm inner diameter; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). The flow rate of injection was set to 500nL/min and peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 250nL/min using a 100 min gradient of 2% to 40% MeCN in 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were then analyzed with the LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). The settings for the precursor ion analysis were: m/z 300–1800, a resolution of 60,000, and an ion accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000. The ten most abundant ions were further fragmented and recorded in the ion trap and were then dynamically excluded for 60 seconds. A lock mass option was enabled.   The AP-MS samples of primary T cells were analyzed with a slightly different methodological approach: Human PBMCs were isolated from blood of healthy donors by standard density-gradient centrifugation using Lymphoprep (Nycomed, Oslo, Norway). Then CD4+ T cells were isolated by the magnetic cell sorting system Vario MACS (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) by negative depletion for cytotoxic T cells, phagocytic cells, B cells and NK cells as described earlier (1).  Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 µM PMSF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% lauryl-maltoside, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) and the lysate was incubated with CNBr-activated sepharose 4B-beads (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) coupled to CD147 mAb MEM-M6/4 or to isotype control mAb AFP-01. After three washing steps with lysis buffer, the pull-down was eluted with urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Proteins were precipitated using methanol-chloroform procedure (2),  and were tryptically digested as previously described (3). Peptides were separated and analyzed using the LTQ Velos IonTrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated using an UltiMate Plus nano HPLC (LC Packings, Amsterdam, Netherlands) separation system, consisting of Famos autosampler, Switchos column switching unit, the UltiMate nano pump and the UV detector. The Acclaim C18 trap column (300 µm ID x 5mm) was operated at the ambient temperature, and the Acclaim C18 nano separation column (75 µm ID x 250 mm) was mounted in the column oven and operated at 45°C. Samples were loaded onto the trap column using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 30 µl/minutes, and the nano separation was performed in gradient mode at 300 nl/minutes from: a) 0.1 formic acid (FA) in 5% aqueous acetonitrile (AcN); b) 0.08% FA in 15% methanol (MeOH), 15% AcN, 70% water; and c) 0.08% FA in 60% AcN, 30% MeOH, and 10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE). User Defined Injection Program (UDP) was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash. Mass spectrometric (MS) analysis was performed using the LTQ Velos IonTrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) with the “Top 20” method. Single charged ions were excluded from fragmentation and detected ions were excluded for further fragmentation for three minutes after initial MS/MS fragmentation has been performed.

### Data Protocol
Data from Jurkat T cell samples was processed with the MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 with the integrated Andromeda search engine and the UNIPROT protein index database for Homo sapiens with common contaminants added. The search parameters were set to ≤ 3 allowed missed cleavages, cystein carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and N-acetyl protein, oxidized methionine as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 7 p.p.m for MS peaks and to 0.5 Da for the MS/MS peaks. The false discovery was determined by searching a reverse database and the false discovery rate of 0.01 on peptide and protein level. A minimum peptide length of 6 residues was set and one unique and a second identified peptide was set as prerequisite for protein identification. The “match between runs” option with a time window of 2 minutes between replicates was enabled. Data analysis from primary T cell samples was performed using Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK), searching in the most recent version of the SwissProt database with a mass tolerance of 0.4 Da for MS and MS/MS. Identifications with two peptides pro protein and a Mascot score of >40 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
The Ig superfamily member CD147 is upregulated following T cell activation and was shown to serve as a negative regulator of T cell proliferation. Thus, Abs targeting CD147 are being tested as new treatment strategies for cancer and autoimmune diseases. How CD147 mediates immunosuppression and whether association with other coreceptor complexes is needed have remained unknown. In the current study, we show that silencing of CD147 in human T cells increases IL-2 production without affecting the TCR proximal signaling components. We mapped the immunosuppressive moieties of CD147 to its transmembrane domain and Ig-like domain II. Using affinity purification combined with mass spectrometry, we determined the domain specificity of CD147 interaction partners and identified the calcium exporter plasma membrane calcium ATPase isoform 4 (PMCA4) as the interaction partner of the immunosuppressive moieties of CD147. CD147 does not control the proper membrane localization of PMCA4, but PMCA4 is essential for the CD147-dependent inhibition of IL-2 expression via a calcium-independent mechanism. In summary, our data show that CD147 interacts via its immunomodulatory domains with PMCA4 to bypass TCR proximal signaling and inhibit IL-2 expression.

### Keywords
Human, Primary t cells, Lc-ms/ms, Jurkat, Affinity purification, Cd147

### Affiliations
Medizinische Universität Wien Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology Lazarettgasse 19  1090 Vienna, Austria
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Verena Supper
Medizinische Universität Wien Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology Lazarettgasse 19  1090 Vienna, Austria


