### Accession
PXD009291

### Title
Enhancement of red blood cell transfusion compatibility using CRISPR-mediated erythroblast gene editing

### Description
Regular blood transfusion is the cornerstone of care for patients with red blood cell (RBC) disorders such as thalassemia or sickle cell disease. With repeated transfusion, alloimmunisation often occurs due to incompatibility at the level of minor blood group antigens. We use CRISPR-mediated genome editing of an immortalised human erythroblast cell line (BEL-A) to generate multiple enucleation competent cell lines deficient in individual blood groups. Edits are combined to generate a single cell line deficient in multiple antigens responsible for the most common transfusion incompatibilities: ABO (Bombay phenotype), Rh (Rhnull), Kell (K0), Duffy (Duffynull), GPB (S- s- U-). These cells can be differentiated to generate deformable reticulocytes, illustrating the capacity for coexistence of multiple rare blood group antigen null phenotypes. This study provides the first proof-of-principle demonstration of combinatorial CRISPR-mediated blood group gene editing to generate customisable or multi-compatible RBCs for diagnostic reagents or recipients with complicated matching requirements.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates from 2x106 reticulocytes per sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) six plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled.  An aliquot of the pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using SepPak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA)).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.   All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and a max injection time of 100ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity range from 5000 to 1E20, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-6) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%.  For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 30 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (134169 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Regular blood transfusion is the cornerstone of care for patients with red blood cell (RBC) disorders such as thalassaemia or sickle-cell disease. With repeated transfusion, alloimmunisation often occurs due to incompatibility at the level of minor blood group antigens. We use CRISPR-mediated genome editing of an immortalised human erythroblast cell line (BEL-A) to generate multiple enucleation competent cell lines deficient in individual blood groups. Edits are combined to generate a single cell line deficient in multiple antigens responsible for the most common transfusion incompatibilities: ABO (Bombay phenotype), Rh (Rh<sub>null</sub>), Kell (<i>K</i><sub>0</sub>), Duffy (Fy<sub>null</sub>), GPB (S-s-U-). These cells can be differentiated to generate deformable reticulocytes, illustrating the capacity for coexistence of multiple rare blood group antigen null phenotypes. This study provides the first proof-of-principle demonstration of combinatorial CRISPR-mediated blood group gene editing to generate customisable or multi-compatible RBCs for diagnostic reagents or recipients with complicated matching requirements.

### Keywords
Erythroid, Bel-a. transfusion, Crispr, Universal donor, Blood

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Joseph Hawksworth

### Lab Head
Dr Ashley Mark Toye
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom


