### Accession
PXD034017

### Title
Extending the Mass Spectrometry-Detectable Landscape of the Immunopeptidome by use of Restricted access Material

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidomics enables the comprehensive identification of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptides from cell culture as well as from tissue or tumor samples and is increasingly applied for the identification of tumor-specific and viral T-cell epitopes. Although mass spectrometry is generally accounted as an unbiased method for MHC peptide identification, the physicochemical properties of MHC peptides can greatly influence their detectability. For instance, highly hydrophobic peptides get easily lost already during sample preparation when C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) is used for separating MHC peptides from proteins. To overcome this limitation, we established an optimized protocol for this sample preparation step applying restricted access material (RAM). Compared to C18-SPE, RAM-SPE improves the overall MHC peptide recovery and extends the landscape of mass spectrometry-detectable MHC peptides towards more hydrophobic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
MHC peptide were isolated (from MaMel63a, DG-75, PBMCs, mouse melanoma#781) using either C18- or RAM-SPE. MHC complexes were immunoaffinity-purified with anti-MHC antibodies coupled to sepharose beads. To avoid SPE overload, antibodies were crosslinked for C18, but not for RAM. Column bed volume was ten times smaller for RAM-SPE. MHC peptides were eluted with 1% TFA and purified using either C18- or RAM-SPE. MHC peptides were eluted with 28% ACN for MHC I and 32% ACN for MHC II peptides from C18 and with 60% ACN from RAM.

### Data Protocol
MHC I peptides were identified using Peptide-PRISM as described previously .De novo peptide sequencing was performed with PEAKS X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) .Raw data refinement was performed with the following settings: (i) Merge Options: no merge; (ii) Precursor Options: corrected; (iii) Charge Options: 1-6; (iv) Filter Options: no filter; (v) Process: true; (vi) Default: true; (vii) Associate Chimera: yes. De novo sequencing was performed with Parent Mass Error Tolerance set to 10 ppm. Fragment Mass Error Tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and Enzyme was set to none. The following variable modifications have been used: Oxidation (M), pyro-Glu from Q (N-term Q), and carbamidomethylation (C). A maximum of 3 variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) were allowed per peptide. Up to 10 de novo sequencing candidates were reported for each identified fragment ion mass spectrum, with their corresponding average local confidence (ALC) score. As chimeric spectra option of PEAKS X+ was used, two or more TOP10 candidate lists could possibly be assigned to a single fragment ion spectrum. All de novo sequence candidates were matched against the 6-frame translated     genome (GRCh38 for human, GRCm38 for mouse) and the 3-frame translated transcriptome (ENSEMBL release 90 for human, and ENSEMBL release 99 for mouse) using Peptide-PRISM. Results were filtered to 1% FDR. NetMHCpan 4.0 was used to predict binding affinities for all identified MHC I peptides .  As per default, a cut-off of 0.5% rank for strong binders and 2% rank for weak binders was used. Sequence-specific hydrophobicity indices (HI) were calculated using SSRCalc.MHC II peptides were identified via database search with PEAKS X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) with the same settings for raw data refinement as for MHC I peptides. Database search was performed with Parent Mass Error Tolerance of 10 ppm and Fragment Mass Error Tolerance of 0.02 Da. Enzyme was set to none. The following variable modifications have been considered: Oxidation (M), pyro-Glu from Q (N-term Q), and carbamidomethylation (C) with a maximum of 3 variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) allowed per peptide. A fasta database generated by translating coding sequences (CDS) of ENSEMBL 90 (h.ens90.translated.fasta) was used for database searching. Results were filtered to 1% PSM-FDR. Peptides identified by database searching were mapped on the 6-frame translated human genome (GRCh38) and the 3-frame translated human transcriptome (ENSEMBL 90) using Peptide-PRISM. Sequence-specific hydrophobicity indices (HI) were calculated using SSRCalc

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidomics enables the comprehensive identification of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptides from a cell culture as well as from tissue or tumor samples and is applied for the identification of tumor-specific and viral T-cell epitopes. Although mass spectrometry is generally considered an "unbiased" method for MHC peptide identification, the physicochemical properties of MHC peptides can greatly influence their detectability. Here, we demonstrate that highly hydrophobic peptides are lost during sample preparation when C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) is used for separating MHC peptides from proteins. To overcome this limitation, we established an optimized protocol involving restricted access material (RAM). Compared to C18-SPE, RAM-SPE improved the overall MHC peptide recovery and extended the landscape of mass spectrometry-detectable MHC peptides toward more hydrophobic peptides.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Solid phase extraction, Restricted access material

### Affiliations
mass spectrometry 
Mass spectrometry

### Submitter
Melissa  Bernhardt

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Mass spectrometry


