### Accession
PXD020590

### Title
LSD1 inhibition induces differentiation and cell death in Merkel cell carcinoma

### Description
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a highly aggressive, neuroendocrine skin cancer that lacks actionable mutations, which could be utilized for targeted therapies. Epigenetic regulators governing cell identity may represent unexplored therapeutic entry points. Here, we targeted epigenetic regulators in a pharmacological screen and discovered that the lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (LSD1/KDM1A) is required for MCC growth in vitro and in vivo. We show that LSD1 inhibition in MCC disrupts the LSD1-CoREST complex leading to displacement and degradation of HMG20B (BRAF35), a poorly characterized complex member that is essential for MCC proliferation. Inhibition of LSD1 causes derepression of transcriptional master regulators of the neuronal lineage, activates a gene expression signature resembling normal Merkel cells, and induces cell cycle arrest and cell death. Our study unveils the importance of LSD1 for proliferation and maintaining cell identity in MCC. There is growing evidence that cancer cells exploit cellular plasticity and dedifferentiation programs to evade destruction by the immune system. The combination of LSD1 inhibitors with checkpoint inhibitors may thus represent a promising treatment strategy for MCC patients.

### Sample Protocol
coIP: Cells were pre-treated with either 1 µM ORY-1001 or DMSO 24 hours prior to the co-IP. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed on ice with 1x Cell  Lysis Buffer (9803, CST). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The lysate concentration was determined with the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit (23227, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein A sepharose magnetic beads (GE28-9670-56, Sigma-Aldrich) were pre-washed with 1x Cell  Lysis Buffer. To reduce nonspecific binding to the beads, the lysates were pre-cleared by incubating with the pre-washed beads for 20 min at RT on a rotator. The pre-cleared lysates were incubated with anti-LSD1 (2139, CST) primary antibody overnight at 4°C on a rotator to form the immunocomplex. Control samples were incubated with an anti-rabbit IgG isotype control antibody (ABIN101961, Antibodies-online). The protein-antibody complexes were then immunoprecipitated for 20 min at RT on a rotator with protein A sepharose magnetic beads which were pre-washed with 1x Cell Lysis Buffer. After incubation, bead-bound immune complexes were washed three times with 1x Cell Lysis Buffer followed by ten PBS washes prior to MS analysis. Confirmation of successful co-IP was conducted by immunoblotting according to standard procedures.  co-IP LC-MS/MS analysis: The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 3h gradient, respectively 225 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35% B over the next 180 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 2 min back to the gradient 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C.   Nuclei isolation & TMT-labeling: Cells were pre-treated with either 1 µM GSK-LSD1 or DMSO 24 hours prior to the nuclei isolation. 1x106 cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, resuspended in CE+NP40 buffer (10 mM HEPES, 60 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.075% (v/v) NP-40, 1mM DTT, pH 7.6.) and incubated for 3 min at 4°C. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were separated by centrifugation for 4 min at 20.000 RCF at 4°C. The cytoplasmic supernatant was removed and the cell nuclei were washed 3x with CE buffer (10 mM HEPES, 60 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, pH 7.6). Successful fractionation of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions was confirmed by immunoblotting. Nuclear proteins were prepared for Mass Spectrometry Analysis using the iST-NHS kit (P.O.00030, PreOmics) together with the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to standard procedures.  TMT LC-MS/MS analysis: The samples were resolved in 50 uL 0.1% FA, and 1% were analyzed on a monolithic HPLC column. The sample concentration was determined based on the UV traces and equal amounts of each channel were mixed. 500 ng of the mixture sample as well as each single channel were subsequently analyzed in an LC-MS/MS experiment to determine the labeling efficiency as well as the mixing ratio by calculating the median value of the 500 most abundant proteins. Based on the results of the LC-MS/MS analysis different amounts of each channel were added to correct the median value to 1:1: 1:1: 1:1 and ensure mixing of equal amounts of all samples. 500 ng of this sample was again analyzed in an LC-MS/MS experiment to confirm the bias. The mixed sample was lyophilized and dissolved in 50 uL SCX A Buffer (5 mM NaPO4 pH 2.7, 15% ACN). SCX was performed using an Ultimate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 35 µl/min and a TSKgel column (ToSOH, 5 µm particles, 1 mm i.d. x 300 mm).  50 µg of peptide were loaded on the column. For the separation, a ternary gradient was used. Starting with 100% buffer A (5 mM NaPO4 pH 2.7, 15% ACN) for 10 min, followed by a linear increase to 20% buffer B (5 mM NaPO4 pH 2.7, 1 M NaCl, 15% ACN) and 50% buffer C (5mM 5 mM NaPO4 pH 6, 15% ACN) in 10 min, to 25% buffer B and 50% buffer C in 10 min, 50% buffer B and 50% buffer C in 5 min and an isocratic elution for further 15 min. The flow-through was collected as a single fraction and along the gradient, fractions were collected every minute from 10 min to 70 min and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
coIP: For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.3.0.12368, Engine version v2.0.0.12368 (Dorfer et al, 2014). For the 1st step search the RAW-files were searched against the Swiss-Prot database, taxonomy Homo sapiens (20.341 sequences; 11,361,548 residues), supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 15ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al, 2007) integrated in the Thermo Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database was generated for further processing. For the 2nd step, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the following search parameters: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, methylation and di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitination on lysine and biotinylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity respectively. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS(Taus et al, 2011). Peptide areas were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant (Doblmann et al, 2019).   TMT: For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.14114 (Dorfer et al. 2014). The RAW-files were searched against the Uniprot database, using Homo sapiens as sub-organism (20,541 sequences; 11,395,640 residues). The following search parameters were used: Acetylhypusine on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, 10-plex tandem mass tag® (TMT) on lysine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, acetylation on lysine as well as Carbamylation and 10-plex TMT on peptide-N-term were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm integrated with Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, which is based on phosphoRS (Taus et al. 2011). Peptides were quantified based on Reporter Ion intensities extracted by the “Reporter Ions Quantifier”-node implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth 2005).

### Publication Abstract
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a highly aggressive, neuroendocrine skin cancer that lacks actionable mutations, which could be utilized for targeted therapies. Epigenetic regulators governing cell identity may represent unexplored therapeutic entry points. Here, we targeted epigenetic regulators in a pharmacological screen and discovered that the lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (LSD1/KDM1A) is required for MCC growth in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. We show that LSD1 inhibition in MCC disrupts the LSD1-CoREST complex leading to displacement and degradation of HMG20B (BRAF35), a poorly characterized complex member that is essential for MCC proliferation. Inhibition of LSD1 causes derepression of transcriptional master regulators of the neuronal lineage, activates a gene expression signature resembling normal Merkel cells, and induces cell cycle arrest and cell death. Our study unveils the importance of LSD1 for maintaining cellular plasticity and proliferation in MCC. There is also growing evidence that cancer cells exploit cellular plasticity and dedifferentiation programs to evade destruction by the immune system. The combination of LSD1 inhibitors with checkpoint inhibitors may thus represent a promising treatment strategy for MCC patients.

### Keywords
Lsd1, Epigenetics, Kdm1a, Mcc, Hmg20b

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Christina Obenauf
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.


