### Accession
PXD015863

### Title
Discovery of Widespread Host Protein Interactions with the Pre-Replicated Genome of CHIKV using VIR-CLASP

### Description
The pioneer interactions between incoming viral RNA genomes and host proteins are crucial to infection and immune response. Until now, the ability to study these events was lacking. We developed VIR-CLASP (VIRal Cross-Linking And Solid-phase Purification) to characterize the earliest interactions between viral RNA and cellular proteins. We investigated the infection of human cells using Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) and Influenza A virus and identified hundreds of direct RNA-protein interactions. Here, we validate the biological impact of three protein classes that bind CHIKV RNA within minutes of infection. We find CHIKV RNA binds and hijacks the lipid-modifying enzyme FASN for pro-viral activity. We show that CHIKV genomes are N6-methyladenosine modified and that YTHDF1 binds and suppresses its replication. Finally, we find that the innate immune DNA sensor IFI16 associates with CHIKV RNA, reducing viral replication and maturation. Our findings have direct applicability to the investigation of potentially all RNA viruses.

### Sample Protocol
For VIR-CLASP, cells were infected with 1000 PFU of non-labeled or 4SU-labeled virus for 1 hr at 4°C and uninfected virus was washed away with cold PBS. The infected cells were incubated for the indicated times at 37°C, prior to 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation. For pre-treatment with interferon, IFN was added to the media 16 hr before viral infection. To irradiate with UV365nm, the growth medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS. Cells were irradiated on ice with 365 nm UV light (0.6 J/cm2 x 2 times) in a Stratalinker 2400 (Stratagene). Cells were scraped off in 2.5 ml PBS per plate. Cells were lysed in denaturation buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 2.5% SDS, 0.66% NP-40), incubated for 10 min at 95 °C and subsequently slowly cooled to 25°C. Crosslinked RNA-protein complexes were purified by Solid-Phase Reversible Immobilization (SPRI)66 beads (GE Healthcare, cat# 65152105050250) under denaturing SPRI buffer (30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 6% glycerol, 1.5% SDS, 0.4% NP-40, 1 M NaCl, 8% PEG-8000). To each sample, 0.66× (e.g. 660 μl of beads for 1ml of sample) of SPRI beads (1mg/ml SPRI beads in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 M NaCl, 18% PEG-8000, 1 mM EDTA and 0.055% Tween 20) were added, and samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. The SPRI beads and complexes were washed 5 times with denaturing SPRI buffer. The crosslinked RNA-protein complexes were eluted for 5min at 37 °C in denaturation buffer (lysis buffer). To reduce non-specific binding on the beads, SPRI purification was repeated.  An equal volume of 4x Benzonase buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 600 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 4 mM DTT, 40% Glycerol) and 2x volume of water were added to eluted samples, followed by the addition of Benzonase (EMD Millipore, cat# 70746-4) to a final concentration of 50 U/ml, and incubation for 2 hr at 37°C. Proteins were precipitated by methanol and chloroform and then re-suspended in 2x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# NP0007) with 50 mM DTT. Staining with SYPRO Ruby protein stain (Invitrogen) was used for total protein normalization. Proteins were cut, in-gel digested using trypsin, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For Virion: CHIKV was purified by ultracentrifugation through a 20% sucrose cushion in TNE buffer as described in method section of viruses. CHIKV was re-suspended in TNE buffer and further purified twice by discontinuous sucrose gradient (30%-60%) in TNE buffer at ∼125,000 × g for 3 hr in a Beckman SW32Ti rotor, and concentrated by 30% sucrose cushion. For VIR-CLASP, purified CHIKV was irradiated on ice with 365 nm UV light (0.6 J/cm2 x 2 times) in a Stratalinker 2400 (Stratagene). The virions were lysed in denaturation buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 2.5% SDS, 0.66% NP-40), incubated for 10 min at 95 °C and subsequently slowly cooled to 25°C. Crosslinked RNA-protein complexes were purified by Solid-Phase Reversible Immobilization (SPRI)66 beads (GE Healthcare, cat# 65152105050250) under denaturing SPRI buffer (30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 6% glycerol, 1.5% SDS, 0.4% NP-40, 1 M NaCl, 8% PEG-8000). To each sample, 0.66× (e.g. 660 μl of beads for 1ml of sample) of SPRI beads (1mg/ml SPRI beads in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 M NaCl, 18% PEG-8000, 1 mM EDTA and 0.055% Tween 20) were added, and samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. The SPRI beads and complexes were washed 5 times with denaturing SPRI buffer. The crosslinked RNA-protein complexes were eluted for 5min at 37 °C in denaturation buffer (lysis buffer). To reduce non-specific binding on the beads, SPRI purification was repeated.  An equal volume of 4x Benzonase buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 600 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 4 mM DTT, 40% Glycerol) and 2x volume of water were added to eluted samples, followed by the addition of Benzonase (EMD Millipore, cat# 70746-4) to a final concentration of 50 U/ml, and incubation for 2 hr at 37°C. Proteins were precipitated by methanol and chloroform and then re-suspended in 2x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# NP0007) with 50 mM DTT. Proteins were cut, in-gel digested using trypsin, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the LC-MS/MS instrument were processed and searched using MaxQuant Software (Version 1.6.6.0 ) to generate peak lists and identify peptide-spectrum matches. Searches were performed using a Uniprot/Swissprot database with only reviewed proteins included (downloaded on Feb. 28th, 2018), with added sequences for Benzonase nuclease (Uniprot #P13717), and for Chikungunya proteins (Capsid, E1, E2, E3, 6k, nsP1, nsP2, nsP3, nsP4) from strain 181/25 (TSI-GSD-218) and Influenza A proteins from strain A/California/7/2004(H3N2) (#H9XN80, #H9XN85, #H9XN78, #H9XN79, #H9XN83, #H9XN81, #H9XN84). For the purified CHIKV viral particles, the database used was the Uniprot reference proteome for Mesocricetus auratus (UP000189706 – downloaded July 36th, 2019, with one protein sequence per gene) with sequences added for the CHIKV proteins listed above, from strain 181/25 (TSI-GSD-218). The search parameters for Andromeda were: fully tryptic specificity, two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl (C) fixed modification and acterylation (N-terminal) variable modification. Match between runs was selected, and LFQ normalization was performed in separate parameter groups (+IFN and +4SU, -IFN and +4SU, +IFN and -4SU, -IFN and -4SU). All other settings used were default, resulting in a protein FDR of < 1% for each dataset.

### Publication Abstract
The primary interactions between incoming viral RNA genomes and host proteins are crucial to infection and immunity. Until now, the ability to study these events was lacking. We developed viral cross-linking and solid-phase purification (VIR-CLASP) to characterize the earliest interactions between viral RNA and cellular proteins. We investigated the infection of human cells using Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) and influenza A virus and identified hundreds of direct RNA-protein interactions. Here, we explore the biological impact of three protein classes that bind CHIKV RNA within minutes of infection. We find CHIKV RNA binds and hijacks the lipid-modifying enzyme fatty acid synthase (FASN) for pro-viral activity. We show that CHIKV genomes are N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine modified, and YTHDF1 binds and suppresses CHIKV replication. Finally, we find that the innate immune DNA sensor IFI16 associates with CHIKV RNA, reducing viral replication and maturation. Our findings have direct applicability to the investigation of potentially all RNA viruses.

### Keywords
Virus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Ascano Lab, Biochemistry Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Manny Ascano

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Ascano
Ascano Lab, Biochemistry Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN, USA


