### Accession
PXD033376

### Title
Investigating the  conformational changes of OEA on  HIF-3A-ARNT by HDX-MS

### Description
We used hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to investigate the influence of OEA on HIF-3A-ARNT.HDX-MS data indicated that OEA binding stabilized multiple residues within the Gβ and Fα regions of HIF-3A PAS-B domain.It is possible that the stabilized Gβ and Fα function as an “interlayer” to further contact with the AB-loop of ARNT.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were processed automatically by a LEAP Technologies Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange PAL system (Carrboro). Specifically, 3.0 μL of each sample was automatically dispensed into a vial and diluted 9-fold with 20m M HEPES, 250 mM NaCl in 99.8% D2O (pHread 7.4) to start the deuterium exchange reaction. HDX measurements were taken at 0 s, 30 s, 100 s, 300 s, 1000 s, 3000 s and 10000 s at 4 °C. After each time point, an aliquot of sample was transferred to a vial in a 0.5 °C chamber and quenched by addition of an equal volume of quench buffer (200 mM Citric acid, 4 M Gu-HCl, 500 mM TCEP in H2O, pHread 2.3) for 0.5 min prior to online digestion. The complete HDX-MS procedure was repeated three times for each sample and each time point.Each quenched sample was immediately injected into a Protease type XIII pepsin column (NovaBioAssays LLC) for 4 min at a flow rate of 50 μL/min with 0.1% formic acid in water then delivered by the loading pump on a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 NCS-3500RS system (Sunnyvale). The digested peptides were trapped and desalted using a 2.1×5 mm Acclaim PepMap 300 C18 μ-precolumn (300 Å, 5 μm). The precolumn was connected to a 1.0×50 mm Thermo Hypersil Gold column C18 (175 Å, 1.9 μm). Peptides were eluted and separated by a linear gradient of Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 45 μL/min using the nanopump of the NCS-3500RS system. Specifically, the gradient was 4-10% over 3 min, 10-30% over 8 min, 30-90% over 1 min followed by isocratic flow with 90% Buffer B for 1 min. The online digestion, trapping, desalting process was performed at 4 °C and separation process was performed at 0.5 °C in the temperature-controlled compartment of the HDX PAL system. Data was acquired using a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer with a Thermo H-ESI II probe. For peptide identification, mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent scan using FTMS mode in MS1 (one microscan, 100 ms max injection time, 60 k resolution at 400 m/z) at the m/z range of 300-1500 followed by ten CID MS2 scans in the ion trap with a ± 2.0 m/z isolation width. Once the peptides were identified, the deuterium uptake in HDX experiments was conducted using FTMS mode in MS1.

### Data Protocol
HDX data analysis was carried out using HDExaminer 2.0 (Sierra Analytics Inc.). The number of D taken up (D-uptake) by each peptide at each exchange time was calculated by the software algorithm for matching the best theoretical isotope distribution pattern to the observed isotope distribution pattern. D-uptake was plotted as a function of exchange time. Triplicate runs were compared using Student’s t-test at the 95% confidence level to confirm the consistency of the analytical results obtained. D-uptake was converted to %D for each peptide based on the theoretical number of D; %D was used to generate heat maps, butterfly comparisons, and difference plots. In addition, HDX-MS analysis was also carried out on non-deuterated and fully deuterated samples to correct back-exchange

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimeric transcription factors modulating cellular responses to the low oxygen condition. Among three HIF-&#x3b1; isoforms, HIF-3&#x3b1; is the least studied to date. Here we show that oleoylethanolamide (OEA), a physiological lipid known to regulate food intake and metabolism, binds selectively to HIF-3&#x3b1;. Through crystallographic analysis of HIF-3 &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimer in both apo and OEA-bound forms, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and biochemical and cell-based assays, we unveil the molecular mechanism of OEA entry and binding to the PAS-B pocket of HIF-3&#x3b1;, and show that it leads to enhanced heterodimer stability and functional modulation of HIF-3. The identification of HIF-3&#x3b1; as a selective lipid sensor is consistent with recent human genetic findings linking HIF-3&#x3b1; with obesity, and demonstrates that endogenous metabolites can directly interact with HIF-&#x3b1; proteins to modulate their activities, potentially as a regulatory mechanism supplementary to the well-known oxygen-dependent HIF-&#x3b1; hydroxylation.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Hif-3a-arnt, Oea

### Affiliations
Shandong University
Helmholtz International Lab, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University

### Submitter
Xiaotong Diao

### Lab Head
Dr Dalei Wu
Helmholtz International Lab, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University


