### Accession
PXD006006

### Title
Mechanistic insight into RET kinase inhibitors targeting the DFG-out conformation in RET-rearranged cancer

### Description
We used quantitative (phospho)proteomics to study how cells may escape the activity of RET kinase inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, samples were lyses, carbamidomethylated and digested with trypsin using FASP. Subsequently, per sample ~150  µg were labeled with TMT (controls: 126, 127N, 127C; 10 nM  AD80: 128N, 128C, 129N; 100 nM AD80: 129C, 130N, 130C; including a mixed sample: 131). After mutliplexing, ~2.5% of the pooled sample were separated via high pH RP into 20 fractions, the rest was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2, followed HILIC-based fractionation into 16 fractions.   Samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometery, online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with Acclaim PepMap C18 columns (precolumn: 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm, 100 Å; main column: 75µm x 50 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å). Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target value of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The top 15 most intense signals with charge states 2-5 were subjected to MS/MS using dynamic exclusion of 30 s, an isolation width of 0.8 m/z, an NCE of 33 %, a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target value of 2 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms, with the first mass set to 100 m/z. To compensate for a higher complexity of the global proteome fractions, the isolation width was reduced to 0.4 m/z to reduce the potential precursor co-isolation.

### Data Protocol
We used quantitative (phospho)proteomics to study how cells may escape the activity of RET kinase inhibitors.  In brief, samples were lyses, carbamidomethylated and digested with trypsin using FASP. Subsequently, per sample ~150  µg were labeled with TMT (controls: 126, 127N, 127C; 10 nM  AD80: 128N, 128C, 129N; 100 nM AD80: 129C, 130N, 130C; including a mixed sample: 131). After mutliplexing, ~2.5% of the pooled sample were separated via high pH RP into 20 fractions, the rest was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2, followed HILIC-based fractionation into 16 fractions.   Samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometery, online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with Acclaim PepMap C18 columns (precolumn: 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm, 100 Å; main column: 75µm x 50 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å). Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target value of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The top 15 most intense signals with charge states 2-5 were subjected to MS/MS using dynamic exclusion of 30 s, an isolation width of 0.8 m/z, an NCE of 33 %, a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target value of 2 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms, with the first mass set to 100 m/z. To compensate for a higher complexity of the global proteome fractions, the isolation width was reduced to 0.4 m/z to reduce the potential precursor co-isolation.  Raw files were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (www.Uniprot.org; April 2016, 20,207 target sequences) using Mascot v 2.4.1 and the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software package. Trypsin was used as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. TMT 10-plex (+229.163 Da on Lys and N-termini) and carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.021 Da) were set as static modifications. Phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr (+ 79.966 Da) and oxidation of Met (+ 15.995 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. Phosphorylation site confidence was determined using phosphoRS 3.1 and false discovery rate assessment was performed using Percolator (1% FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic fusion events have been identified in a broad range of tumors. Among them, <i>RET</i> rearrangements represent distinct and potentially druggable targets that are recurrently found in lung adenocarcinomas. We provide further evidence that current anti-RET drugs may not be potent enough to induce durable responses in such tumors. We report that potent inhibitors, such as AD80 or ponatinib, that stably bind in the DFG-out conformation of RET may overcome these limitations and selectively kill <i>RET</i>-rearranged tumors. Using chemical genomics in conjunction with phosphoproteomic analyses in <i>RET</i>-rearranged cells, we identify the CCDC6-RET<sup>I788N</sup> mutation and drug-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway reactivation as possible mechanisms by which tumors may escape the activity of RET inhibitors. Our data provide mechanistic insight into the druggability of RET kinase fusions that may be of help for the development of effective therapies targeting such tumors.

### Keywords
Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Tmt, Kinase inhibitor

### Affiliations
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre
ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr René Zahedi
ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany


