### Accession
PXD041164

### Title
Cancer cell-derived ADAM15 dictates macrophage infiltration in colorectal tumors

### Description
Tumor progression and response to treatment is highly affected by interactions between cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME). Many of the soluble factors and signaling receptors involved in this crosstalk are shed by a disintegrin and metalloproteinases (ADAMs). Upregulation of ADAM15 has been linked to worse survival in cancer patients and a tumor-promoting function both in vitro and in murine cancer models. Although ADAM15 has been involved in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions, its role in the crosstalk between cancer cells and the TME in vivo remains unexplored. Therefore, we aimed to understand how ADAM15 regulates the cell composition of the TME and how it affects tumor progression. Here, we showed an upregulation of ADAM15 in tumor tissues from rectal cancer patients. Subcutaneous injection of wildtype and ADAM15-knockout CT26 colon cancer cells in syngeneic mice confirmed the pro-tumorigenic role of ADAM15. Profiling of tumors revealed higher immune cell infiltration and cancer cell apoptosis in the ADAM15-deficient tumors. Specifically, loss of ADAM15 led to a reduced number of granulocytes and higher infiltration of antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic cells and macrophages, as well as more T cells. Using in vitro assays, we confirmed the regulatory effect of ADAM15 on macrophage migration and identified ADAM15-derived CYR61 as a potential molecular mediator of this effect. Together, our data suggest that targeting ADAM15 could increase the infiltration of immune cells in colorectal tumors and thereby turn cold tumors hot, resulting in a potentially improved response to combined immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis of CT26 WT and Adam15-/- cells was performed using tandem mass tags (TMT)-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS-based proteomics. Three million CT26 WT and Adam15- /- cells were seeded in T-175 flasks in full growth media and incubated for 12h. The medium was changed to RPMI without phenol red, FBS or antibiotics, and cells were incubated for another 12h. Next, the medium was collected and treated with 0.5mM PMSF and 10mM EDTA to inhibit the proteolytic activity. Following removal of cells and debris by centrifugation and filtering through a 0.22µm membrane, the medium was up-concentrated and reconstituted in 50mM HEPES, pH 7.8 buffer using 3kDa cut-off Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (Merck), following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Next, protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA Protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s protocol and the reference sample was prepared by mixing equal amounts of proteins from each sample. All samples contained 10μg of protein in 90μl of 50mM HEPES, pH 7.8 buffer and were denatured at 65°C, reduced with 3.5mM TCEP, alkylated with 5mM chloroacetamide and digested for 24h with trypsin (all from Sigma-Aldrich), using 1:20 (trypsin/protein) ratio. Next, peptides were labeled with TMTpro 16plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. For each condition, 10μg of peptides were labelled at 5:1 (TMT/peptide) ratio, pooled and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). Pooled samples were analyzed on Q Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC™ 1200 Liquid Chromatography system and a PepMap™ RSLC C18 50cm column (2μm, 100Å, 75μm × 50cm) at 45°C (all from ThermoFisher Scientific). Data was recorded in a data-dependent acquisition mode over a 140min HPLC gradient using full-MS scans. MS1 spectra was recorded with 70000 resolution using 3e6 ions, and MS2 spectra was acquired with 35000 resolution, top 10 precursors with isolation windows of 1.6 m/z and 60ms max injection time, AGC target of 1e6 ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data file was analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) against a database compiled from the Uniprot reference proteome for Mus Musculus (taxid: 10090 v.26-1-2021). Search results were validated using Percolator and filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For normalization of TMT-channels, the function “Total Peptide Amount” was selected in ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4, and the value of each channel was scaled to the channel of the reference sample. Quantified proteins were filtered to master only medium and high FDR confidence. Statistical analysis was performed using CARMAweb (Rainer et al., 2006), applying Limma moderated t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg p-value adjustment. Fold changes of 1.5x with adjusted p-values ≤0.05 were considered significant. J. Rainer, F. Sanchez-Cabo, G. Stocker, A. Sturn, Z. Trajanoski, CARMAweb: comprehensive R- and bioconductor-based web service for microarray data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 34, W498-503 (2006).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Ct26, Tmt, Adam15, Cyr61

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen (Biotech Research and Innovation Centre)
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Krzysztof Piotrowski

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Kveiborg
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen


