### Accession
PXD016878

### Title
IP C5ORF30 macrophage immunometabolism regulator gene

### Description
Expression of the macrophage immunometabolism regulator gene (MACIR) is associated with severity of autoimmune disease pathology and the regulation of macrophage biology through unknown mechanisms. The 206 amino acid protein lacks homology to any characterized protein sequence and is a disordered protein according to structure prediction algorithms. Here we identify specific interactions of MACIR using a fragment complementation-based affinity pull down of cellular proteins prepared with a membrane solubilization buffer. Quantitative mass spectrometry showed enrichment of nuclear and mitochondrial proteins and of 63 significant interacting proteins, binding to the nuclear transport receptor TNPO1 and trafficking proteins UNC119 homolog A and B were validated by immunoprecipitation. Analysis of mutations in two candidate recognition motifs in the MACIR amino acid sequence confirmed TNPO1 binds via a PY-NLS motif (aa98-117). Characterizing nuclear MACIR activity in macrophage and fibroblasts is a priority with respect to developing strategies for treatment of autoimmune disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were mixed with 400 μl of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.9 using a clean eppendorf. Samples were concentrated in Vivacon spin ultracentrifugation units at 14,000 × g for 15 minutes at 20°C for 15 minutes. 200 μl of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.9 was added to the filter unit and spun for 15 minutes at 20°C. The flow through was discarded and 100 μl of 0.05 M iodoacetamide/ 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.9 added to the filter units. The samples were mixed for 1 minute at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer and incubated in darkness for 20 minutes. A further spin at 14,000 × g for 10 minutes at 20°C was performed and then two washes with 100 μl of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.9, and a further two washes with 100 μl of 0.05 M NH4HCO3. The filter units were transferred to new collection tube and 40 μl of 0.05 M NH4HCO3 with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) added to the filter units and mixed at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 minute. Filters were incubated on a wet chamber overnight at 37°C, spun at 14,000 × g for 15 minutes at 20°C to collect digested peptides. The filter units were washed once with 40 μl of 0.05 M NH4HCO3 to make a total volume of 80 μl per sample. The samples were measured with a NanoDrop™2000 to determine peptide concentration. c18 ZipTips were first equilibrated by aspirating 10 μl wetting solution (50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) twice prior to collection at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. Protein from the tryptic digest supernatants was aspirated and dispensed up to 10 times and washing solution (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in ddH2O) was aspirated and dispensed twice through the ZipTip. 10 μL of elution solution (50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) was dispensed into a clean tube followed by aspiration and dispensing of the sample through the ZipTip at least 3 times without the introduction of air. Samples were evaporated on a CentriVap Concentrator for 10-15 min, allowing for a small retentate volume (6 μL). The sample was finally resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000 rpm. 16 μL of this sample was transferred to a clean mass spectrometry vial for analysis.  Mass spectrometry was performed using an Ultimate3000 RSLC system that was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following tryptic digest, the peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300 μm i.d × 5mm precolumn that was packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) running at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid made up in HPLC water. The peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) after 3 minutes by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) using a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 150 minutes. The remaining peptides were eluted using a short gradient from 30% to 95% in buffer B for 10 minutes. The mass spectrometry parameters were as follows: for full mass spectrometry spectra, the scan range was 335-1500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed using top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. Maximum injection time was 50 ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set at 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Trypsin was set to be the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-thermal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data was then analysed with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 5 ppm and the 2re-quantify2 option was selected. For protein and peptide identification the Human subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2015_12) was used and the contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes. A statistical analysis of the cut off ratio and two-sample t-test was done to determine interactors.

### Publication Abstract
Expression of the macrophage immunometabolism regulator gene (MACIR) is associated with severity of autoimmune disease pathology and with the regulation of macrophage biology through unknown mechanisms. The encoded 206 amino acid protein lacks homology to any characterized protein sequence and is a disordered protein according to structure prediction algorithms. To identify interactions of MACIR with proteins from all subcellular compartments, a membrane solubilization buffer is employed, that together with a high affinity EF hand based pull down method, increases the resolution of quantitative mass spectrometry analysis with significant enrichment of interactions from membrane bound nuclear and mitochondrial compartments compared to samples prepared with radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer. A total of 63 significant interacting proteins are identified and interaction with the nuclear transport receptor TNPO1 and the trafficking proteins UNC119 homolog A and B are validated by immunoprecipitation. Mutational analysis in two candidate nuclear localization signal motifs in the MACIR amino acid sequence shows the interaction with TNPO1 is likely via a non-classical proline/tyrosine-nuclear localization signal motif (aa98-117). It is shown that employing a highly specific and high affinity pull down method that performs efficiently in this glycerol and detergent rich buffer is a powerful approach for the analysis of uncharacterized protein interactomes.

### Keywords
Ip c5orf30 macir human rheumatoid arthritis

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


