### Accession
PXD009738

### Title
Immunopeptidomic profiling of HLA-A2-positive triple negative breast cancer

### Description
Here we analysed the immunopeptidomes of 6 HLA-A2-positive triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) samples by nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nUPLC-MS2).

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 0.5 cm3 of breast cancer and matching normal tissue biopsy material was homogenized in lysis buffer (1% Igepal, 300 mM sodium chloride, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) using a bead beater (Precellys 24 bead-beater, Bertin Technologies) five times for 10 s at 6500 rpm. Lysates were cleared by subsequent centrifugation steps at 300 g for 10 min and then 20,000 g for 60 min. One mg per sample of human anti-HLA class I antibody (W6/32, ATCC HB-95) was bound and cross-linked to 1 ml Protein A beads (GE healthcare) and used for immunoprecipitation of HLA complexes. In brief, lysates were incubated with the antibody beads over night at 4ºC and washed subsequently with 50 mM Tris, pH8.0 containing either 150 mM, 450 mM and finally no salt. Peptides were eluted with 5 ml of 10% acetic acid. Dried peptides were resuspended and injected onto a 4.6 x 50 mm ProSwift RP-1S column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated from larger complex components by elution using a 500 μl/min flow rate over 10 min from 2-25% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Alternate fractions were pooled and two final fractions were analysed by nUPLC-MS2. HLA peptides eluted from tissues were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) using a PepMap C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 75 μm x 50 cm (Thermo Scienific) with a 30 min (two technical replicates) and 1h (single run) linear gradient of 3-25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in water) at a flowrate of 250 µl/min. Peptides were introduced using an Easy-Spray source at 2000V and to a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 305ºC. Full MS spectra were recorded from 300-1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 400,000. Precursor selection was performed using TopSpeed mode at a cycle time of 2 s. Peptide ions were isolated using an isolation width of 1.2 amu and trapped at a maximal injection time of 120 ms with an AGC target of 300,000. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was induced at an energy setting of 28 for peptides with a charge state of 2-4, while singly charged peptides were fragmented at an energy setting of 32 at lower priority. Fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw data was performed using Peaks 8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions). Sequence interpretation of MS2 spectra was carried out using databases containing all human SwissProt database entries (03/03/2016, 20210 entries) with the following settings: 5 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.03 Da fragment mass tolerance and no enzyme specificity. PTM search with all 485 build-in modifications, and maximally 2 variable modifications per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The recent development in immune checkpoint inhibitors and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cells in the treatment of cancer has not only demonstrated the potency of utilizing T-cell reactivity for cancer therapy, but has also highlighted the need for developing new approaches to discover targets suitable for such novel therapeutics. Here we analyzed the immunopeptidomes of six HLA-A2-positive triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) samples by nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nUPLC-MS<sup>2</sup> ). Immunopeptidomic profiling identified a total of 19&#xa0;675 peptides from tumor and adjacent normal tissue and 130 of the peptides were found to have higher abundance in tumor than in normal tissues. To determine potential therapeutic target proteins, we calculated the average tumor-associated cohort coverage (aTaCC) that represents the percentage coverage of each protein in this cohort by peptides that had higher tumoral abundance. Cofilin-1 (CFL-1), interleukin-32 (IL-32), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), syntenin-1 (SDCBP), and ribophorin-2 (RPN-2) were found to have the highest aTaCC scores. We propose that these antigens could be evaluated further for their potential as targets in breast cancer immunotherapy and the small cohort immunopeptidomics analysis technique could be used in a wide spectrum of target discovery. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009738.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Hla-a2, Tnbc

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, The Jenner Inistitute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Nicola Maria Nathalie Ternette
University of Oxford, The Jenner Inistitute


