### Accession
PXD031809

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals enzymes for β-D-glucan formation and degradation in Levilactobacillus brevis TMW 1.2112

### Description
Bacterial exopolysaccharide (EPS) formation is crucial for biofilm formation, protection against environmental factors or as storage compounds. EPSs produced by lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are appropriate for applications in food fermentation or the pharmaceutical industry, yet the dynam-ics of formation and degradation thereof are rather poorly described. This study focuses on car-bohydrate active enzymes, including glycosyl transferases (GT) and glycoside hydrolases (GH), and their roles in the formation and potential degradation of O2-substituted (1,3)-β-D-glucan of Levilactobacillus (L.) brevis TMW 1.2112. The fermentation broth of L. brevis TMW 1.2112 was ana-lyzed for changes in viscosity, β-glucan and D-glucose concentrations during exponential, sta-tionary and early death phase. While the viscosity reached its maximum during stationary phase and subsequently decreased, the β-glucan concentration only increased to a plateau. Results were correlated with secretome and proteome data to identify involved enzymes and pathways. The suggested pathway for β-glucan biosynthesis involved a β-1,3 glucan synthase (GT2) and en-zymes from maltose phosphorylase (MP) operons. The decreased viscosity appeared to be associ-ated with cell lysis as the β-glucan concentration did not decrease most likely due to missing ex-tracellular carbohydrate active enzymes. In addition, an operon was discovered containing known moonlighting genes, all of which were detected in both proteome and secretome samples.

### Sample Protocol
The L. brevis TMW 1.2112 fermentation broths (50 mL) were centrifuged at 17,000× g for 30 min at 4 °C. For cellular proteome measurements the cell pellets were processed, while for secretome analyses the supernatants were collected. Cellular proteomes: Bacterial cell pellets were washed once with 50 mL saline solution. After a second centrifu-gation step the cell pellets were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. For cell lysis between 300 and 1600 μL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in water, pH 8.0) and acid-washed glass beads (Ø 2.85–3.45 mm) were added, depending on the previous OD of the culture broth. The cell pellet of 50 mL culture broth with OD600 1 was resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer. The cells were disrupted with a benchtop ho-mogenizer (FastPrep®-24 MP, MP Biomedical Inc, Germany) in five cycles each 45 s at 5 m⸱s-1. Between the cycles the samples were stored on ice for cool down (1 min). Cell lysates were collected after centrifugation (17,000× g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the total protein concentrations were determined using the Coomassie (Bradford) protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). For each sample, 15 µg of protein extract were reduced with 10 mM DTT and car-bamidomethylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were digested twice with 0.15 µg trypsin, first for 2 hours and then overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide samples were desalted and resuspended in 2% ace-tonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Secretomes: For secretome analyses 500 µl of the fermentation medium were mixed 2:1 with NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (4X) (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) and heated for 10 min at 70°C. In-gel trypsin digestion was per-formed according to standard procedures [100]. Briefly, the samples were run on a NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Pro-tein Gel (Thermofisher Scientific, US) for 3 min. Subsequently, the still not size-separated single protein band per sample was cut out of the gel, reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (55 mm CAA, chloroacetamid) and digested over-night with trypsin (trypsin-gold, Promega). The sample was freshly re-suspended before MS measurement in 25 µl 2% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid and 3 µl were injected into the mass spectrometer per measurement.  The visualization of the proteins from the secretome was performed according to Schägger, et al. (1987) using a with a 12% SDS gel stained with Coomassie Brilliant dye Roti® Blue (Carl Roth GmbH+Co. KG, Germany) [102].  4.3.2. LC-MS/MS Measurements LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteome analyses ca. 0.2 µg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in HPLC grade water with 0.1% formic acid. After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and 5% (v/v) DMSO) contained 5% DMSO to boost MS intensity. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 pep-tide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda [103,104]. MS2 spectra were searched against the proteome databased of L. brevis TMW 1.2112, (GenBank accession No.: CP016797) including 2,537 coding sequences supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using re-versed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was enabled (matching time window 0.7 min, alignment window 20 min). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifica-tions. To compare relative protein abundances in the cell lysate time course experiment, label free quantification (LFQ) was used. The LFQ assumes that the overall protein abundance across samples is comparable. This assump-tion is clearly violated in the secretome experiment; therefore, we used the intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) in this analysis [105]. Each sample type was analyzed at least in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Levilactobacillus brevis tmw 1.2112, Glycosyltransferase, Glycosyl hydrolase, Proteome, Secretome, Exopolysaccharide, Β-glucan, Moonlighting proteins

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


