### Accession
PXD020288

### Title
Urine proteomics in IgA nephropathy

### Description
we aimed at developing a urinary biomarker-based algorithm that predicts rapid disease progression in IgAN, thus enabling a personalized risk stratification.

### Sample Protocol
Shortly before the CE-MS analysis, lyophilisates were resuspended in HPLC-grade water to a final protein concentration of 0.8 mg/ml, based on the BCA assay (Interchim, Montlucon, France). CEMS analysis was performed as described27 using a P/ACE MDQ capillary electrophoresis system (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, USA) on-line coupled to a MicroTOF MS (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) was grounded, and the ion spray interface potential was set at 4.5 kV. CE-MS data acquisition was automatically controlled by the CE via contact-close relays. Spectra were accumulated every 3 s, over a range of mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 to 3000

### Data Protocol
CE-MS data were processed using MosaiquesVisu software (Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH, Hannover, Germany).31 Migration time and ion signal intensity (amplitude) were normalized using ‘internal polypeptide standards’, as described.32 The resulting peak list characterizes each peptide by its molecular mass [Da], normalized migration time [min] and signal intensity. All detected polypeptides were deposited, matched, and annotated in a Microsoft SQL database. Cluster analysis was used to align peptides by mass across samples. During initial clustering, peptides across different samples were considered identical, if mass deviation was<50 ppm for small or 75 ppm for larger peptides. Due to analyte diffusion effects, CE peak widths increase with CE-migration time. In the data clustering process, this effect was considered by linearly increasing cluster widths over the entire electropherogram (19 min to 45 min) from 2–5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glomerulonephritis, Progression, Biomarker, Urine proteomics, Igan, : iga, Ckd

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH

### Submitter
Martin Pejchinovski

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pejchinovski
Clinical Proteomics


