### Accession
PXD016325

### Title
Integrating serum protein electrophoresis with mass spectrometry, a new workflow for M-protein detection and quantification

### Description
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) and immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) are standard tools for multiple myeloma (MM) routine diagnostics. M-protein is a biomarker for MM that can be quantified with SPE and characterized with IFE. We have investigated combining SPE/IFE with targeted mass spectrometry (MS) to detect and quantify the M-protein. SPE-MS assay offers the possibility to detect M-protein with higher sensitivity than SPE/IFE, which could lead to better analysis of minimal residual disease in clinical laboratories. In addition, analysis of archived SPE gels could be used for retrospective MM studies. We have investigated two different approaches of measuring M-protein and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (t-mAbs) from SPE/IFE gels. After extracting proteotypic peptides from the gel, they can be quantified using stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptides and measured by Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Alternatively, extracted peptides can be labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT). Both approaches are not hampered by the presence of t-mAbs. Using SIL peptides, limit of detection of the M-protein is approximately 100-fold better than with routine SPE/IFE. Using TMT labeling, M-protein can be measured and compared in different samples from the same patient. We have successfully measured M-protein proteotypic peptides extracted from the SPE/IFE gels utilizing SIL peptides and TMT.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the sensitivity of the SPE-MS assay we have prepared a series of M-protein dilutions. SPE gel pieces were marked with a ruler and a scalpel, and were cut with scissors. Samples were digested with trypsin and cleaned-up with C18 ZipTips. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on Q Exactive HF Orbitrap and Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Signals were integrated using Skyline.12 We have selected a maximum of six transitions with highest intensities for each peptide. Concentration of each peptide was calculated from the peak area ratio between the endogenous and the SIL peptides. Peak areas were calculated as the sum of all selected transitions.

### Publication Abstract
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) and immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) are standard tools for multiple myeloma (MM) routine diagnostics. M-protein is a biomarker for MM that can be quantified with SPE and characterized with IFE. We have investigated combining SPE/IFE with targeted mass spectrometry (MS) to detect and quantify the M-protein. SPE-MS assay offers the possibility to detect M-protein with higher sensitivity than SPE/IFE, which could lead to better analysis of minimal residual disease in clinical laboratories. In addition, analysis of archived SPE gels could be used for retrospective MM studies. We have investigated two different approaches of measuring M-protein and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (t-mAbs) from SPE/IFE gels. After extracting proteotypic peptides from the gel, they can be quantified using stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptides and measured by Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Alternatively, extracted peptides can be labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT). Both approaches are not hampered by the presence of t-mAbs. Using SIL peptides, limit of detection of the M-protein is approximately 100-fold better than with routine SPE/IFE. Using TMT labeling, M-protein can be compared in different samples from the same patient. We have successfully measured M-protein proteotypic peptides extracted from the SPE/IFE gels utilizing SIL peptides and TMT.

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Multiple myeloma, Serum protein electrophoresis, M-protein, Immunofixation electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Marina Zajec

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


