### Accession
PXD015080

### Title
Development of an sulfoxide-based, CuAAC-enrichable cross-linker

### Description
Cross-linking of BSA with a novel cross-linker. Modification of the cross-linker containing peptides with CuAAC-chemistry to attach a cleavable biotin-derivative. Enrichment with streptavidin-beads.

### Sample Protocol
BSA was diluted to a concentration of 1 µg/µL in 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4). A 20 mM solution of cross-linker in dry DMSO was prepared and added to the samples for a final concentration of 1 mM following incubation at room temperature for 45 min. To quench the reaction, an aqueous solution of 1 M NH4HCO3 was added (final concentration 20 mM, incubation at room temperature for 15 min). In the next step, an aqueous solution of 500 mM DTT was added (final concentration 5 mM, incubation at 60 °C for 30 min) to reduce disulfide bonds. The resulting free thiols were alkylated with an aqueous solution of 1 M iodoacetamide (final concentration 20 mM, incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark). Cold acetone (HPLC grade) was added to a concentration of 80% (v/v) and proteins were precipitated at -20 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 15000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was air-dried to remove leftover acetone. Proteins were resuspended to a concentration of 13.3 µg/µL with resuspension buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) and incubated at 37 °C for 15 min following addition of dilution buffer (10 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) to achieve a final guanidinium chloride concentration of 0.45 M and a protein concentration of 1 µg/µL. Samples were digested by adding Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, dissolved in 50 mM aqueous AcOH) 1:40 (w/w) relative to protein amount and incubating at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with 5% aqueous TFA, purified with C18-ZipTips (0.6 µL resin, Merck) and the solvent was evaporated. Before MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 2% MeCN, 0.1% TFA in water to a concentration of ≈ 1 µg/µL. 2 µL were injected for each measurement. Samples that were modified and enriched were for the first part prepared the same way as the cross-linking-only samples. After acetone precipitation however, these samples were resuspended to a concentration of 6 µg/µL with resuspension buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) and incubated at 37 °C for 15 min following addition of dilution buffer (10 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) to achieve a final guanidinium chloride concentration of 1 M and a protein concentration of 1 µg/µL. For the CuAAC-reaction, first, 10 mM biotin-azide 7 (dissolved in DMSO) was added to a final concentration of 500 µM. Secondly, 50 mM CuSO4 and 250 mM THPTA (both dissolved in H2O) were pre-mixed in a ratio of 1:1 (v/v) and added to the reaction mixture to a final concentration of 250 µM and 1.25 mM, respectively. Finally, 500 mM sodium ascorbate was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Subsequently, a second acetone precipitation was carried out analogous to the first one and the samples were digested and purified as described for the cross-linking-only samples.

### Data Protocol
The acquired .raw data files of the BSA-cross-linked samples were converted to .mgf-files with MSConvert by the ProteoWizard software suite (version 3.0.9576). For analysis of the .mgf-files, MeroX 2.0.0.6 was used.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is the method of choice for the characterisation of proteomes. Most proteins operate in protein complexes, in which their close association modulates their function. However, with standard MS analysis, information on protein-protein interactions is lost and no structural information is retained. To gain structural and interactome data, new crosslinking reagents are needed that freeze inter- and intramolecular interactions. Herein, the development of a new reagent, which has several features that enable highly sensitive crosslinking MS, is reported. The reagent enables enrichment of crosslinked peptides from the majority of background peptides to facilitate efficient detection of low-abundant crosslinked peptides. Due to the special cleavable properties, the reagent can be used for MS<sup>2</sup> and potentially for MS<sup>3</sup> experiments. Thus, the new crosslinking reagent, in combination with high-end MS, should enable sensitive analysis of interactomes, which will help researchers to obtain important insights into cellular states in health and diseases.

### Keywords
Xl-ms, Cuaac, Sulfoxide

### Affiliations
Princeton University
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Michael  Stadlmeier

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Carell
LMU Munich


