### Accession
PXD033937

### Title
Proteasome dysfunction leads to enhanced autophagy mediated degradation of mutant lamin A/C

### Description
Lamin A/C are nuclear intermediate filament proteins that form a proteinaceous meshwork called lamina beneath the inner nuclear membrane. Mutations in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C cause a heterogenous group of inherited degenerative diseases known as laminopathies. Previous studies have revealed altered cell signaling pathways in lamin mutant patient cells, but little is known about the fate of mutant lamin A/C within the cells. Here, we analyzed the turnover of lamin A/C in cells derived from a dilated cardiomyopathy patient with a heterozygous p.S143P mutation in LMNA. We found that transcriptional activation and mRNA levels of LMNA are increased in the primary patient fibroblasts, but that the lamin A/C protein levels remain equal in control and patient cells because of a meticulous interplay between autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). Both endogenous and ectopic expression of p.S143P lamin A/C cause significantly reduced activity of UPS and accumulation of K48-ubiquitin chains in the nucleus. Furthermore, K48-ubiquitinated lamin A/C is degraded by compensatory enhanced autophagy, as shown by increased autophagosome formation and binding of lamin A/C to microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3. Finally, a chaperone 4-PBA augmented protein degradation by restoring UPS activity as well as autophagy in the patient cells. In summary, our results suggest that the p.S143P mutant lamin A/C has overloading and deleterious effects on protein degradation machinery and pharmacological interventions with compounds enhancing protein degradation may be beneficial for cell homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins separated on a SDS-PAGE gel were digested and dissolved in 15 μl of 0.1% formic acid and 1/10 of this was injected. The LC ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,San Jose, USA) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A 30 min gradient from 8 to 37% B was used to elute peptides. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300 - 1300 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation with a top speed mode with the 3 s cycle time for precursor selection. An inclusion list including possible tryptic peptides containing the mutation S143P site was created and added to the LC-MS/MS method. During the first analysis only peptides on the inclusion list were fragmented if detected in the sample. During the 2nd analysis also all other peptides detected by MS using the method described above were fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house server running the Mascot 2.6.1 software (Matrix Science). Data was searched against a custom made SwissProt database containing all human protein sequences including prelamin-A/C with S143P mutation. The following database search parameters were used. Enzyme: Trypsin Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ) Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C)* *) Peptides were alkylated with iodoacetamide Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: ± 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Instrument type: ESI-TRAP

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin-proteasome-system, Degradation, Ubiquitin, Lamin a/c, Autophagy, Disease mutations

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku and Department of Pathology, Turku University Hospital Medisiina D, 5th floor Kiinamyllynkatu 10 20520 Turku Finland

### Submitter
Gun West

### Lab Head
Dr Pekka Taimen
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku and Department of Pathology, Turku University Hospital Medisiina D, 5th floor Kiinamyllynkatu 10 20520 Turku Finland


