### Accession
PXD001280

### Title
Shotgun proteomic analysis of Bordetella pertussis response to iron availability

### Description
B. pertussis Tohama I was cultivated in iron-depleted or iron-repleted medium in order to monitor proteins which are influence by iron supply. More than 200 proteins displayed increased or decreased levels. Proteins involved in iron acquisition, biofilm production and oxidative stress response were increased during iron starvation. Limited iron supply caused on the other hand decreased levels of virulence factors regulated by the BvgAS system.

### Sample Protocol
B. pertussis strains BP536, a streptomycin-resistant derivative of Tohama I was used in this study. Bacteria were cultured in Stainer-Scholte liquid medium under iron-replete conditions (36 μM iron), and iron-depleted conditions (without addition of FeSO4.7H2O) until late stationary phase. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 15 min at room temperature), washed with sterile iron-free saline solution, and diluted to an estimated concentration of 2x108 CFU/ml. Cells were resuspended in 50 µL urea/thiourea (8M/2M).  The proteins were solubilized during 1 h at room temperature (RT) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 20°C for 1 h. Total protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. Finally, four µg of proteins solved in UT were further diluted in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 25 mM DTT, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide, and proteolytically digested with 4 mL of trypsin (0.25 µg/µL) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight in a water bath at 37°C. The tryptic digest was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) to a final concentration of 0.1% v/v. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min at RT. The supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube and peptides were puriﬁed and desalted using C18-ZipTip columns (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA , USA). Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Proxeon nano-LC system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap-MS (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-ESI source. Three independent replicates were prepared for both iron-depleted and iron-replete conditions.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data were post-processed with the Sorcerer™ software package v3.5 (Sage-N Research Inc. Milpitas, CA,USA). After conversion, all Tandem-MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST® search engine (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA, USA, version v.27, rev.11) against the B. pertussis Tohama I FASTA database assuming the digestion with trypsin (precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1 Da, variable oxidation of methionine). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds and as a result, SEQUEST® identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.8, and 3.8 for doubly, triply, and quadruply charged peptides, respectively. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate protein identifications derived from MS/MS sequencing results. Scaffold verifies peptide identifications assigned by SEQUEST® using the X!Tandem database searching program (Craig and Beavis 2003). Peptide and protein identiﬁcations were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 % probability respectively, as speciﬁed by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they reached greater than 99% probability and contained at least 2 identified unique peptides. These identification criteria typically established <0.01% false discovery rate based on a decoy database search strategy at the protein level. Identified peptides/proteins were further quantified using unweighted spectral counting. To this end, total spectra identified in a dataset were normalized with spectra identified in dataset that was to be compared. This normalization, which is achieved by using a display option called "Quantitative value" in Scaffold v 3.0, was used to determine relative abundance of proteins within datasets and the statistical significance was assessed by using a Student's t test (p<0.05).The proteins were further functionally classified, as assigned by the descriptive multifunctional classification of Serres and Riley ,(200) in the categories “Metabolism” (MultiFun category 1), “Information Transfer” (MultiFun category 2), “Regulation” (MultiFun category 3), “Transport” (MultiFun category 4), “Cell Processes” (MultiFun category 5) and “Cell Structure” (MultiFun category 6). We further included two other categories, namely, “Virulence Factors” (known B. pertussis virulence factors) and “Hypothetical and Conserved Hypothetical” (no E. coli homologue or unknown molecular function). Those proteins with a putative function that has only been assigned by homology to other genomes, without biological evidence, were included in the MultiFun classification, according to their respective predicted function.

### Publication Abstract
One of the mechanisms involved in host immunity is the limitation of iron accessibility to pathogens, which in turn provokes the corresponding physiological adaptation of pathogens. This study reports a gel-free nanoLC-MS/MS-based comparative proteome analysis of Bordetella pertussis grown under iron-excess and iron-depleted conditions. Out of the 926 proteins covered 98 displayed a shift in their abundance in response to low iron availability. Forty-seven of them were found to be increased in level while 58 were found with decreased protein levels under iron starvation. In addition to proteins previously reported to be influenced by iron in B. pertussis, we observed changes in metabolic proteins involved in fatty acid utilization and poly-hydroxybutyrate production. Additionally, many bacterial virulence factors regulated by the BvgAS two-component system were found at decreased levels in response to iron limitation. These results, together with the increased production of proteins potentially involved in oxidative stress resistance, seem to indicate that iron starvation provokes changes in B. pertussis phenotype that might shape host-pathogen interaction.

### Keywords
Iron limitation, Shotgun proteomics, B. pertussis

### Affiliations
ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Schmidt
ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


