### Accession
PXD028946

### Title
ID3 Promotes Homologous Recombination via Non-transcriptional and Transcriptional Mechanisms and its Loss Confers Sensitivity to PARP Inhibition

### Description
The inhibitor of DNA-binding 3 (ID3) is a transcriptional regulator that limits interaction of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors with their target DNA sequences. We previously reported that ID3 loss is associated with mutational signatures linked to DNA repair defects. Here we demonstrate that ID3 exhibits a dual role to promote DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, particularly homologous recombination (HR). ID3 interacts with the MRN complex and RECQL helicase to activate DSB repair and it facilitates RAD51 loading and downstream steps of HR. In addition, ID3 promotes the expression of HR genes in response to ionizing radiation by regulating both chromatin accessibility and activity of the transcription factor E2F1. Consistently, analyses of TCGA cancer patient data demonstrate that low ID3 expression is associated with impaired HR. The loss of ID3 leads to sensitivity of tumor cells to PARP inhibition, offering new therapeutic opportunities in ID3-deficient tumors.

### Sample Protocol
After a wash with water, Flag-magnetic beads were then conditioned in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate NH4HCO3. Samples were subjected to reduction with DTT 7mM final at 55°C for 30min, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide 12mM at RT for 40min in the dark. The reaction was quenched with DTT and proteins were digested on beads with a Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega, V5071) at 37°C for 16h. Digested peptides were desalted with 2μL of SP3 para-magnetic beads as previously described (23-25). Peptides were eluted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in H2O, loaded on a trap column (PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap 100µm x 2cm) and separated over a 25cm analytical column (Waters nanoEase BEH, 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å,) using the Thermo Easy nLC 1200 nanospray source (Thermo EasynLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 8% in 4 minutes, then increased to 10% in 2 minutes, to 32% in 68 minutes, to 50% in 12 minutes and finally to 100% in a further 1 minute and went down to 3% for the last 11 minutes. Peptides were analyzed on a Tri-Hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive (+2kV) data-dependent acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. The MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively with a total cycle time of 3sec. MS1 detection occurred at 120000 resolution, AGC target 1E6, maximal injection time 50 ms and a scan range of 375-1500 m/z. Peptides with charge states 2 to 4 were selected for fragmentation with an exclusion duration of 40s. MS2 occurred with CE 33%, detection in topN mode and scan rate was set to Rapid. AGC target was 1E4 and maximal injection time allowed of 50 ms. Data were recorded in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed with Maxquant software (1.5.1.2) including the Andromeda search engine (26, 27). Peptide identification was performed using Homo sapiens Uniprot database concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of contaminants (canonical and isoform). Default parameters of Maxquant were used with the following modifications: digestion by Trypsin/P and LysC, default variable modification (methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation), cytosine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The Instrument set Orbitrap (with precursor tolerance 20ppm, MS tolerance 0.5Da). FDR was set to 1% at both protein and peptide levels. Match between runs option was enabled, Label-Free Quantification (LFQ), and iBAQ calculated. For further protein analysis, Perseus free software was used (28). Potential contaminants, reverse proteins, and proteins only identified by sites were removed and only proteins identified with at least one unique peptide in both biological replicates were considered for further analysis. Missing values in the untreated samples were replaced with fixed value corresponding to the lower LFQ log10 value of that experiment. Two-sided t-test statistics were used for the generation of the volcano plots based on LFQ log10 values of expressed proteins. FDR was 0.05 and S0 constant was 0.1. Pathway enrichment analysis was done using the Metascape resource (29).

### Publication Abstract
The inhibitor of DNA-binding 3 (ID3) is a transcriptional regulator that limits interaction of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors with their target DNA sequences. We previously reported that ID3 loss is associated with mutational signatures linked to DNA repair defects. Here we demonstrate that ID3 exhibits a dual role to promote DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, particularly homologous recombination (HR). ID3 interacts with the MRN complex and RECQL helicase to activate DSB repair and it facilitates RAD51 loading and downstream steps of HR. In addition, ID3 promotes the expression of HR genes in response to ionizing radiation by regulating both chromatin accessibility and activity of the transcription factor E2F1. Consistently, analyses of TCGA cancer patient data demonstrate that low ID3 expression is associated with impaired HR. The loss of ID3 leads to sensitivity of tumor cells to PARP inhibition,&#xa0;offering new therapeutic opportunities in ID3-deficient tumors.

### Keywords
Dsbs, Dna repair, Id3, Hr, Cell sensitivity, Parpi

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Epigenomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), INF280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Schmezer
Division of Cancer Epigenomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), INF280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


