### Accession
PXD016771

### Title
L-Ascorbic acid and α-Tocopherol synergistically triggers apoptosis inducing antileukemic effects of arsenic trioxide via oxidative stress in human acute promyelocytic leukemia cells.

### Description
Chemosensitization is an effective strategy to overcome the drawbacks of arsenic trioxide (As2O3) treatment which may be possible through the use of dietary supplements in combination. Proteomic analysis revealed that the combination of arsenic trioxide with vitamins can alter a number of proteins related to the translation, cell cycle, oxidative stress and apoptotic pathways that adds to their effectiveness in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. This study provides the fact that HL-60 cells became more vulnerable to As2O3 in the presence of L-Ascorbic acid and α-Tocopherol indicating that this combination may be a hopeful approach to increase the outcome of As2O3 in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
For studying the synergistic effect of vitamins with arsenic trioxide on HL-60 cells, the experimental groups were selected as follows (a) Control cells (b) 10 μM As2O3, (c) 10 μM As2O3, 100 μM L-AA and 50 μM α-TOC. After 48 hours of exposure time, cells were washed twice with PBS and centrifuged at 9000 rpm to eliminate traces of FBS. The cell lysate was prepared in 0.1% acid-labile detergent RapiGest SF in 25mm ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Protein quantification was performed by Bradford assay. Using in-solution trypsin digestion, peptide was produced for each sample (100 μg of protein). The digested peptide solutions were centrifuged at 20,817 g for 12 min. The supernatant was stored at -200C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. 100 micrograms of protein from each sample were used for in-solution trypsin digestion. DL-dithiothreitol (10 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) buffer at 60ᴼC for 30 minutes was used to reduce the disulfide bonds. The subsequent alkylation of proteins was done with 200mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the same buffer at 27°C for 30 minutes in the dark. The alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing-grade modified trypsin, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1:25 w/w) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by incubating overnight at 37ᴼC. Formic acid(Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1% v/v) was used to terminate the trypsin digestion reaction. The digested peptide solution was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4ºC for 12 minutes, and the supernatant was stored at -20ᴼC until the LC/MS/MS analysis. The peptide samples were analyzed by using a nano ACQUITY UPLC® System (Waters, UK) coupled to a Quadrupole-Time of Flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-G2, Waters, UK) controlled by MassLynx4.1 SCN781 software (Waters, UK). In each sample, equivalent to 3µg of protein (3µl), was injected in ‘partial loop’ mode and was loaded into the reverse phase column with 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B, using the binary solvent manager. The trap column (Symmetry® 180µm x 20mm C18 5µm, Waters, UK) was used to remove any salt by employing a high flow rate (15µl/minute) with 99.9% mobile phase A and 0.1% mobile phase B for 1 minute. The peptide separation was performed in a 75µm x 200mm 1.8 µm HSST3 column (Waters, UK), with a particle size of 1.7µm. Gradient elution with 1-40% mobile phase B, for 55.5 minutes at 300nl/minute flow rate, was employed. After separation, the column was washed with 80 % mobile phase B for 7.5 minutes and re-equilibrated with 1% mobile phase B for 20 minutes. The column temperature was maintained at 40ᴼC. Three technical replicate runs were performed for each sample. Peptides eluted from the nano-LC were monitored by SYNAPT® G2 High Definition MS™ System (HDMSE System (Waters, UK). The time of flight analyzer (TOF) was calibrated with a solution of 500fmole/µl of human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and the lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 seconds by the same peptide delivered through the reference sprayer of the nano-LockSpray source at a flow rate of 500nl/minute. This calibration sets the analyzer to detect ions in the range of 50 - 2,000 m/z. The mass spectrometer was operated in the ‘resolution mode’ with a resolving power of 18,000 FWHM, and the data acquisition was performed in ‘continuum’ format. The data were acquired by rapidly alternating between two functions – Function-1 (low energy) and Function-2 (high energy-MSE). Each spectrum was acquired in 0.9 seconds with an interscan delay of 0.024s.

### Data Protocol
The LC- MSE data was analyzed by using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Non-linear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne UK) for protein identification as well as for the relative protein quantification. Data processing includes lock mass correction post-acquisition. The database for human was downloaded from Uniprot. During database search, the protein false positive rate was set at 4%. The parameters for protein identification was made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least one fragment ion match, the protein was required to have at least three fragment ion matches, and protein was required to have at least one peptide match for identification. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme used with a specificity of 1 missed cleavage. Data sets were analysed and quantified using Relative Quantitation using Hi-N algorithm, which resolve peptide conflicts and uses the average intensity of the three most abundant unique peptides for a protein .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc- ms/ms, Human acute promyelocytic leukemia cells

### Affiliations
scientist EII , Rajiv Gandhi centre for Biotechnology
Technician, Mass spectrometry and proteomics core facility, RGCB

### Submitter
MAHESH CHANDRAN V R

### Lab Head
Dr dr.Abdul jaleel K A
scientist EII , Rajiv Gandhi centre for Biotechnology


