### Accession
PXD022015

### Title
Characterization of gastric tumor organoids with specific oncogenic pathway activations

### Description
Gastric cancer ranks the fifth most common malignancy and the third leading cause of cancer related death worldwide. Classical chemotherapy is still the standard treatment in advanced stages, with only two targeted therapies currently in clinical use. Several targeted trials have failed, likely due to missing relevant biomarkers that predict response. Patient derived cancer organoids (PDOs) constitute a three dimensional cell culture system showing self renewal, self organization and regularly unlimited proliferation while faithfully recapitulating many aspects of the tumor they are derived from. Nevertheless, the complex individual mutational landscape hampers the use of PDOs for basic and translational research. We therefore characterized three murine tumor organoid models with defined mutational patterns altering specific oncogenic pathways: a RAS activated (KrasG12D, Tp53R172H), a WNT activated (Apcfl/fl, Tp53R172H) and a diffuse (Cdh1fl/fl, Apcfl/fl) tumor model. The models were analyzed phenotypically, a proteome signature was established and a drug screen performed. The models were morphologically diverse, were characterized by individual protein expression signatures and showed differential drug sensitivities. The developed organoid models allow functional assays as well as pathway specific drug interference testing in a genetically defined setting.

### Sample Protocol
Urea extraction, Trypsin digestion. Isobaric iTRAQ-8plex labelling. Off-line High pH prefractionantion. LC-MSMS QQTOF (IMPACT, Bruker) LC-MSMS Orbitrap (Qexactive, Thermo. TiO2 affinity purification plus on TIP microHPH.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis of Raw data. Trypsin KR allowing 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications:  C (carbamidonethyl) N-Termini iTRAQ-8plex, K iTRAQ-8plex. Variable modifications: M (oxidation) S, T, Y (phosphorylation).

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer ranks the fifth most common and third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Alterations in the RTK/MAPK, WNT, cell adhesion, TP53, TGF&#x3b2;, NOTCH, and NF&#x3ba;B signaling pathways could be identified as main oncogenic drivers. A combination of altered pathways can be associated with molecular subtypes of gastric cancer. In order to generate model systems to study the impact of different pathway alterations in a defined genetic background, we generated three murine organoid models: a RAS-activated (Kras<sup>G12D</sup> , Tp53<sup>R172H</sup> ), a WNT-activated (Apc<sup>fl/fl</sup> , Tp53<sup>R172H</sup> ), and a diffuse (Cdh1<sup>fl/fl</sup> , Apc<sup>fl/fl</sup> ) model. These organoid models were morphologically and phenotypically diverse, differed in proteome expression signatures and possessed individual drug sensitivities. A differential vulnerability to RTK/MAPK pathway interference based on the different mitogenic drivers and according to the level of dependence on the pathway could be uncovered. Furthermore, an association between RTK/MAPK pathway activity and susceptibility to HDAC inhibition was observed. This finding was further validated in patient-derived organoids from gastric adenocarcinoma, thus identifying a novel treatment approach for RTK/MAPK pathway altered gastric cancer patients.

### Keywords
Proteome signature, Murine tumor organoid models, Gastric cancer, Phospho proteome signature

### Affiliations
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN
Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid.  SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid.  SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110


