### Accession
PXD006642

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the liver isolated from the double (apolipoprotein E and endothelial nitric oxide synthase) knockout mice reveals decreased expression of major urinary proteins (MUPs)

### Description
Nitric oxide (NO) is a crucial gaseous signaling molecule engaged in a variety of physiological and pathological processes. It is produced by three isoenzymes called nitric oxide synthases (NOS): neuronal, inducible and endothelial NOS (eNOS). eNOS-derived NO plays an important role in endothelium-dependent vasodilation as well as in lipid and glucose homeostasis in the liver. In addition, it has been shown that NO exert a beneficial effect on mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration. Thus, the aim of our study was to used iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics to investigate the changes in protein expression in the mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions isolated from the liver of the double (apolipoprotein E (apoE) and eNOS) knockout (apoE/eNOS-DKO) mice as compared to apoE-/- mice – an animal model of atherosclerosis and hepatic steatosis.  Collectively, our proteomic approach revealed the increased expression of proteins related to gluconeogenesis, fatty acids and cholesterol biosynthesis as well as the decreased expression of proteins participated in triglyceride breakdown, cholesterol transport, protein transcription & translation and processing in endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Moreover, one of the most down-regulated proteins were major urinary proteins (MUPs), which are abundantly expressed in the liver and are involved in the regulation of lipid and glucose metabolism as well as mitochondrial function. However, the exact functional consequences of the revealed alterations require further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics  Sample preparation The liver was homogenized and then cytosolic & microsomal fraction and mitochondria-enriched fraction were isolated at 4°C from the freshly-harvested liver as previously described (Stachowicz et al., 2014). Cytosolic & microsomal fractions and mitochondria-enriched pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml of lysis buffer  (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTT, the mix of protease inhibitors (Sigma, USA)), vortexed, incubated at 25C for 30 min and then centrifuged at 12 000 g for 15 min. The protein concentrations were determined in the harvested supernatants with the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976).100 μg of calculated protein content of each sample was precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone (Sigma, USA) (1:6 v:v). Samples were centrifuged at 12000 x g for 10 min at 4 ºC. Acetone was carefully removed and precipitates were air-dried for 10 min. Subsequently, samples were dissolved, reduced and alkylated as recommended by iTRAQ protocol (ABSciex). Proteins were digested with Trypsin (Promega, Germany) overnight, with 1:50 (w:w) ratio, at 37 ºC. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagents as recommended by producer and ordered as follows: apoE-/-: 113, 114, 115 and apoE/eNOS-DKO: 116, 119, 121. Labeled samples were combined, and dried in vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany). Next, peptides were dissolved in 5%ACN, 0.1% TFA and purified with C18 MacroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus). Eluate was dried in vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, and subjected to SCX fractionation. Samples were loaded onto previously conditioned SCX Macrospin columns (Harvard Apparatus), flow-through fractions were collected, and peptides were eluted in 11 consecutive salt steps (5 mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, 40 mM, 60 mM, 80 mM, 100 mM, 150 mM, 200 mM, 300 mM, 500 mM ammonium acetate in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA). Each sample resulted in a total of 12 SCX fractions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis Samples were concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm column, Thermo Scientific Dionex). Each fraction was then injected on-line on PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm column (Thermo Scientific Dionex) and peptides were separated in 90 min 7-55% B phase linear gradient (A phase – 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid; B phase – 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min by UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex) and applied on-line to a Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA) dual-pressure ion-trap mass spectrometer. The main working nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Scientific) parameters were as follows: ion spray voltage 1.7 kV and capillary temperature 250°C. Spectra were collected in full scan mode (400 – 1500 Da, 50ms AT), followed by 1 HCD (Higher energy Collisional Dissociation) and 1 CID MS/MS of five most intense ions from the preceding survey full scan under dynamic exclusion criteria. The RAW files were processed by the EasierMgf software, which combines the low mass range data from each HCD MS/MS spectrum with the corresponding CID data  for the same precursor into single MS/MS spectra (Dayon et al., 2010). These hybrid HCD-extended MS/MSCID spectra were analyzed by the X!Tandem (The GPM Organization) and Comet search algorithms and validated with Peptide Prophet and iProphet under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) suite of software (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA). Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy: mouse (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot), enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 2, fixed modification: Methylthio(C), variable modifications: Methionine oxidation(M), iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), iTRAQ8plex(Y); parent mass error – 1.5 to + 3.0 Da and peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.7 Da. Quantitative information of the peptides data was extracted from the HCD MS2 data by Libra software under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). Peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was estimated by Mayu (TPP) and peptide identifications with FDR below 1% were considered as correct matches. DanteR software (Taverner et al., 2012) was used for statistical analysis of iTRAQ-labeled peptides. In brief, data was normalized using linear regression and ANOVA was performed at peptide level using a linear model with minimum 2 and maximum 500 peptides. Finally, the Benjamini & Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction was used to adjust p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)-derived nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role, not only in endothelium-dependent vasodilation but also in lipid and glucose homeostasis in the liver and exerts beneficial effects on mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration. Thus, the aim of our study was to use iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics to investigate the changes in protein expression in the mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions isolated from the liver of the double (apolipoprotein E (apoE) and eNOS) knockout (apoE/eNOS-DKO) mice as compared to apoE KO mice (apoE<sup>-/-</sup> ) - an animal model of atherosclerosis and hepatic steatosis. Collectively, the deficiency of eNOS resulted in increased expression of proteins related to gluconeogenesis, fatty acids and cholesterol biosynthesis as well as the decreased expression of proteins participated in triglyceride breakdown, cholesterol transport, protein transcription &amp; translation and processing in endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Moreover, one of the most downregulated proteins were major urinary proteins (MUPs), which are abundantly expressed in the liver and were shown to be involved in the regulation of lipid and glucose metabolism. The exact functional consequences of the revealed alterations require further investigation.

### Keywords
Apolipoprotein e, Liver, Proteomics, Mup, Enos

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University Medical College

### Submitter
Aneta Stachowicz

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Olszanecki
Jagiellonian University Medical College


