### Accession
PXD022426

### Title
A tailored phosphoaspartate probe unravels CprR as a response regulator in Pseudomonas aeruginosa interkingdom signaling

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a difficult-to-treat Gram-negative bacterial pathogen causing life-threatening infections. Adaptive resistance (AR) to cationic peptide antibiotics such as polymyxin B impairs the therapeutic success. This self-protection is mediated by two component systems (TCS) consisting of a membrane-bound histidine kinase and an intracellular response regulator (RR). As phosphorylation of the key RR aspartate residue is transient during signaling and hydrolytically unstable, the study of these systems is challenging. Therefore, we applied a tailored reverse polarity chemical proteomic strategy to capture this transient modification and read-out RR phosphorylation in complex proteomes using a nucleophilic probe. An ideal trapping methodology was developed with a recombinant RR demonstrating the importance of fine-tuned acidic pH values to facilitate the attack on the aspartate carbonyl C-atom and prevent unproductive hydrolysis. Analysis of Bacillus subtilis and P. aeruginosa proteomes revealed the detection of multiple phosphoaspartate sites, which closely resembled the conserved RR sequence motif. With this validated strategy we dissected the signaling of dynorphin A, a human peptide stress hormone, which is sensed by P. aeruginosa to mediate AR. Intriguingly, our methodology identified CprR as an unprecedented RR in dynorphin A interkingdom signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol consists of three different reverse-polarity (RP) ABPP experiments with different desthiobiotin azide (DTB) tags and enrichment methods: (1) B. subtilis with spiked-in E. coli PhoB (DTB, protein enrichment), (2) RP-ABPP in B. subtilis (168) and P. aeruginosa (PAO1) (DTB, peptide enrichment), (3) RP-ABPP in P. aeruginosa (PAO1) (isotopically labeled DTB (isoDTB), peptide enrichment). (1):  PhoB labeling: PhoB was in vitro phosphorylated and the degree of phosphorylation was assessed with intact-protein mass spectrometry (IPMS). Phosphorylated PhoB was treated with the probe (HA-yne) at pH = 4 and subjected to IPMS analysis. The modified protein was precipitated and washed. B. subtilis treatment: Exponentially growing B. subtilis cultures were harvested and lyzed in a buffer containing HA-yne at pH = 4. Fractions were separated and washed. Spike-in and protein enrichment: Both fractions and labeled PhoB were combined and clicked to desthiobiotin azide. The samples were precipitated, washed, re-dissolved and proteins were enriched on streptavidin agarose beads. The beads were washed and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin and then AspN. The beads were washed and peptides were eluted. The samples were dried under vacuum, re-dissolved in 1% FA, filtered and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. (2): Exponentially growing B. subtilis, P. aeruginosa or Dynorphin A/DMSO treated P. aeruginosa cultures were harvested and lyzed in a buffer containing HA-yne at pH = 4. Fractions were separated, washed and protein concentrations adjusted to 1 mg/mL. Each fraction was clicked to desthiobiotin azide and the samples were precipitated and washed before peptide enrichment (see below). (3): Exponentially growing P. aeruginosa (PAO1) cultures were treated with either Dynorphin A or DMSO. The cells were harvested and lyzed in a buffer containing HA-yne at pH = 4. Fractions were separated, washed and protein concentrations adjusted to 1 mg/mL. Dynorphin A treated samples were clicked to the light isoDTB tag and DMSO treated samples were clicked to the heavy isoDTB tag. Light and heavy isoDTB-tagged samples were combined in acetone (-80 °C) and the precipitated samples were washed before peptide enrichment. Peptide Enrichment: The samples were re-dissolved and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The peptides were enriched on streptavidin agarose beads and the beads were washed. The peptides were eluted and dried under vacuum. The samples were re-dissolved in 1% FA, filtered and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (DDA and PRM). LC-MS/MS Analysis: Samples were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column, washed with 0.1% TFA and separated on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in a TOP10 DDA mode. Full MS (MS1) scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, a scan range of m/z = 300 1500 Th, an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The ten most intense precursors (Top10) were selected for MS2 scan acquisition at a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e5, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursors with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 were excluded and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Quadrupole isolation of the precursor was set to a window of 1.6 Th. Fragment ions were generated using higher-energy dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27% and detected in the orbitrap. PRM LC-MS/MS Analysis: For PRM measurements, PROCAL retention time peptides were spiked into the samples directly before measurement. Samples were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column, washed with 0.1% TFA and separated on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in PRM mode. Full MS (MS1) scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, a scan range of m/z = 300 1500 Th, an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Targeted MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e5, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The number of targeted precursors was adjusted to maintain a maximum cycle time of 2 s in a non-scheduled PRM measurement. In total, 13 peptides were targeted. Quadrupole isolation of the precursor was set to a window of 1.6 Th. Fragment ions were generated using HCD) with an NCE of 27% and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The protocol consists of three different analyses: (1) DTB (selectivity) and (2) isoDTB (selectivity and quantification) and (3) PRM (quantification). (1): MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: The FASTA databases were downloaded from UniProt (B. subtilis 168 taxon identifier: 224308, date of download: 20.09.2018; P. aeruginosa PAO1 taxon identifier: 208964, date of download: 22.05.2019). No labels were used. The proteolytic enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with up to three missed cleavages. Variable modifications with HA-yne and DTB were allowed on Asp, Glu, Asn and Gln. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were selected as further variable modifications and carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was 5. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” was enabled and “Dependent peptides” was disabled. “Match between runs” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. A minimal Andromeda score of 40 and a delta score of 6 was set for modified peptides. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR. Technical replicates were analyzed in the same MaxQuant analysis and the “Sites.txt” files generated by MaxQuant analysis for modification with HA-yne and the desthiobiotin azide tag were used for further analysis. (2): For selectivity analysis, the same settings as above were used. But instead of HA-yne and DTB, HA-yne and either the light or the heavy isoDTB tag was allowed as variable modification on Asp or Glu. For quantification, MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: A modified FASTA database, based on the UniProt database for P. aeruginosa (PAO1), with individual substitutions of aspartates and glutamates with the placeholders “O” and “U”, respectively, was used. Labels were set on the placeholder amino acids “O” and “U” to accommodate the modification with the probe and the light or heavy isoDTB tag and to additionally transfer the mass of the placeholder amino acid to the mass of aspartates and glutamates. A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1 was allowed. The proteolytic enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with up to three missed cleavages. Variable modifications with HA-yne and DTB were allowed on Asp, Glu, Asn and Gln. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were selected as further variable modifications and carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was 5. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” was enabled and “Dependent peptides” was disabled. “Match between runs” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. A minimal Andromeda score of 40 and a delta score of 6 was set for modified peptides. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR. Technical replicates were analyzed in the same MaxQuant analysis and the “peptides.txt” file of the MaxQuant analysis was used for further analysis. (3) For the generation of a spectral library, the raw PRM data was processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) analogously to the selectivity analysis of (2) but with the normal P. aeruginosa FASTA file including the spiked-in PROCAL Peptides. Using the built spectral libraries (from DDA and PRM), PRM data analysis was performed using the Skyline-daily (64 bit) software (version 20.2.1.286).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B. subtilis, Isotopically labeled tags, Phosphorylation, Response regulator, Adaptive resistance, Parallel reaction monitoring, Activity-based protein profiling, P. aeruginosa, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Technical University of Munich, Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Patrick Allihn

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Technical University of Munich, Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85748 Garching, Germany


