### Accession
PXD013081

### Title
The type VII secretion system protects Staphylococcus aureus against host-specific fatty acids

### Description
The Staphylococcus aureus type VII secretion system (T7SS) exports several proteins that are pivotal for bacterial virulence. The mechanisms underlying T7SS-mediated staphylococcal survival during infection are nevertheless unclear. Here we show that EsxC, a small secreted effector implicated in bacterial persistence, contributes to S. aureus membrane architecture and fluidity. Interestingly, isogenic mutants lacking EsxC, T7SS effectors (EsxA or EsxB), and the membrane-bound EssC are more sensitive to killing by the host-specific fatty acid, linoleic acid (LA), compared to the wild-type. We demonstrate that LA induces more cell membrane damage in the T7SS mutants, although they do not bind differentially to LA. Membrane lipid profiles show that T7SS mutants are also less able to incorporate LA into their membrane phospholipids. Proteomics analyses of wild-type and mutant cell fractions reveal that, in addition to compromising membranes, T7SS defects readily induce bacterial stress and hamper their response to LA challenge. Together, our findings indicate that T7SS is crucial for S. aureus membrane integrity and homeostasis, which is critical when bacteria encounter antimicrobial fatty acids.

### Sample Protocol
Cell shaving for surfome analysis. S. aureus USA300 JE2 WT grown to OD1 and ΔesxC were washed three times before being treated with Proteomics grade trypsin from porcine pancreas (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) for 15 min as described (37). The samples were then centrifuged at 1000 × g for 15 min, and the bacterial pellets discarded while supernatants were filtered through a 0.2 µM filter. The freshly prepared peptides were frozen (-20ºC) until 2 additional, independent biological replicates per strain were prepared.  Cellular proteomics. S. aureus strains were grown O/N at 37ºC on tryptic soy agar plates. The next day, single colonies were used to inoculate 10 mL plain TSB or TSB with 10 µM LA. Cultures were grown at 37ºC with 180-rpm shaking until an OD600 of 3.2 ± 0.2 was reached. The bacteria were then centrifuged, washed with PBS, and resuspended in lysis buffer (PBS, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 µg/mL lysostaphin) supplemented with cOmplete™, mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, UK). After 15 min incubation at 37ºC, cells were lysed mechanically with silica spheres (Lysing Matrix B, Fischer Scientific, UK) in a fast-prep shaker as described previously (16). Samples were then centrifuged, and the supernatants transferred to fresh tubes, where proteins were reduced and alkylated for 20 min at 70ºC with 10 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 40 mM CAA (2-chloroacetamide), respectively. Next, the solvent was exchanged first to 8M urea buffer then to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested O/N at 37ºC with mass spectrometry grade lysyl endopeptidase LysC and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega LTD, UK). Peptides prepared for surfome or whole-cell proteome analyses were desalted and concentrated with a C18 cartridge in 40 µL MS buffer (2% acetonitrile plus 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). For each sample, 20 µL were analysed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using the Ultimate 3000/Orbitrap Fusion instrumentation (Thermo Scientific), and a 90 minute LC separation on a 50 cm column.

### Data Protocol
The data were used to interrogate the Uniprot Staphylococcus aureus USA300 database UP000001939, and the common contaminant database from MaxQuant (68). MaxQuant software was used for protein identification and quantification using default settings. Intensities were log2-tansformed with the Perseus software, and proteins with one or no valid value for every sample in triplicate were filtered. For surfome data, the removeBatchEffect function of the limma R package (69) was used to remove differences accounting for variation in shaving efficiency done on three different days for all the biological replicates. Missing values in cellular proteomics data were imputed on R. Specifically, for each sample, the imputed value was either the lowest intensity across all samples if at least two biological replicates had missing values or the average of two valid values if only one was missing.

### Publication Abstract
The Staphylococcus aureus type VII secretion system (T7SS) exports several proteins that are pivotal for bacterial virulence. The mechanisms underlying T7SS-mediated staphylococcal survival during infection nevertheless remain unclear. Here we report that S. aureus lacking T7SS components are more susceptible to host-derived antimicrobial fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids such as linoleic acid (LA) elicited an increased inhibition of S. aureus mutants lacking T7SS effectors EsxC, EsxA and EsxB, or the membrane-bound ATPase EssC, compared to the wild-type (WT). T7SS mutants generated in different S. aureus strain backgrounds also displayed an increased sensitivity to LA. Analysis of bacterial membrane lipid profiles revealed that the esxC mutant was less able to incorporate LA into its membrane phospholipids. Although the ability to bind labelled LA did not differ between the WT and mutant strains, LA induced more cell membrane damage in the T7SS mutants compared to the WT. Furthermore, proteomic analyses of WT and mutant cell fractions revealed that, in addition to compromising membranes, T7SS defects induce oxidative stress and hamper their response to LA challenge. Thus, our findings indicate that T7SS contribute to maintaining S. aureus membrane integrity and homeostasis when bacteria encounter antimicrobial fatty acids.

### Keywords
Type vii secretion system, Long-chain unsaturated free fatty acids, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Microbiology and Infection Group, Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Meera Unnikrishnan
Microbiology and Infection Group, Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom


