### Accession
PXD029941

### Title
phosphoproteomic profile of chicken embryos LC-MS/MS

### Description
we evaluated the  phosphoproteomic profiles of chicken embryos in pre-diapause, diapause, and reactivated states.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics, ten embryos from the same group were randomly pooled together as one sample. Samples were lysed in SDT lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris -HCl (pH 7.6) and 0.1M DTT. Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 xg at 4°C and protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). A total of 200 mg protein was digested using filter aided proteome preparation assay [9]. Digested samples were desalted by running through the C18 cartridge (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma) and dried by SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 100 μg peptides of each sample was labeled using TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using the AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). The enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out using sequential IMAC method by High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific). After lyophilized, the phosphopeptides were resuspended in 20 µL loading buffer (0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptides were separated by liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. Briefly, phosphopeptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin), and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS data were analyzed on an a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a data-dependent top 10 method with maximum injection time of 10ms, a scan range of 300–1800 m/z, and an automatic gain control target of 3e6. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was set to 0.1%.  Mass spectrometry data were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.4. Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6/10 plex (N-term) and TMT 6/10/16 plex (K) were selected as fixed modifications, while Oxidation (M), TMT 6/10/16 plex (Y) and phospho (S/T/Y) was added as variable modification. False-discovery rate for phosphopeptides was set to 0.01. Searches were performed against the Gallus gallus UniProt FASTA database (February 2020) containing 34,878 entries. Quantification of phosphopeptides was normalized by subtracting the median intensity of each sample. Phosphopeptides changed by >1.5-fold and Student t-test p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly regulated.  Concerning the kinase-substrate enrichment analysis, iGPS [10] was used to identify any phosphosite on a kinase. For kinase enrichment, GSEA version 4.1.0 [11] was used to identify statistically significant enriched kinase based on a ranked fold change of all quantified phosphopeptides. For each kinase the corresponding p value and normalized enrichment score are assigned.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo, Chicken, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
China agricultural university
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Junxiao Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Yang
China Agricultural University


