### Accession
PXD023457

### Title
Proteomic analysis of U251 MG glioblastoma cells in the presence and absence of α-fodrin

### Description
The cortical cytoskeleton comprises mainly of the spectrin family of proteins. Spectrin and fodrin are members of this family. They support the plasma membrane. Fodrin is expressed in most tissues apart from the erythrocytes. Fodrin has been shown to be important in a wide variety of functions such as signal transduction, cardiac and brain development, etc. Through our studies it was understood that fodrin not only serves as a cortical supporting protein, but it also interacts with γ-tubulin and inhibits its microtubule nucleation activity. To gain a comprehensive view on the diverse functions of fodrin it was imperative to look into the downstream effectors of this protein in an unbiased fashion. Hence, we decided to downregulate α-fodrin in glioblastoma cells U-251 MG, and then perform a global protein expression analysis.

### Sample Protocol
U-251 MG cells were treated with control shRNA/α-fodrin shRNA for 96 hours to achieve appreciable downregulation of α-fodrin expression. The cells were then harvested and total protein was extracted using RapiGestTM SF (Waters Corporation, USA). It was added at a final concentration of 0.5% in 50 Mm ammonium bicarbonate with Protease Inhibitor cocktail to the cell pellet and incubated in ice for 45 minutes with intermittent vortexing. To break open the cells, the samples were sonicated in a bath sonicator for 3 cycles of 10 min each at 37ºC followed by three cycles of freeze-thawing in liquid N2. The samples were centrifuged at 14000 rpm at 4ºC for 15 min and the supernatants containing crude proteins were retained and estimated. Approximately 100 µg of total protein from each sample, normalised to a concentration of 1µg/µl, was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion to generate peptides. Disulfide bonds were reduced by treatment with 100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 30 min at 60ºC. After cooling at room temperature for 5 min, the samples were incubated with 200 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC to perform alkylation in dark at room temperature. Proteins were then digested by using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma) at a trypsin: total protein ratio of ~1:25 and incubated for 17 hrs at 37ºC. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to each sample so that final formic acid concentration is 1.0% and incubating at 37°C for 20 min. The digested peptide solutions were centrifuged at 20,817 g for 12 min and the supernatant was stored at -20ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were separated using a nanoACQUITY UPLC® chromatographic system (Waters, Manchester, UK) and the instrument control and data processing was done with MassLynx4.1 SCN781 software. The peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography and injected in partial loop mode in a 5 μl loop (injection volume 3.0 μl). Water and acetonitrile were used as solvent A and B respectively. All solvents for the UPLC system contained 0.1 % formic acid. The peptides were trapped and desalted on a trap column (Symmetry® 180 µm x 20 mm C18 5 µm, Waters) for 1 min at a flow rate of 15μl/min. The trap column was placed in line with the reversed-phase analytical column, a 75 µm (internal diameter) X 200 mm HSS T3 C18 (Waters) with particle size of 1.8 µm. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a linear gradient of 1 to 40% solvent B over 55.5 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a 7.5 min rinse of 80 % solvent B. The column was immediately re-equilibrated at initial conditions (1% solvent B) for 20 min. The column temperature was maintained at 40ºC. The lock mass, [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (Sigma) (positive ion mode [M+2H] 2+ = 785.8426) for mass correction was delivered from the auxiliary pump of the UPLC system through the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSprayTM source at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Each sample was injected in triplicate with blank injections between each sample. MS analysis of eluting peptides was carried out on a SYNAPT® G2 High Definition MS™ System (HDMSE System (Waters). The instrument settings were: nano-ESI capillary voltage – 3.4 KV, sample cone - 40 V, extraction cone - 4 V, IMS gas (N2) flow - 90 (mL/min). To perform the mobility separation, the IMS T-Wave™ pulse height is set to 40 V during transmission and the IMS T-Wave™ velocity was set to 800 m/s. The travelling wave height was ramped over 100% of the IMS cycle between 8 V and 20 V. All analyses were performed in positive mode ESI using a NanoLockSprayTM source. The lock mass channel was sampled every 45 s. The time of flight analyzer (TOF) of the mass spectrometer was calibrated with a solution of 500 fmole/μl of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (Sigma). This calibration set the analyser to detect ions in the range of 50 - 2000 m/z. The mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode (V mode) with a resolving power of 18,000 FWHM and the data acquisition was done in continuum format. The data was acquired by rapidly alternating between two functions – Function-1 (low energy) and Function-2 (high energy). In Function-1, only low energy mass spectra (MS) was acquired and in Function-2, mass spectra at elevated collision energy with ion mobility (HDMSE)was acquired. In Function-2, collision energy was set to 4 eV in the Trap region of mass spectrometer and is ramped from 20 eV to 45 eV in the transfer region of mass spectrometer to attain fragmentation in the HDMSE mode. The continuum spectral acquisition time in each function was 0.9 seconds with an interscan delay of 0.024s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired ion mobility enhanced MSE spectra was analysed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics V3.0 (Non Linear Dynamics, Waters) for protein identification as well as for the label-free relative protein quantification. Data processing includes lock mass correction post acquisition. Processing parameters for Progenesis were set as follows: noise reduction thresholds for low energy scan and high energy scans were calculated automatically by using ion accounting workflow in the software.The protein identifications were obtained by searching against the human protein database downloaded from UniProt. During database search, the protein false positive rate was set to 4%. The parameters for protein identification were made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least 1 fragment ion match, a protein was required to have at least 3 fragment ion matches and at least 1 peptide match for identification. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen with a specificity of 1 missed cleavage. Data sets were analysed and quantified by relative quantitation using Hi-N algorithm, which resolves peptide conflicts and uses the average intensity of the three most abundant unique peptides for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Shrna, U251 mg glioblastoma cells, Α-fodrin

### Affiliations
scientist F  Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology
Technician, Mass spectrometry and proteomics core facility, RGCB

### Submitter
MAHESH CHANDRAN V R

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Suparna sengupta
scientist F  Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology


