### Accession
PXD035875

### Title
Proteomic identification and analysis of FoAPY1 transgenic tomato plants

### Description
In this study, we obtain FoAPY1 transgenic tomato plants (2417-GFP) and control plants (GFP). All target tomato plants were identified by WB using anti-GFP antibody and all transgenic tomato plants has no differences in morphological and growth rate compared with wild type tomato plants. In order to detect the potential functional mechanism of FoAPY1 protein in the host plant, the proteomic analysis was performed to analyze differentially abundant proteins in two type tomato plants

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previous protocols (Lv et al., 2018). Spores were spread on PDA -cellophane plates and cultivated at 30˚C for 3 days, mycelia were collected, grounded in liquid nitrogen, and then sonicated three times on ice in lysis buffer. After centrifugation, proteins in the supernatant were precipitated using TCA and then washed by ice-pre-cold acetone. Then, protein concentration was quantified by BCA method (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) and digested with trypsin according to the procedure described previously.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was using Maxquant solfware(v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database 、. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for-fragment ions. Trypsin was selected for enzyme specificity and two missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation on Cys, TMT 6-plex tag on Lys and peptide N-terminal was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and TMT 6-plex tag on Tyr was specified as variable modification. Decoy (reverse) database was searched against to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). The calculating results were revalued by algorithm percolator, and PSMs (Peptide-Spectrum Match) with p-value<0.05 were accepted. . Other settings were set to the default setting. The protein ratio type was median, the normalization method was median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Fusarium oxysporum, Overexpression, Analysis, Proteomic, Tomato

### Affiliations
Qingdao Agricultural University
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Qingdao Agricultural University


