### Accession
PXD018124

### Title
LC-MSMS of OVCAR-3 class I immunopeptidome

### Description
Endogenous retroelements (ERE) constitute about 42% of the human genome and have been implicated in common human diseases such as autoimmunity and cancer. Despite evidence that some EREs can be expressed at the RNA and protein levels in specific contexts, a systems-level evaluation of their expression in human tissues is lacking. We report that all human tissues express EREs but the breadth and magnitude of ERE expression are very heterogeneous from one tissue to another. ERE expression was particularly high in two MHC-I-deficient tissues (ESCs and testis) and one MHC-I-expressing tissue, mTECs. In mutant mice, we report that the exceptional expression of EREs in mTECs was AIRE-independent. MS analyses identified 103 non-redundant ERE-derived MAPs (ereMAPs) in B-LCLs. These ereMAPs preferentially derived from sense translation of intronic EREs. Notably, detailed analyses of their amino acid composition revealed that ERE-derived MAPs presented homology to viral MAPs. This study shows that ERE expression in somatic tissues is more pervasive and heterogeneous than anticipated. The high and diversified expression of EREs in mTECs and their ability to generate MAPs suggest that EREs may play an important role in the establishment of self-tolerance. The viral-like properties of ERE-derived MAPs suggest that those not expressed in mTECs can be highly immunogenic.

### Sample Protocol
OVCAR-3 cells were cultured in RPMI medium 1640 (Gibco, A10491) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco, 12483) and 1% Penicillin Streptomycin (Gibco, 15140). Prior to immunopeptidome analyses, 12.5 ng/mL of IFN-ɣ (Life, PHC4031) was added to the culture medium for 72 hours to enhance MHCI levels on the cell surface. OVCAR-3 cell pellets were resuspended with PBS up to 4.5 mL and then solubilized by adding 0.5 mL of ice-cold 10X lysis buffer (2.5% sodium deoxycholate (w/v)/2 mM iodoacetamide/2% (w/v)/ 10% (w/v) Octyl β-D-glucopyranoside/2 mM EDTA) supplemented with Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). After 60-minute incubation with tumbling at 4°C, samples were spun at 10000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing 1 mg of W6/32 antibody coupled to either protein A magnetic beads or GammaBind Plus Sepharose beads per sample. MAPs were immunoprecipitated as previously described (Lanoix et al., 2018) and MAP extracts were all dried using a Speed-Vac and kept frozen prior to MS analyses. Dried peptide extracts were re-suspended in 0.2 % formic acid. Peptide extracts were loaded on a home-made C18 analytical column (15 cm x 150 μm i.d. packed with C18 Jupiter Phenomenex) with a 56-min gradient from 0–30 % acetonitrile (0.2 % formic acid) and a 600 nL.min-1 flow rate on a nEasy-LC II system. Samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution, was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automatic gain control target of 5e4, an injection time of 100 ms and collision energy of 25 %

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Peaks X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) and peptide sequences were searched against the personalized proteome of each sample. For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Occurrence of oxidation (M) and deamination (NQ) were considered as post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Ovcar-3

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


