### Accession
PXD024746

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ECM-enriched fraction of breast xenograft and skin tissue from mice injected with 13C-glutamine

### Description
Elevated production of collagen-rich extracellular matrix (ECM) is a hallmark of cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and a central driver of cancer aggressiveness. How to target ECM production to oppose cancer is yet unclear, since targeting CAFs has been shown to restrain but also promote cancer progression. Metabolic rewiring is a second hallmark of CAFs. Here we find that proline, which is a highly abundant amino acid in collagen proteins, is newly synthesised from glutamine to make tumour collagen in breast cancer xenografts, and that its production is increased in breast cancer patient-derived CAFs compared to their matched normal fibroblasts in vitro. PYCR1 is the rate-limiting enzyme for proline synthesis and is highly expressed in the tumour stroma of breast cancer patients and in CAFs. Reducing PYCR1 levels in CAFs is sufficient to reduce collagen production, tumour growth and metastatic spread in vivo and cancer cell proliferation in vitro. Collagen and proline synthesis are enhanced by increased acetyl-CoA levels, which occurs through the epigenetic regulator EP300, and targeting PYCR1 overwrites this epigenetic reprogramming and decreases collagen production. Altogether, we present a previously uncharacterised pathway that supports pro-tumorigenic collagen production in CAFs. We show that PYCR1 and COL1A1 are overexpressed in patients with poor prognosis in several cancer types. PYCR1 is a recognised cancer cell vulnerability and potential target for therapy, hence, our work provides evidence that targeting PYCR1 in tumours may have the additional benefit of halting the production of pro-tumorigenic ECM. Finally, PYCR1 is highly expressed in collagen-producing fibroblasts derived from lungs of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients, suggesting that PYCR1 may also offer therapeutic opportunities in fibrotic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis of 12C-glutamine and 13C-glutamine labelled, 100 µg tissue was homogenised in 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT buffer. The resulting lysate was precipitated with acetone, re-dissolved in urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl), and trypsin digested.  Peptides were resuspended in 1% TFA, 0.2% acetic acid or formic acid buffer and injected on an EASY-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 50-cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with reverse-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with a flow of 300 nl/min using a 120-min gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via electrospray ionisation. MS data were acquired using XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files were processed with MaxQuant software and searched with the Andromeda search engine with the following settings: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation of Proline and Methionine. For the tracing experiments with 13C5-glutamine, 13C5-proline and 12C5-proline were added as heavy and light labels respectively. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Specificity for trypsin cleavage was required and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Perseus 1.6.2.2 was used for downstream analysis. The data were filtered to remove potential contaminants, reverse peptides which match a decoy database, and proteins only identified by site. To ensure unambiguous identification, only proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were considered. For 13C5-glutamine tracing experiments, heavy (13C-proline) and light (12C-proline) labelled peptides were filtered as described above and transformed by log2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen, Breast cancer, Xenograft tumour of mcf10dcis.com

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


