### Accession
PXD012034

### Title
Analysis of plasma proteome of pregnant women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS

### Description
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrinological disorder of fertile-aged women. PCOS has been associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes and abnormalities of the placenta. By taking a quantitative label-free quantitative proteomics approach we set out to investigate if changes in the plasma proteome of pregnant women with PCOS could elucidate the mechanisms behind the pathologies observed in PCOS pregnancies. We have performed label-free quantitative proteomics on plasma samples from pregnant women with PCOS at term (n=14) and plasma samples from pregnant control women (n = 23) matched for age, gestational length and BMI. The samples are derived from BASIC pregnancy cohort from Uppsala, Sweden. A total of 169 proteins with two or more unique peptides were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Top12 abundant proteins of plasma were depleted by TOP 12 depletion kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher) from 10 µL plasma according to manufacturer’s instructions. Depleted plasma was used for estimating the protein amount by BRADFORD MX reagent (EXPEDION) and equal amount of protein per sample was dried and resuspended in 50mM Tris buffer containing 6M urea (pH 7.8). Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to final concentration of 10mM and sample tubes shaken for 1 hour at RT. Iodoacetamide to final concentration of 40mM was then added and tubes shaken for 1 hour at RT. DTT (40mM) was then used to quench excess IAA for 1 hour at RT with shaking. Trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 was used to add trypsin to protein mixtures and incubated at 37°C overnight. resulting tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in data independent acquisition mode using UDMSE with Synapt G2‐S HDMS (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). The data was collected for 100–2000 m/z, scan time one‐second, IMS wave velocity 650 m/s, and collision energy was ramped in trap between 20 and 60 V. Calibration was done with Glu1‐Fibrinopeptide B MS2 fragments and as a lock mass, Leucine-Enkephaline ion (m/z 556.2771) was used during the runs. The samples were run as triplicates and further analysis was done with, Progenesis QI for Proteomics – software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrinological disorder of fertile-aged women. Several adverse pregnancy outcomes and abnormalities of the placenta have been associated with PCOS. By using quantitative label-free proteomics we investigated whether changes in the plasma proteome of pregnant women with PCOS could elucidate the mechanisms behind the pathologies observed in PCOS pregnancies. A total of 169 proteins with &#x2265;2 unique peptides were detected to be differentially expressed between women with PCOS (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7) and matched controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;20) at term of pregnancy, out of which 35 were significant (p-value&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). A pathway analysis revealed that networks related to humoral immune responses, inflammatory responses, cardiovascular disease and cellular growth and proliferation were affected by PCOS. Classification of cases and controls was carried out using principal component analysis, orthogonal projections on latent structure-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), hierarchical clustering, self-organising maps and ROC-curve analysis. The most significantly enriched proteins in PCOS were properdin and insulin-like growth factor II. In the dataset, properdin had the best predictive accuracy for PCOS (AUC&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). Additionally, properdin abundances correlated with AMH levels in pregnant women.

### Keywords
Pregnant, Pcos, Proteomics, Udmse, Mse

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology PEDEGO Research Unit, Medical Research Center Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu Kajaanintie 50, BOX 5000, 90014 Oulu, FINLAND

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Terhi T. Piltonen
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology PEDEGO Research Unit, Medical Research Center Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu Kajaanintie 50, BOX 5000, 90014 Oulu, FINLAND


