### Accession
PXD021101

### Title
The alterations of proteins expression related to insulin signaling pathway in the brain of phenobarbital addictive rats by TMT

### Description
Drug addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease. The alterations of glucose uptake and metabolism were found in the brain of drug addicts. Insulin mediates brain glucose metabolism and its abnormality could induce brain injury and cognitive impairment. Here, we established a rat model of phenobarbital addiction by 90 days dosed escalation and evaluated addiction-related symptoms. We also performed proteomic analysis of the function of the differentially expressed (DE) proteins via bioinformatics in brain tissues by LC-MS/MS on day 60 and 90 of phenobarbital or 0,5% CMC-Na (vehicle) administration. The results showed that phenobarbital addictive rats developed severe withdrawal symptoms after abstinence. Proteomics analysis showed that numerous DE proteins were enriched after phenobarbital administration; which CALM1, ARAF and Cbl proteins (related to insulin signaling pathway) were significantly downregulated on day 60 but no day 90; however, SLC27A3 and NF-kB1 proteins (related to insulin resistance) were significantly upregulated on day 90. Our data indicate that insulin signaling pathway and insulin resistance may play a role in the development of phenobarbital addiction and brain injury and the findings may have important clinical implication.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared from the brain tissues for proteomics analysis based on TMT after the rats were fasted for 6 h (twelve rats for each group, n=12), and then the brain tissues were quickly removed after anesthesia. The peptide mixtures were extracted from the homogenized samples for TMT labeling. Then, the peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra data were obtained from searching in the uniprot-Rattus norvegicus database using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. The Gene Ontology of DEproteins was analyzed by GO biological process, cellular component and molecular function annotations through the online tool of OmicsBean(http://www.omicsbean.cn). The kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes of DE proteins were analyzed using the KEGG Automatic Aaaotation Server Ver. 2.0 (http://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas/).

### Publication Abstract
Drug addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease. Alterations of glucose uptake and metabolism are found in the brain of drug addicts. Insulin mediates brain glucose metabolism and its abnormality could induce brain injury and cognitive impairment. Here, we established a rat model of phenobarbital addiction by 90 days of dose escalation and evaluated addiction-related symptoms. We also performed <sup>18</sup>F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) to detect glucose uptake in the brain and proteomic analysis of the function of the differentially expressed (DE) proteins via bioinformatics in brain tissues by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on days 60 and 90 of phenobarbital or 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose sodium (CMC-Na) (vehicle) administration. The results showed that phenobarbital-addictive rats developed severe withdrawal symptoms after abstinence and glucose uptake was significantly increased in the brain. Proteomics analysis showed that numerous DE proteins were enriched after phenobarbital administration, among which CALM1, ARAF, and Cbl proteins (related to the insulin signaling pathway) were significantly downregulated on day 60 but not day 90. However, SLC27A3 and NF-&#x3ba;B1 proteins (related to insulin resistance) were significantly upregulated on day 90 (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021101). Our data indicate that the insulin signaling pathway and insulin resistance may play a role in the development of phenobarbital addiction and brain injury, so the findings may have important clinical implications.

### Keywords
Insulin signaling pathway, Phenobarbital, Addiction, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou. Sichuan 646000, China 
Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, China

### Submitter
Guojun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Guojun Wang
Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, China


