### Accession
PXD039517

### Title
Y79 retinoblastoma cell line surface proteome

### Description
The proteins on the surface of Y79 retinoblastoma cell line were analyzed by cell surface biotinylation and streptavidin affinity purification.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface proteins were biotinylated using EZ-Link™ Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Pierce/Thermo Fisher) and were purified using streptavidin agarose. The purified proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue. Each gel lane was divided into six slices, and the proteins in each slice were digested in situ with trypsin (Promega; sequencing grade) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw files were converted to mzXML format and were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (UniProt release 2016_04) using X! TANDEM CYCLONE TPP (2011.12.01.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB). Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification in all searches. For biotinylated cell surface proteins, EZ-LINK biotinylation of N-terminus and lysine were considered as variable modifications. Up to one missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The X! Tandem search results were analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, version 4.3. Peptide/protein identifications were validated by the Peptide/ProteinProphet software tools.

### Publication Abstract
Retinoblastoma is a cancer of the infant retina primarily driven by loss of the Rb tumor suppressor gene, which is undruggable. Here, we report an autocrine signaling, mediated by secreted frizzled-related protein 2 (SFRP2), which suppresses nitric oxide and enables retinoblastoma growth. We show that coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CXADR) is the cell-surface receptor for SFRP2 in retinoblastoma cells; that CXADR functions as a "dependence receptor," transmitting a growth-inhibitory signal in the absence of SFRP2; and that the balance between SFRP2 and CXADR determines nitric oxide production. Accordingly, high SFRP2 RNA expression correlates with high-risk histopathologic features in retinoblastoma. Targeting SFRP2 signaling by SFRP2-binding peptides or by a pharmacological inhibitor rapidly induces nitric oxide and profoundly inhibits retinoblastoma growth in orthotopic xenograft models. These results reveal a cytokine signaling pathway that regulates nitric oxide production and retinoblastoma cell proliferation and is amenable to therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Cell surface proteome, Retinoblastoma

### Affiliations
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science Center
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio

### Submitter
Yuzuru Shiio

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzuru Shiio
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science Center


