### Accession
PXD046809

### Title
ASGR1 deficiency diverts lipids toward adipose tissue but results in liver damage during obesity.

### Description
Asialoglycoprotein receptor 1 (ASGR1), primarily expressed on hepatocytes, promotes the clearance and the degradation of glycoproteins, including lipoproteins, from the circulation. In humans, loss-of-function variants of ASGR1 are associated with a favorable metabolic profile and reduced incidence of cardiovascular diseases. The molecular mechanisms by which ASGR1 could affect the onset of metabolic syndrome and obesity are unclear. Therefore, here we investigated the contribution of ASGR1 in the development of metabolic syndrome and obesity.

### Sample Protocol
ASGR1 deficient mice (ASGR1-/-) were subjected to a high-fat diet (45% Kcal from fat) for 20 weeks. The visceral adipose tissue and liver were processed for untargeted proteomics. Livers from each genotype (n=3/group) were pooled up to 20 mg and lysed with urea 8M, Tris-HCl 0.1 M pH 8.5 in the presence of protease inhibitors at a ratio of 1:100 (Cell Signaling, Cat# 5872S) for 60 minutes at 4°C with constant shaking. While for WAT from each genotype (n=6/group) were pooled up to 100 mg and the fat pads were sonicated twice 30/30s break on ice, with buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES, 1% Triton, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM Na-orthovanadate, 10 mM EDTA, 0.2% SDS, 100 mM NaCl. Homogenates were lysed for 5 min on ice with Tissue Ruptor (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). Proteins were separated from fat and debris by centrifugation at 20,000 x g and 4°C for 30 min. Thereafter, proteins were precipitated using four times the volume of acetone per sample and incubated for 15 min at -80°C and 120 min at -20°C. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 x g and 4°C for 15 min, then air-dried and resuspended in buffered urea (8 M, Tris-HCl 0.1 M, pH 8.5). Next, samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 14000 g at 4°C. The supernatant containing the proteins extracted was collected and quantified by Lowry protein assay. Liver and WAT samples were then dried completely using a vacuum concentrator at 45°C for 45 minutes and later resuspended in 10 μl of water with the addition of 10 μl of Ammonium bicarbonate solution 50 mM. (Final pH 8.5). Proteins were reduced following incubation with DTT (final concentration 5 mM), for 30 minutes at 55°C. Protein alkylation was then performed at RT, by incubating with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM), for 30 minutes in the dark. Trypsin digestion (enzyme to protein ratio of 1:20), was performed overnight at 37°C, and stopped by acidification trifluoroacetic acid, (final percentage: 1%).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files, obtained from Orbitrap FusionTM Tribrid™ Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source, were converted to mzML format for proteomics using the MSconvert tool of the ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.1957). Converted mzML files were analyzed afterwards with OpenMS ver.2.8, which was operating on the open-source software platform KNIME® ver. 4.6. The peptide identification was done using an approach combining four search engines as previously described in project PXD030365.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipose tissue, Liver, Shotgun proteomics, Asgr1

### Affiliations
University of Milan
Professor of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences “Rodolfo Paoletti", University of Milan

### Submitter
Monika Svecla

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Danilo Norata
Professor of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences “Rodolfo Paoletti", University of Milan


