### Accession
PXD005600

### Title
Identification of new Stn7/Stn8 kinase targets reveals crosstalk between electron transport, carbohydrate metabolism and gene expression

### Description
The thylakoid-associated kinases STN7 and STN8 are involved in short- and long-term acclimation of photosynthetic electron transport to changing light conditions. While the short term-response is well understood, the mechanistic details of the long-term response and the factors involved are enigmatic until now. Here we report the identification of new STN7/STN8 in vivo targets that connect photosynthetic electron transport with the regulation of metabolism and gene expression. Comparative phosphoproteomics with the stn7 and stn8 single and double mutants identified two proteases, one RNA-binding protein, a ribosomal protein, the large subunit of rubisco and a ferredoxin-NADP reductase as new targets for the thylakoid-associated kinases. Phosphorylation of three of the above proteins can be partially complemented by STN8 in the stn7 single mutant albeit at lower efficiency, while phosphorylation of the remaining three proteins strictly depends on STN7. The properties of the STN7-dependent phosphorylation site are similar to those of phosphorylated light-harvesting complex proteins entailing glycine or another small hydrophobic amino acid in the -1 position. Our analysis uncovers a so far unknown regulatory connection between photosynthetic electron transport, its immediate downstream sinks and long–term adaptation processes affecting metabolite accumulation and gene expression that is mediated by the STN7/STN8 kinase pair.

### Sample Protocol
plant growth and chloroplast isolation: Arabidopsis thaliana plants: ColO (wt), SALK_073254 (stn7), SALK_060869 (stn8) and the double mutant of both T-DNA insertional genotypes (stn7/8) were grown on soil- vermiculite mixture (4:1) in a controlled environment chamber under short-day conditions (8 h light/ 16 h dark). Plants were harvested after 24d. Chloroplasts were isolated according to established protocols].  tryptic digest and phosphopeptide enrichment: 1mg of the acetone precipitated and 300µg of the Heparin Sepharose affinity enriched chloroplast proteins were tryptic digested and TiO2 spin tip enriched.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analysed in 2 ways. On the one hand the Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the SEQUEST software was used for peptide assignment and on the other Maxquant 1.3.05. In both cases the A. thaliana database (TAIR10, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org)  containing common the contaminant database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) was used as analysis basis. Proteome Discoverer analyses were performed with a strict FDR of 1% and a relaxed one of 5%, in the Maxquant analyses the protein FDR was set to 1%. For both analyses carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance to 0.8 Da .  One missed cleavage  was allowed. WT and stn7/8 samples were analysed in comparative approaches.

### Publication Abstract
The thylakoid-associated kinases STN7 and STN8 are involved in short- and long-term acclimation of photosynthetic electron transport to changing light conditions. Here we report the identification of STN7/STN8 in&#xa0;vivo targets that connect photosynthetic electron transport with metabolism and gene expression. Comparative phosphoproteomics with the stn7 and stn8 single and double mutants identified two proteases, one RNA-binding protein, a ribosomal protein, the large subunit of Rubisco and a ferredoxin-NADP reductase as targets for the thylakoid-associated kinases. Phosphorylation of three of the above proteins can be partially complemented by STN8 in the stn7 single mutant, albeit at lower efficiency, while phosphorylation of the remaining three proteins strictly depends on STN7. The properties of the STN7-dependent phosphorylation site are similar to those of phosphorylated light-harvesting complex proteins entailing glycine or another small hydrophobic amino acid in the -1 position. Our analysis uncovers the STN7/STN8 kinases as mediators between photosynthetic electron transport, its immediate downstream sinks and long-term adaptation processes affecting metabolite accumulation and gene expression.

### Keywords
Kinase mutant, Phosphoproteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie, Abteilung Pflanzenbiochemie
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie, Abteilung Pflanzenbiochemie


