### Accession
PXD010901

### Title
Further evidence for sustainable alternatives to replace threatened animal horn based on quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
In the present study, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to analyse and compare the proteome in horns from endangered species (rhinoceros, Saiga antelope, and Tibetan antelope) and common species (yak, water buffalo, and goat) based on the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) techniques. In total, 591 proteins were identified, and 321 were quantified and categorised based on molecular function, cellular component, and biological process. Principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) results based on differences in the amount of protein identified three major clusters, and proteins including transglutaminase, desmocollin, and elongation factors were selected as trait components from proteomic patterns of horn samples from different species. Quantitative proteomic analysis-based strategies can therefore provide further evidence for sustainable alternatives to replace animal horn from threatened species.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Samples and preparation Rhinoceri Asiatici Cornu (RH-1), Rhinoceri Africani Cornu (RH-2) and Pantholopsis Hodgsoni Cornu (Tibetan antelope horn, TAH) were purchased from Jiangsu Medicinal materials company (Permission State Forestry Administration of China for purchasing Rhino horn samples, 2003, No. 7). Saigae Tataricae Cornu (SAH), Bubali Cornu (WBH) and Caprae Hircus Cornu (GH) were purchased from Jiangsu Medicine Company (Jiangsu, China). Bovis Grunniens Cornu (YH) was purchased from a slaughter house located on Linkuo North Road in Lhasa, Tibet. All horn samples were authenticated by Prof. Dr. Jin-ao Duan. All horn samples were powdered and transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III, 2 mM EDTA). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at 20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.2 Digestion and iTRAQ labeling For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 1M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of peptide) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. RH-1 was labelled with reagent 113, RH-2 was labelled with reagent 114, SAH was labelled with reagent 115, TAH was labelled with reagent 116, YH was labelled with reagent 117, WBH was labelled with reagent 118, GH was labelled with reagent 119, and mixed sample (MIX, trypsin digestions of seven horns were mixed in equal mass) was labelled with reagent 121. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot_Laurasiatheria database (downloaded on the 6th Oct, 2016). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, iTRAQ-8plex (N-term) and iTRAQ-8plex (K) were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, iTRAQ-8plex (Y) was specified as variable modifications. Both peptide FDR and protein FDR were adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20. For quantitation, a protein should have at least two unique peptides above identity. The protein ratio type and the normalization method were set to median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Animal horn, Clustering, Itraq, Principal component analysis

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, and National and Local Collaborative Engineering Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization and Formulae Innovative Medicine, Nanjing 210023, PR China
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Rui Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Liu
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, and National and Local Collaborative Engineering Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization and Formulae Innovative Medicine, Nanjing 210023, PR China


