### Accession
PXD007088

### Title
Proteomic profiles of FFPE breast normal and tumor tissue

### Description
Accessing the proteome of formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue could lead to discovery of new biomarkers and development of clinically useful assays. A critical step to realizing this potential is developing a simple and reproducible method to obtain proteomic profiles from FFPE tissue. An objective of this work is to develop and optimize a method to obtain proteomic profiles from FFPE breast tissue using a protocol commonly applied in pathology laboratories. The outcome is a method that incorporates steps used for immunohistochemical analyses of FFPE tissue that results in highly reproducible proteomic profiles. Implementing this assay with normal breast tissue and breast tumor tissue produced proteome profiles that reproducibly demonstrate substantial differences between normal vs. tumor tissue.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE breast tissue specimens (32 tumor and 23 normal samples) were obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN), Western Division at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and the University of California, San Diego  (Supplemental Table 1). FFPE tissue samples were processed for proteomic analysis as summarized in Figure 1. Most (43 samples) FFPE breast tissue sections were 5 µm thickness and mounted on glass slides. Twelve FFPE breast tissue sections were 30 µm thickness and not mounted on glass slides. For samples not mounted on glass slides the FFPE sections were processed in microcentrifuge tubes in the same manner as samples mounted on glass slides. In each case the tissues were treated with xylene twice to remove paraffin. The tissue sections were rehydrated using a series of ethanol/water mixtures (100%, 90% and 75% ethanol/water followed by 100% water and 5 min. per treatment).  Antigen retrieval was achieved by incubating the tissue sections at 100ºC for 60 min using citrate buffer (pH6) (Fisher Scientific, Santa Clara, CA). The tissue sections were cooled to room temperature and trypsin digestion (on-slide-digestion) was carried out at 38ºC in a cell culture incubator for 1h. Tryptic peptides were recovered from the digest solution by ultrafiltration with a 30kD Microcon device. The filtered solution was dried via SpeedVac, resuspended in water containing 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by nanoLC/MS/MS using a QExactive Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a Dionex UtiMate3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany).  Q Exactive nano LC/MSMS analyses- The following LC settings were used for nanoLC/MS/MS analyses:  mobile phase A was 0.1% HCOOH/water and mobile phase B was 0.1% HCOOH in acetonitrile.  A 90 min solvent gradient program was used for peptide separation (holding 5%B in 10 min, 5 to 12.5%B in 5 min, 12.5% to 35% B in 40 min, 35% to 80% B in 10 min, holding at 80% B for 4 min, and back to hold at 5% B). Tryptic peptides derived from each FFPE sample were suspended in a water/0.1% formic acid solution and injected into a C18 trap column (300 μm x 5 mm, Zorbax 5 µm C18; Agilent, Germany) followed by elution to a C18 self-packed nano column (75 μm x 130mm, Nucleosil 5 µm C18; Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) for nanoLC/MS/MS analysis. The parameters for data dependent acquisition (DDA) were as follows; MS scan range of m/z 400-1500 with a maximum ion injection of 1e6 and MS/MS (HCD= 27eV) analyses for the 10 most abundant ions with a maximum ion injection of 5e5 or 1e6. The maximum ion accumulation time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS scans, and the precursor isolation width was set at 3 m/z and the MS/MS intensity threshold was 2.5e4 or 5e4. The dynamic exclusion for MS/MS analysis was set at 10 sec and the charge state screen of precursor ions for MS/MS scans was set to exclude singly charged ions and ions with charge states greater than 7. Resolving power for the Q Exactive was set as 70,000 for the MS scan, and 17,500 for the MS/MS scan at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
The Sequest HT (refs) algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Thermo) was used to identify peptides from the resulting MS/MS spectra by searching against the combined human protein database (a total of 20,127 proteins) extracted from SwissProt (January, 2017) using taxonomy “homo sapiens”.  The QExactive MS searching parameter for parent ion mass tolerance was set as 10 ppm, and 0.05 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance to assure the specificity of peptide identification (ref Biomolecule). Variable parameters for peptide modifications included oxidation of Met (+15.995 Da), methylol (+30.010 Da) for Lys/Trp/Tyr, Schiff base (imine; +12.000 Da) for Lys/Trp/Tyr, and methyl (+14.016 Da) for Lys. Trypsin was selected as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The protein identification was based on the Percolator algorithm (ref) with a false discovery rate less than 1% using decoy database searching.  Three additional filtering processes were used to reduce false positive peptide spectrum matching; (1) The search engine ranking was limited to the top ranked peptide, (2) the peptide mass deviation was set to be equal to, or less than 5 ppm, and (3) the minimum Xcorr score vs. charged state was set to 1.6 for 1+ ions, 2.2 for 2+ ions, 2.75 for 3+ ions, 3.5 for 4+ ions, 4.5 for 5+ ions and 5 for 6+ ions.  Results of the corresponding sample were exported in an Excel file that contains the detail information of peptides detected and their total spectrum counts, as well as the corresponding UniProt protein ID. The results were converted into a two-column text files in which the UniProt accession number of each protein was listed in the first column and the corresponding “total spectrum count” was listed in the second column. The ProteinID Finder program (Proteome Solutions) was used to compile all proteins and spectral counts associated with the corresponding sample. Protein ID Finder then summarized and extracted protein information from the UniProt database. Label-free quantification based on the spectral counting method was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
This study identifies the main changes in protein expression in human breast tumors compared to normal breast tissue. Malignant tumors (32) and normal breast tissue samples (23), from formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens are subjected to discovery proteomics using liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry, with spectral counts for quantitation. The dataset contains 1406 proteins. Differential expression is measured using a method that takes advantage of estimates of the percentage of tumor on a slide. This analysis shows that the major classes of proteins over-expressed by tumors are RNA-binding, heat shock and DNA repair proteins. RNA-binding proteins, including heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (HNRNPs), SR splice factors (SRSF) and elongation factors form the largest group. Comparison with results from another study demonstrates that the RNA-binding proteins are associated specifically with malignant transformation, rather than with cell proliferation. HNRNP and SRSF proteins help define splice sites in normal cells. Their over-expression may dysregulate splicing, which in turn has the potential to promote malignant transformation.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Ffpe, Protein profile, Breast, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
San Francisco State University-USA
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Francisco State University, USA

### Submitter
Ten-Yang Yen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Yen
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Francisco State University, USA


