### Accession
PXD017197

### Title
The iTRAQ-based proteome profile was also identified in the mutant and WT to provide a deeper insight into post-transcriptional modifications

### Description
The iTRAQ-based proteome profile was also identified in the mutant and WT to provide a deeper insight into post-transcriptional modifications.

### Sample Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis based on Triple TOF 5600 Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μl on average. 10μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4min, then the 35min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1%FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60%, then, followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally return to 5% in 1 min. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas at 30 psi, nebulizer gas at 15 psi, and an interface temperature of 150°C. The MS was operated with an RP ≥ 30 000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts/s and with a 2+ to 5+ charge state. The total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz by monitoring the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detection ions. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35 ± 5 eV coupled with iTRAQ adjusted to a rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification was performed using a Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02). For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contained at least two unique spectra. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values <0.05, and only fold changes of >1.5 were considered to be a significant change. Functional annotations of the proteins were conducted using Blast2GO program against the non-redundant protein database (NR; NCBI). The KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and the COG database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) were used to classify and group these identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Plant architecture is an important factor for crop production. Plant height, tiller pattern, and panicle morphology are decisive factors for high grain yield in rice. Here, we isolated and characterized a T-DNA insertion rice mutant <i>Osdmt1</i> (Oryza sativa dwarf and multi-tillering1) that exhibited a severe dwarf phenotype and multi-tillering. Molecular cloning revealed that <i>DMT1</i> encodes a plasma membrane protein that was identified as a putative Ca<sup>2+</sup> permeable mechanosensitive channel. The transcript expression level was significantly higher in the <i>dmt1</i> mutant compared to wild type (WT). Additionally, the <i>dmt1</i> homozygous mutant displayed a stronger phenotype than that of the WT and heterozygous seedlings after gibberellic acid (GA) treatment. RNA-seq and iTRAQ-based proteome analyses were performed between the <i>dmt1</i> mutant and WT. The transcriptome profile revealed that several genes involved in GA and strigolactone (SL) biosyntheses were altered in the <i>dmt1</i> mutant. Ca<sup>2+</sup> and other ion concentrations were significantly enhanced in the <i>dmt1</i> mutant, suggesting that <i>DMT1</i> contributes to the accumulation of several ions in rice. Moreover, several EF-hand Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensors, including CMLs (CaM-like proteins) and CDPKs (calcium-dependent protein kinases), displayed markedly altered transcript expression and protein levels in the <i>dmt1</i> mutant. Overall, these findings aid in the elucidation of the multiply regulatory roles of <i>OsDMT1/OsMCA1</i> in rice.

### Keywords
Leaf, Itraq, Rice

### Affiliations
SOUTH CHINA AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY

### Submitter
Zemin Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zemin Zhang
SOUTH CHINA AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY


