### Accession
PXD003559

### Title
Isotopomer analysis of quiescent primary human fibroblasts

### Description
To ensure that the pool of precursor amino acids utilized for protein synthesis is completely labeled prior to the first labeling time-point, we conducted an isotopomer analysis. After adaption to media, cells were plated at a density of 500,000 cells per 10 cm plate. 8 days after plating, the confluent quiescent cultures were switched to 15N labeling medium. Cells were collected after 0h, 6h, 1d, 2d, 4d of labeling, washed with PBS and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. 15N labeling medium was made from “Cell free” Amino Acid Mix (20AA, U-15N, 96-98%)(Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific), 100U/mL penicillin, 100U/mL streptomycin. 1g is used for making 702mL labeling medium. The final amino acids concentrations in 15N labeling medium are as following: Alanine: 0.1140 g/L, Arginine: 0.0499 g/L, Asparagine: 0.0940 g/L, Aspartic acid: 0.1353 g/L, Cystine: 0.01140 g/L, Glutamic acid: 0.1852 g/L, Glutamine: 0.0869 g/L, Glycine: 0.0698 g/L, Histidine: 0.0157 g/L, Isoleucine: 0.0698 g/L, Leucine: 0.1211 g/L, Lysine: 0.0527 g/L, Methionine: 0.0228 g/L, Phenylalanine: 0.0541 g/L, Proline: 0.0299 g/L, Serine: 0.0541 g/L, Threonine: 0.0741 g/L, Tryptophan: 0.0456 g/L, Tyrosine: 0.0613g/L, Valine: 0.0798 g/L. LC-MS/MS and quantitative analysis of isotopic envelopes and 15N incorporation of peptides was conducted as described in (Zhang et al., 2014).   The data indicate that when exposed to fully 15N-labeled media (where all 20 natural amino acids are isotopically labeled), the fraction of proteins that are synthesized within the first day are almost fully labeled. Thus, the extent of fractional labeling is almost exclusively influenced by the kinetics of protein turnover rather than amino acid uptake and recycling within the cell.  Table of files  Cells Time points                 Labeling Fractionation Raw Data Filenames Wildtype 0d, 1d,2d,4d,7d13C   6Lys, 6Arg& 15N No 0d.raw 1d.raw 2d.raw 4d.raw 7d.raw

### Sample Protocol
A buffer containing 50 mM Tris-formic acid (FA), pH=7.8, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 2% IGEPAL® CA-630, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche Applied Science) was used for cell lysis. 200 μL of lysis buffer was added to approximately 106 cells. The samples were sonicated using a high-energy sonicator (Qsonica) with 5 seconds bursts for 30 seconds (non-continuous) on ice. The samples were then centrifuged for 30 min at 4 o C at 20,000 g. The supernatant were transferred to a new Eppendorf tube, while the cell debris pellet at the bottom and the lipid layer on the top of the supernatant were avoided. Protein concentrations were measured by the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit (Pierce Biotechnology), and the final protein concentration was adjusted to 1 μg/μL. Reduction of protein disulfide bonds was performed with 3 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 37 oC for 30 min in an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf), and protein alkylation was performed with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 37 oC for 30 min in darkness. Surfactant-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SOD) procedure was employed to derive tryptic peptides for LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins were first precipitated by stepwise addition of 9 volumes of chilled acetone and overnight incubation under -20 oC to remove undesirable components in the sample matrix, e.g. detergents, non-protein cellular components. After centrifugation at 4 oC and 20,000 g for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded and the protein pellet was washed with 800 μL of chilled acetone/water mixture (85/15, v/v %), followed by solvent removal and air drying (~5 min). The protein pellet was then re-suspended in 80 μL of Tris-FA buffer, and a two-step digestion procedure was performed as previously described (An et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2009). In the first step, trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:40 (w/w) was added to the solution and the mixture was incubated at 37 oC for 6hr with constant vortexing to cleave the proteins into large peptide fragments. In the second step, a same amount of trypsin was added to reach a final enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated at 37 o C overnight (12 hr) with constant vortexing to achieve complete cleavage of proteins. Digestion was terminated by adding 1% FA to the solution, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove impurity particles. The supernatant containing tryptic peptides derived from 4 μg of proteins each sample was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed using an Eksigent (Dublin) ekspert nanoLC 425 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) for A and 0.1% FA in 88% ACN for B. Samples were loaded onto a reversed-phase trap (300 μm ID x 0.5 cm, packed with Zorbax5-μm C18 material), with 1% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 10 μL/min, and the trap was washed for 3 min. A series of nanoflow gradients at a flow rate of 250 μL/min was used to back-flush the trapped samples onto the nanoLC column (75 μm ID x 100 cm, packed with 3 μm particles) for chromatographic separation. The nanoLC column was heated at 52°C so that both chromatographic resolution and reproducibility could be significantly improved. A 3-hr shallow gradient was used to achieve sufficient peptide separation. The gradient profile was listed as follows: 3% B for 3 min; 3% to 6% B for 5 min; 6% to 28% B for 125 min; 28% to 50% B for 10 min; 50% to 97% B for 1 min; isocratic at 97% B for 18 min; and then the column was equilibrated with 3% B for 18 min. An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer was used for ion detection. The data-dependent product ion mode was selected for all analyses. One scan cycle consisted of one MS1 survey scan (m/z 400-1500) at a resolution of 120,000 and twenty MS2 scans to fragment the 20 most abundance precursor ions in the survey scan via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation. For MS1 survey scans, automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 4 x 105, and peptide precursors with charge states of 2-7 were sampled for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the following settings: repeat count = 1; exclusion duration = 60 s; mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3s. MS2 scans was performed with ddMS2 OT-HCD, and the isolation window was set at 1 Th with quadrupole. The normailzied collision energy was 35% and tandem mass spectra were analyzed with a resolution of 15,000. The MS2 AGC target was set to 5 x 104 and the maximal injection time was 50 ms with centroid data type of 1 microscan.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra by searching against the homo sapiens Swiss-Prot database using the integrated Andromeda search engine with the software MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). MS1 data were extracted using the program PAVA from the LC-MS/MS raw data files corresponding to the unlabeled (t = 0) time. The analysis of fractional labeling was conducted as described in Zhang et al (Zhang T, Price JC, Nouri-Nigjeh E, Li J, Hellerstein MK, Qu J, Ghaemmaghami S. Kinetics of precursor labeling in stable isotope labeling in cell cultures (SILAC) experiments. Anal Chem. 2014 Nov 18;86(22)).

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic cells, macroautophagy is a catabolic pathway implicated in the degradation of long-lived proteins and damaged organelles. Although it has been demonstrated that macroautophagy can selectively degrade specific targets, its contribution to the basal turnover of cellular proteins has not been quantified on proteome-wide scales. In this study, we created autophagy-deficient primary human fibroblasts and quantified the resulting changes in basal degradative flux by dynamic proteomics. Our results provide a global comparison of protein half-lives between wild-type and autophagy-deficient cells. The data indicate that in quiescent fibroblasts, macroautophagy contributes to the basal turnover of a substantial fraction of the proteome at varying levels. As contrasting examples, we demonstrate that the proteasome and CCT/TRiC chaperonin are robust substrates of basal autophagy, whereas the ribosome is largely protected under basal conditions. This selectivity may establish a proteostatic feedback mechanism that stabilizes the proteasome and CCT/TRiC when autophagy is inhibited.

### Keywords
Isotopomer analysis, 15n labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, USA
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, USA


