### Accession
PXD041096

### Title
Mechanism of ribosome-associated mRNA degradation during tubulin autoregulation

### Description
Microtubules play crucial roles in cellular architecture, intracellular transport, and mitosis. The availability of free tubulin subunits impacts polymerization dynamics and microtubule function. When cells sense excess free tubulin, they trigger degradation of the encoding mRNAs, which requires recognition of the nascent polypeptide by the tubulin-specific ribosome-binding factor TTC5. How TTC5 initiates decay of tubulin mRNAs is unknown. Here, our biochemical and structural analysis reveals that TTC5 recruits the poorly studied protein SCAPER to the ribosome. SCAPER in turn engages the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex through its CNOT11 subunit to trigger tubulin mRNA decay. SCAPER mutants that cause intellectual disability and retinitis pigmentosa in humans are impaired in CCR4-NOT recruitment, tubulin mRNA degradation, and microtubule-dependent chromosome segregation. Our findings demonstrate how recognition of a nascent polypeptide on the ribosome is physically linked to mRNA decay factors via a relay of protein-protein interactions, providing a paradigm for specificity in cytoplasmic gene regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics procedures On-bead digestion: Proteins bound to beads were reduced with 2 mM DTT in 2 M urea buffer and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to a final concentration of 5 ng/µl. After incubation for 3 h at 25°C, supernatants were transferred to fresh eppendorf tubes. Beads were washed once with 2M urea buffer, once with 1M urea buffer, and the washes were combined with the corresponding supernatants. Samples were then alkylated with 4 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at 25°C for 30 min. An additional 0.1 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added to the samples and digested over night at 25°C. Samples were acidified to 0.5% formic acid (FA) and desalted using home-made C18 (3M Empore) stage tips filled with 4 µl of Poros Oligo R3 resin (Thermo Fisher).  Bound peptides were eluted sequentially with 30%, 50% and 80% acetonitrile (MeCN) in 0.5% FA and lyophilized.   Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling: Dried peptides from each condition were resuspended in 15 µl of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. 7.5 µl of TMTpro 18-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), reconstituted in anhydrous acetonitrile according to manufacturer’s instructions, was added and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The labeling reactions were terminated by incubation with 1.5 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 30 min. Labeled samples for each condition were pooled into one sample, and MeCN was removed by vacuum centrifugation. TMT-labeled peptides were desalted and then fractionated with home-made C18 stage tip using 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and increasing acetonitrile concentration. Eluted fractions were acidified, partially dried down in a speed vac and used for LC-MS/MS.   Mass spectrometry analysis: The fractionated peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a 100 µm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 µm × 25cm, nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (Waters). Peptides were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were introduced directly via a nanospray ion source into a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quardrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS2, TurboID-TTC5 samples) or Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (RTS-MS3, TurboID-SCAPER samples), both from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent mode, performed MS1 full-scan at m/z = 380-1600 with a resolution of 70K, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35K and NCE of 29%. MS1 target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40s. For the RTS-MS3 experiment (TurboID-SCAPER samples), MS1 spectra were acquired using the following settings: Resolution=120K; mass range=400-1400m/z; AGC target=4e5 and dynamic exclusion was set at 60s. MS2 analysis were carried out with HCD activation, ion trap detection, AGC=1e4; NCE=33% and isolation window =0.7m/z. RTS of MS2 spectrum was set up to search uniport Human proteome (2021), with fixed modifications cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMTpro 16plex at N-terminal and lysine residues. Met-oxidation was set as variable modification. Missed cleavage=1 and maximum variable modifications=2. In MS3 scans, the selected precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the orbitrap with these settings: Isolation window=1.3 m/z; NCE=55; orbitrap resolution=50K; scan range=110-500 m/z and AGC=1e5.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: The acquired LC-MS/MS raw files, were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v1.6.6.0 or v1.6.17.0). MS/MS spectra were quantified with reporter ion MS2 or MS3, and searched against Human Reviewed UniProt Fasta database (downloaded in 2019). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation (protein) were set as variable modifications.  Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. In the identification tab, second peptides and match between runs were not selected. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The MaxQuant output file (proteinGroups.txt) was then processed with Perseus software (v1.6.6.0 or v1.6.17.0). After uploading the matrix, the data was filtered to remove identifications from reverse database, identifications with modified peptide only, and common contaminants. Data were log2-transformed, a valid value filter was applied and missing values for remaining proteins were imputed with standard settings. Data were then exported for further processing in MS Excel, where intensity values were normalized to bait protein levels for each sample, except for untagged control samples. Background binders were filtered if intensities were less than 4-fold enriched in any sample over an untagged cell line (TurboID-TTC5), or if average intensity in TurboID samples was less than 2-fold enriched over untagged control levels (TurboID-SCAPER). A two-tailed t-test was used to calculate p-values between sample groups. For TurboID-TTC5 versus K97A comparison, values from all conditions (DMSO, colchicine, nocodazole, two replicates each) were used for statistics, because SCAPER binding was independent of treatments. For TurboID-SCAPER, three replicates each of TurboID-SCAPER +/- CA4, and two replicates for ∆E620 + CA4 samples were analyzed. Data were plotted in GraphPad Prism.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubules play crucial roles in cellular architecture, intracellular transport, and mitosis. The availability of free tubulin subunits affects polymerization dynamics and microtubule function. When cells sense excess free tubulin, they trigger degradation of the encoding mRNAs, which requires recognition of the nascent polypeptide by the tubulin-specific ribosome-binding factor TTC5. How TTC5 initiates the decay of tubulin mRNAs is unknown. Here, our biochemical and structural analysis reveals that TTC5 recruits the poorly studied protein SCAPER to the ribosome. SCAPER, in turn, engages the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex through its CNOT11 subunit to trigger tubulin mRNA decay. SCAPER mutants that cause intellectual disability and retinitis pigmentosa in humans are impaired in CCR4-NOT recruitment, tubulin mRNA degradation, and microtubule-dependent chromosome segregation. Our findings demonstrate how recognition of a nascent polypeptide on the ribosome is physically linked to mRNA decay factors via a relay of protein-protein interactions, providing a paradigm for specificity in cytoplasmic gene regulation.

### Keywords
Orbitrap eclipse, Q exactive plus, Human lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Markus Hoepfler

### Lab Head
Dr Ramanujan S. Hegde
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology


