### Accession
PXD031538

### Title
Identification of a previously uncharacterised polypeptide component of the Rhodopseudomonas palustris light-harvesting 2 complex.

### Description
The purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris is a model organism for dissecting the energy and electron transfer processes that have evolved in phototrophic organisms. This bacterium is of particular interest because, in addition to driving its metabolism via solar energy capture, it is capable of nitrogen and carbon dioxide fixation, producing hydrogen and utilising a wide range of organic compounds. Understanding these processes underpins the potential exploitation of Rhodopseudomonas palustris for synthetic biology, biohydrogen production and bioremediation, for example. Like other purple bacteria, Rhodopseudomonas palustris has 2 light-harvesting (LH) systems: LH1 and LH2. The former has already been extensively characterised by X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM. The aim of this proteomics project is to provide complementary information to support the cryo-EM mapping of LH2 structure.

### Sample Protocol
LH2 complexes were isolated from cells after lysis using a French pressure cell at 15,000 psi. The membrane fraction was pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 180,000 xg and solubilised in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2% N,N-dimethyldodecylamine N-oxide (LDAO). The membranes were fractionated by sucrose density centrifugation at 150,000 xg for 16 h and the LH2 band collected and further purified by anion exchange chromatography on a Q-Sepharose column. Elution was by an NaCl gradient with monitoring by A800/A260 ratio. The LH2 complexes were then isolated by gel filtration on a Sephadex-200 column. Proteins in isolated LH2 complexes were digested using a trypsin/Lys-C mixture (1:25) in 1% (w/v) sodium dodecanoate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 3 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 0.5% TFA and the dodecanoate extracted with ethyl acetate. The peptide-containing lower phase was dried in a vacuum concentrator, followed by desalting using C18 spin columns then re-dried. Proteins isolated as bands following analysis by SDS-PAGE were subjected to in-gel digestion using a trypsin/Lys-C mixture (0.125 µg/band) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 5 mM CaCl2 for 16 h at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from the gel with 15 µL 25 mM ABC followed by 20 µL ACN, and the combined extracts dried in a vacuum concentrator. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 75 min at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
LH2 proteins were identified by searching the Rps. palustris reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001426, strain ATCC BAA-98/CGA009 downloaded on 8 February 2022) using Byonic v. 2.9.38 (Protein Metrics).

### Publication Abstract
The genomes of some purple photosynthetic bacteria contain a multigene <i>puc</i> family encoding a series of &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-polypeptides that together form a heterogeneous antenna of light-harvesting 2 (LH2) complexes. To unravel this complexity, we generated four sets of <i>puc</i> deletion mutants in <i>Rhodopseudomonas palustris</i>, each encoding a single type of <i>pucBA</i> gene pair and enabling the purification of complexes designated as PucA-LH2, PucB-LH2, PucD-LH2, and PucE-LH2. The structures of all four purified LH2 complexes were determined by cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) at resolutions ranging from 2.7 to 3.6 &#xc5;. Uniquely, each of these complexes contains a hitherto unknown polypeptide, &#x3b3;, that forms an extended undulating ribbon that lies in the plane of the membrane and that encloses six of the nine LH2 &#x3b1;&#x3b2;-subunits. The &#x3b3;-subunit, which is located near to the cytoplasmic side of the complex, breaks the C9 symmetry of the LH2 complex and binds six extra bacteriochlorophylls (BChls) that enhance the 800-nm absorption of each complex. The structures show that all four complexes have two complete rings of BChls, conferring absorption bands centered at 800 and 850 nm on the PucA-LH2, PucB-LH2, and PucE-LH2 complexes, but, unusually, the PucD-LH2 antenna has only a single strong near-infared (NIR) absorption peak at 803 nm. Comparison of the cryo-EM structures of these LH2 complexes reveals altered patterns of hydrogen bonds between LH2 &#x3b1;&#x3b2;-side chains and the bacteriochlorin rings, further emphasizing the major role that H bonds play in spectral tuning of bacterial antenna complexes.

### Keywords
Gamma-subunit, Light-harvesting 2 complex, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Rpa_1495

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr C Neil Hunter
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, UK


