### Accession
PXD006025

### Title
hickory LC-MS/MS -  Comparative Proteomic Analysis of the Graft Unions in Hickory (Carya cathayensis) Provides Insights into Response Mechanisms to Grafting Process

### Description
Hickory (Carya cathayensis) is a woody plant with high nutritional and economic value, and is widely cultivated in China. It is different from herbaceous plants and undergoes a long vegetative stage before reaching floral transition. Hickory can be cultivated on a large scale using grafting. To reveal the response mechanisms to grafting, we employed a proteomics-based approach to identify differentially expressed proteins during the hickory grafting process. In our study, 3723 proteins were identified and 2518 proteins were quantified. A total of 710 differentially quantified proteins (DQPs) were identified and these were involved in various molecular functional and biological processes. Among these DQPs, 341 were up-regulated and 369 were down-regulated at 7 days after grafting compared to the control. The protein interaction networks of the DQPs indicated that there were two enriched interaction clusters. These were „ribosome‟ and „starch and sucrose metabolism‟. Four auxin-related proteins were down-regulated, which was in agreement with the transcription levels of their encoding genes. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the „Flavonoid biosynthesis‟ pathway was significantly up-regulated. Further experiments verified a significant increase in the total flavonoid contents in scions, which suggested that graft union formation may activate flavonoid biosynthesis to increase the contents of a series of downstream secondary metabolites. This comprehensive analysis provides fundamental information on the candidate proteins and the secondary metabolism pathways involved in the grafting process for hickory.

### Sample Protocol
Experiment design, plant materials, and protein extraction Hickory (Carya cathayensis Sarg.) trees that had been planted in a greenhouse at the campus of Zhejiang A & F University (Lin‟an, China) were used in this experiment. Hickory samples were collected from the graft unions (the stem segment that includes the swollen part of the rootstock and the scions) at 7 days after grafting. A sample taken from 2-year-old rootstock and a 1-year-old scion before grafting was used as the control. The samples were first ground in liquid nitrogen, then transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tubes, and sonicated three times on ice with pre-cooled lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g and 4°C for 10 min. Then, the protein was precipitated with pre-cooled 15% TCA for 2 h at –20°C. The supernatant was discarded after 3 min of centrifugation at 20,000 g under 4°C. Finally, the remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone buffer. The protein was re-dissolved in a buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0), and a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) was used to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer‟s instructions.  Trypsin digestion and TMT labeling First, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein samples were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) to produce the trypsin digestion samples. The trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 trypsin:protein for the first overnight digestion and at 1:100 trypsin:protein for the second 4 h digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein in each sample was digested with trypsin. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed using a 6-plex TMT kit according to the manufacturer‟s protocol. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated into 80 fractions over 80 min using a gradient of 2 to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 10). Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  LC- tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) Analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA buffer and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific, Shanghai, China). Then the peptides were separated by a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 22% to 35% for 8 min, and then rose to 80% over 3 min. This was held at 80% for the last 3 min. The constant flow rate was 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed using a Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , Shanghai, China). The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by MS/MS in a Q ExactiveTM (ThermoFisher Scientific, Shanghai, China) coupled to the UPLC online. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer at a resolution of 70,000. The peptides were selected for MS/MS using a NCE setting of 28 and the ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied to the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with a 30 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and 5E4 ions were accumulated to generate the MS/MS spectra. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for the MS scans and the fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0, http://www.matrixscience.com/). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Carya cathayensis database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme and up to 2 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ions and at 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. TMT-6-plex was selected in Mascot for protein quantification. The FDR was adjusted to < 1% and the peptide ion score was set to ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
Hickory (<i>Carya cathayensis</i>), a tree with high nutritional and economic value, is widely cultivated in China. Grafting greatly reduces the juvenile phase length and makes the large scale cultivation of hickory possible. To reveal the response mechanisms of this species to grafting, we employed a proteomics-based approach to identify differentially expressed proteins in the graft unions during the grafting process. Our study identified 3723 proteins, of which 2518 were quantified. A total of 710 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were quantified and these were involved in various molecular functional and biological processes. Among these DEPs, 341 were up-regulated and 369 were down-regulated at 7 days after grafting compared with the control. Four auxin-related proteins were down-regulated, which was in agreement with the transcription levels of their encoding genes. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis showed that the 'Flavonoid biosynthesis' pathway and 'starch and sucrose metabolism' were both significantly up-regulated. Interestingly, five flavonoid biosynthesis-related proteins, a flavanone 3-hyfroxylase, a cinnamate 4-hydroxylase, a dihydroflavonol-4-reductase, a chalcone synthase, and a chalcone isomerase, were significantly up-regulated. Further experiments verified a significant increase in the total flavonoid contents in scions, which suggests that graft union formation may activate flavonoid biosynthesis to increase the content of a series of downstream secondary metabolites. This comprehensive analysis provides fundamental information on the candidate proteins and secondary metabolism pathways involved in the grafting process for hickory.

### Keywords
Flavonoid biosynthesis; graft; hickory; tmt; secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Hangzhou
Nurturing Station for the State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A 20 & F University, Dong Hu Campus, 88 Northern Circle Road, Linan 311300, China.

### Submitter
zhang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Bingsong Zheng
Nurturing Station for the State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A 20 & F University, Dong Hu Campus, 88 Northern Circle Road, Linan 311300, China.


