### Accession
PXD011273

### Title
Ixodes scapularis chemotactic protein identification

### Description
Tick proteins within a fraction from medium pressure liquid chromatography were identified as potential chemoattractants for Borrelia burgdorferi. The proteins in two replicate fractions were identified using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tick salivary gland was fractionated using anion exchange medium pressure chromatography (NGC, Bio-rad).Fractions were concentrated using a 3 kDa spin column and were re-suspended in PBS for chemotaxis assays and mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins from fractionated pools processed for bottom-up proteomics using high resolultion LC-MS/MS of a Waters NanoACQUITY UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Mass spectral data were analyzed with Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against the tick protein database (VectorBase).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were analyzed with Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against the tick protein database (VectorBase). Significant protein hits were those with a Mascot expectation value of 0.05 (equivalent to a 95% confidence identification) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/tutorial/Altschul-1.html) and represented by at least 2 unique peptides. Significance of proteomics hits were assessed using Mascot Search Engine criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Lyme disease is a common tick-borne infection caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto (s.s.). B. burgdorferi s.s. may utilize chemotaxis, the directional migration towards or away from a chemical stimulus, for transmission, acquisition, and infection. However, the specific signals recognized by the spirochete for these events have not been defined. In this study, we identify an Ixodes scapularis salivary gland protein, Salp12, that is a chemoattractant for the spirochete. We demonstrate that Salp12 is expressed in the I. scapularis salivary glands and midgut and expression is not impacted by B. burgdorferi s.s. infection. Knockdown of Salp12 in the salivary glands or passive immunization against Salp12 reduces acquisition of the spirochete by ticks but acquisition is not completely prevented. Knockdown does not impact transmission of B. burgdorferi s.s. This work suggests a new role for chemotaxis in acquisition of the spirochete and suggests that recognition of Salp12 contributes to this phenomenon.

### Keywords
Tick, Chemotaxis, Ixodes scapularis, Protein

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University, Department of Internal Medicine

### Submitter
Kristen Murfin

### Lab Head
Dr Erol Fikrig
Yale University, Department of Internal Medicine


