### Accession
PXD041644

### Title
ECM composition dictates the mode of cell competition and competence for tumor initiation

### Description
The skin epidermis is constantly renewed throughout life1,2. Disruption of the balance between renewal and differentiation can lead to uncontrolled growth and tumour initiation3. Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most frequent cancer in human4,5. Cell competition, the elimination of less fit cells by their neighboring winners, has been proposed to be important for tumour initiation6-10. Recent studies identified somatic mutations in cancer drivers in normal tissues lead to clonal expansion of these mutated cells11-16.  However, the ways in which oncogenic mutations impact the balance between renewal and differentiation and lead to clonal expansion, cell competition, tissue colonization and tumour development is currently unknown. Using multidisciplinary approaches which combine lineage tracing, clonal analysis in living animals, single cell sequencing, quantitative proteomics, and functional experiments, we have investigated the mode of cell competition and the ability of oncogene-expressing cells to develop invasive BCC in different skin regions. The quantitative proteomics analysis of the ear and backskin dermis before and 6 weeks after oncogene expression was performed to investigate whether a different composition of the dermis in the ear and the backskin affects the ability of oncogene targeted cells to form BCC.  To investigate whether a different composition of the dermis in the ear and the backskin affects the ability of oncogene targeted cells to form BCC, we performed an unbiased quantitative proteomics analysis of the ear and backskin dermis before and 6 weeks after oncogene expression. This analysis revealed that only very few proteins were more highly expressed in the backskin as compared to the ear and included Col1a1 and Col1a2 in WT conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Ear and back skin from CD1 mice and K14CreER/Rosa-SmoM2-YFP (200 mg wet weight) were used.  To isolate the dermis, ears were dissected, opened in two along the cartilage with forceps and incubated in DMEM (- 0,25% Trypsin ON at 4°C. The back skin was first shaved with electric clippers, dissected and the hypodermis was then removed by scratching it with a scalpel. The remaining tissue (epidermis-dermis) was finally incubated in DMEM-0,25% trypsin overnight at 4°C by placing the dermis in contact with the solution. The day after, the dermis was carefully separated from the epidermis by using a scalpel and was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed using a mortar and pestle to obtain powder tissue. 3 mice were used for each condition (WT and SmoM2). 10-70 mg skin or ear tissue was transferred to 1.5 ml tubes and 50 µl lysis buffer containing 5% SDS and 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 was added. The samples were mechanically disrupted by 2 cycles of grinding with a micropestle and heating to 90°C in between cycles. Another 50 µl lysis buffer was added, the resulting lysate were sonicated with a PIXUL Multisample sonicator (Active Motif) for 60’ with default settings (Pulse 50 cycles, PRF 1 kHz, Burst Rate 20 Hz). After centrifugation of the samples for 5’at 2,204 x g at RT to remove insoluble components, the protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific) and from each sample 300 µg of protein was isolated to continue the protocol. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by addition of 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide and incubation for 10’at 95°C in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% and samples were diluted 7-fold with binding buffer containing 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55. After protein binding, the S-trap™ plate was washed three times with 200 µl binding buffer. A new deepwell plate was placed below the 96-well S-Trap™ plate and trypsin (1/100, w/w) was added for digestion overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted first with 80 µl 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µl 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and finally with 80 µl 0.2% FA in H2O/CAN (50/50, v/v). The peptides were dried and re-suspended in 90 µl 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5), peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer and peptide amount was adjusted to 50 µg for each sample. Peptides were labeled for 1 h at RT using 0.25 mg of TMTProTM label (labels used: 126, 127C, 128C: K14CrER Rosa SmoM2 Dermis EAR replicates; 127N, 128N, 129N: K14CrER Rosa SmoM2 Dermis Back skin replicates; 129C, 132C, 133C: WT Dermis EAR replicates; 130N, 133N, 134N: WT Dermis Back skin replicates). The reaction was quenched for 15 min at RT by addition of hydroxylamine (0.2%). The 12 labeled samples were combined, 100 µg labeled peptides was isolated, dried, re-dissolved in 100 µl 50 mM TEAB and 13 IUBMB mU Peptide-N-Glycosidase F (PNGaseF, made in-house) was added for deglycosylation at 37°C overnight. Peptides were acidified with TFA to pH below 3 and desalted on reversed phase (RP) C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). The combined elutions were transferred to HPLC inserts and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Vacuum dried peptides were re-dissolved in 100 µl solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and 95 µl was injected for fractionation by RP-HPLC (Agilent series 1200) connected to a Probot fractionator (LC Packings). Peptides were first loaded in solvent A on a 4 cm pre-column (made in-house, 250 µm internal diameter (ID), 5 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) for 10 min at 25 µl/min and then separated on a 15 cm analytical column (made in-house, 250 µm ID, 3 µm C18 beads, Dr Maisch). Elution was done using a linear gradient from 100% RP-HPLC solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5) in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) to 100% RP-HPLC solvent B (70% ACN, 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5)) in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 3 µL/min. Fractions were collected every minute between 20 and 92’and pooled every 24’to generate a total of 24 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and the peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Lab). 15 µl of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 20 μl/min for 2 min in loading solvent A on a (Pepmap, 300 μm ID, 5 μm beads, C18, Thermo). The peptides were separated on a 110cm µPAC column (Thermo), kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting from 2% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) reaching 26.4% MS solvent B in 45 min, 44% MS solvent B in 55 min and 56% MS solvent B  in 60 min starting at a flowrate of 600 nl/min for 5 minutes, and completing the run at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 5-minute wash at 56% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition in TopSpeed mode. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7), dynamic exclusion (60 s; +/- 10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 5E4). The precursor ions were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.7 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 1.2E4 or a maximum injection time of 100 ms and activated using CID fragmentation (35% NCE). The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at turbo scan rate. 10 most intense MS2 fragments were selected in the quadrupole using MS3 multi-notch isolation windows of 2 m/z. An orbitrap resolution of 60k was used with an AGC target of 1.0e5 or a maximum injection time of 118 ms and activated using HCD fragmentation (65% NCE). QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project64. LC-MS/MS runs of all 12 samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm (version 2.1.3.0) with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of 2022_01), containing 21,986 sequences (www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at Arg/Lys-Pro bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. In order to reduce the number of spectra that suffer from co-fragmentation, the precursor ion fraction (PIF) option was set to 75%. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 2,849 proteins. MS2-based quantification using TMTproTM labels was chosen as quantification method and a minimum ratio count of two unique peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with an in-house R script. Reverse database hits were removed from the MaxQuant proteingroups file, corrected reporter intensities were log2 transformed & median normalized and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed by random sampling from a normal distribution centered around each sample’s detection limit (package DEP) leading to a list of 2,781 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. To compare protein intensities between pairs of sample groups, statistical testing for differences between group means was performed, using the package limma. Statistical significance for differential regulation was set to a false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini-Hochberg method) of 0.05 and |log2FC| = 1 and volcano plots were generated. Z-scored protein intensities from differentially abundant hits were plotted in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
The skin epidermis is constantly renewed throughout life<sup>1,2</sup>. Disruption of the balance between renewal and differentiation can lead to uncontrolled growth and tumour initiation<sup>3</sup>. However, the ways in which oncogenic mutations affect the balance between renewal and differentiation and lead to clonal expansion, cell competition, tissue colonization and tumour development are unknown. Here, through multidisciplinary approaches that combine in vivo clonal analysis using intravital microscopy, single-cell analysis and functional analysis, we show how SmoM2-a constitutively active oncogenic mutant version of Smoothened (SMO) that induces the development of basal cell carcinoma-affects clonal competition and tumour initiation in real time. We found that expressing SmoM2 in the ear epidermis of mice induced clonal expansion together with tumour initiation and invasion. By contrast, expressing SmoM2 in the back-skin epidermis led to a clonal expansion that induced lateral cell competition without dermal invasion and tumour formation. Single-cell analysis showed that oncogene expression was associated with a cellular reprogramming of adult interfollicular cells into an embryonic hair follicle progenitor (EHFP) state in the ear but not in the back skin. Comparisons between the ear and the back skin revealed that the dermis has a very different composition in these two skin types, with increased stiffness and a denser collagen I network in the back skin. Decreasing the expression of collagen I in the back skin through treatment with collagenase, chronic UV exposure or natural ageing overcame the natural resistance of back-skin basal cells to undergoing EHFP reprogramming and tumour initiation after SmoM2 expression. Altogether, our study shows that the composition of the extracellular matrix regulates how susceptible different regions of the body are to tumour initiation and invasion.

### Keywords
Cell competition, Bcc, Tumor initiation, Live imaging, Ecm

### Affiliations
1Université Libre de Bruxelles, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, Brussels B-1070, Belgium. 2WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels B-1070, Belgium
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr Cédric Blanpain
1Université Libre de Bruxelles, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, Brussels B-1070, Belgium. 2WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels B-1070, Belgium


