### Accession
PXD028530

### Title
Light-triggered and phosphorylation-dependent 14-3-3 association with  NON-PHOTOTROPIC HYPOCOTYL 3 is required for hypocotyl phototropism

### Description
NON-PHOTOTROPIC HYPOCOTYL 3 (NPH3) is a key component of the auxin-dependent plant phototropic growth response. We report that NPH3 directly binds polyacidic phospholipids, required for plasma membrane association in darkness. We further demonstrate that blue light induces an immediate phosphorylation of a C-terminal 14-3-3 binding motif in NPH3. Subsequent association of 14-3-3 proteins is causal for the light-induced release of NPH3 from the membrane and accompanied by NPH3 dephosphorylation. In the cytosol, NPH3 dynamically transitions into membrane-less condensate-like structures. The dephosphorylated state of the 14-3-3 binding site and NPH3 membrane recruitment are recoverable in darkness. NPH3 variants that constitutively localize either to the membrane or to condensates are non-functional, revealing a fundamental role of the 14-3-3 mediated dynamic change in NPH3 localization for auxin-dependent phototropism. This regulatory mechanism might be of general nature, given that several members of the NPH3-like family interact with 14-3-3 via a C-terminal motif.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation:  Arabidopsis thaliana seeds (ecotype Columbia-0 (Col-0)) expressing 14-3-3 epsilon-GFP under control of the native promoter and, as control, GFP (UBQ10 promoter) were sown on half-strength MS plates and grown in the dark for 3 days. Subsequently, the etiolated seedlings were either kept in darkness or treated with overhead BL (1 mol m-2 sec-1) for 30 min. Three grams of plant tissue were used under red safe light illumination for immunoprecipitation. The seedlings were ground thoroughly in liquid nitrogen and suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Mixture (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). After 30 min incubation on ice, cell debris-removed supernatants were incubated with 50 l GFP-Trap beads (ChromoTek) for 3 h in the cold room with mild rotation. The beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100, followed by washing with lysis buffer. The final precipitate in Laemmli buffer was used for a tryptic in gel digestion.  Protein in gel digestion: Proteins were purified on an SDS PAGE (Invitrogen). In gel tryptic digest was performed as described previously (Borchert et al.) and gel extracts desalted on stage tips (Rappsilber et al.). Eluted peptides were subjected to LCMS/MS analysis.   Mass spectrometry: LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an QExactive HF mass specrometer (Thermo Scientific) as decribed previously (Kliza et al.) with slight modifications: Peptides were eluted with a 57-min segmented gradient of 10–20-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). Full scans of positive ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 1650 at a resolution of 60,000 followed by HCD fragmentation of the 7 most intense precursor ions. High-resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000. The target values for the MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were 3x 106 and 105 charges with a maximum fill time of 25 ms and 110 ms, respectively. Precursor ions were excluded from sequencing for 30 s after MS/MS.  Borchert N, Dieterich C, Krug K, Schütz W, Jung S, Nordheim A, Sommer RJ, Macek B. (2010) Proteogenomics of Pristionchus pacificus reveals distinct proteome structure of nematode models. Genome Res. 2010 Jun;20(6):837-46 Rappsilber J., Mann M., Ishihama Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1896–1906 Kliza, K., Taeumer, C., Pinzuti, I., Franz-Wachtel, M., Kunzelmann, S., Stieglitz, B., Macek, B.,and Husnjak, K. (2017) Internally tagged ubiquitin: a tool to identify linear polyubiquitin modified proteins by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods. 14(5), 504–512

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software suite v. 1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011), which is integrated in MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy Uniprot database consisting of 41,351 protein entries from A. thalinana and 245 commonly observed contaminants.  In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of protein N-terminuns were set as variable modifications. Initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.5 dalton (Da) for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). The iBAQ algorithm was enabeled to estimate quantitative values by dividing the sum of peptide intensities of all detected peptides by the number of theoretically observable peptides of the matched protein (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011).  Cox 2008: MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367-72. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1511. Epub 2008 Nov 30. Cox 2011: Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Elias, J. E. and Gygi, S. P. (2007) Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nature methods 4, 207–214 Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., and Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., and Selbach, M.. (2011) Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature,  473(7347), 337-342.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Etiolated seedling, Blue-light dependent 14-3-3 interactors

### Affiliations
Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP) Plant Physiology University of Tübingen Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Oecking
Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP) Plant Physiology University of Tübingen Tübingen Germany


