### Accession
PXD021841

### Title
A redirected protein secretion stress response in the genome-engineered midiBacillus-II

### Description
Genome engineering offers the possibility to create completely novel cell factories with enhanced properties for biotechnological application. In recent years, the possibilities for genome engineering have been extensively explored in the Gram-positive bacterial cell factory Bacillus subtilis, where up to 42% of the genome, encoding dispensable functions has been removed. Such studies have shown that some strains with minimized genomes gained beneficial features, for instance in protein production. However, strains with the most minimal genomes also showed particular growth defects. This has focused our attention on strains with less extensive genome deletions that show close-to-wild-type growth properties, while retaining the acquired beneficial traits in secretory protein production of strains lacking larger genomic segments. A strain of the latter category is B. subtilis IIG-Bs27-47-24, here referred to as midiBacillus II, which lacks 30.95% of the parental genome. To date, it was unknown how the altered genomic configuration of midiBacillus II impacts on cell physiology at large, and protein secretion in particular. Therefore, the present study was aimed at bridging this knowledge gap through an in-depth proteomics analysis with special focus on protein secretion stress responses. Interestingly, the results show that the secretion stress response of midiBacillus II as elicited by high-level expression of a staphylococcal antigen is completely different from the secretion stress responses that occur in the parental strain 168. This implies that high-level protein secretion has different implications for wild-type and genome-engineered Bacillus strains, dictated by the altered genomic and proteomic configurations.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table S4.1. All B. subtilis strains were grown in Lysogeny Broth (LB) medium (Becton Dickinson) at 37 °C with continuous shaking at 250 rpm. Medium was supplemented with 2 μg mL-1 erythromycin and 20 μg mL-1 kanamycin when required. Both B. subtilis 168 and midiBacillus-II carried the spaRK genes in the amyE locus, which was necessary for subtilin-induced expression of staphylococcal protein IsaA from plasmid pRAG3::isaA, as previously described1,2. For production of IsaA, the B. subtilis strains 168 and midiBacillus-II carrying pRAG3::isaA were growth in LB medium supplemented with antibiotics for 18 h and, subsequently, diluted in 100 mL of fresh LB medium without antibiotics to an OD600 of 0.15. Culturing was continued until an OD600 of 0.9 was reached, which corresponded to the exponential growth phase. At this point, the expression of IsaA was induced by addition of 1% (v/v) subtilin-containing culture supernatant of B. subtilis ATCC66331. After continued culturing for 2 h, samples were collected for LDS-PAGE, Immuno-blotting and proteomic analysis. Non-induced control cultures were treated in the same way. All induced and non-induced cultures were performed in triplicate. For the proteomic analysis, the extracellular and cell fractions were separated by centrifugation at 8,500 × g, 20 min at 4C. The supernatant was used for further enrichment of the extracellular proteins, and harvested cells were washed with 50 ml of TE buffer (20 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). The washing step was repeated twice before resuspension in 1 mL of TE buffer. Those cell pellets, containing the soluble and hydrophobic fraction, were stored at -80C for further processing and enrichment of the membrane and cytosolic protein fractions. Proteins present in the medium fraction were enriched by primed affinity bead Purification with StrataClean beads (Agilent) and consecutively eluted from the beads by LDS-PAGE3. Protein bands were excised from the gel, washed and digested with trypsin solution (Promega). Subsequent peptide elution was carried out by ultrasonication. Peptides were quantified using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted with ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore). Cells were disrupted in a FastPrep24 instrument (MPBiomedicals) (3 × 30 s at 6.5 m s−1) with 5 min cooling between each cycle. Cellular debris and beads were removed by centrifugation (20,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C). The resulting supernatant was designated as whole cell extract, and its protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay following manufacture’s protocol. An aliquot with a protein content of 3 mg was used as starting material for the preparation of the membrane fraction. Volumes were adjusted up to 1.5 mL of TE buffer prior to ultra-centrifugation (170,000 × g, 1 h, 4 °C). The resulting supernatant was stored at -20 °C for further processing of the cytosolic protein fraction and the corresponding pellet was used to enrich the hydrophobic fraction, as described previously4. Shortly, the pellet was treated with 750 µl of high-salt buffer (10 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl) and incubated in ultrasonic bath to detach it. Pellet was resuspended carefully, and the pipette tip was rinsed with additional 750 µl of high-salt buffer. The resulting suspension was mixed at 8000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C in a rotator prior to ultracentrifugation (170,000 × g, 1 h, 4 °C). The ultracentrifugation step was repeated and two more ultracentrifugation steps were performed in the same conditions but with alkaline carbonate buffer pH 11 (10 mM EDTA, 100 mM Na2CO3, 100 mM NaCl) and tetraethylammonium bromide (50 mM TEAB).  The pellets containing the crude cell membrane extract were dried and resuspended in 25 µl of urea solution (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea). The pipette tip was rinsed with 25 µl urea solution and samples were sonicated for 5 min prior protein quantification by Bradford assay. 20 µg of crude membrane extract were used for protein digestion using S-trap columns (Protifi) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% of acetic acid, quantified with the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted with C18-ZipTips (Merck-Millipore). The previously obtained supernatant containing the cytoplasmic membrane fraction was thawed, and proteins were quantified by Bradford assay. The same protocol as for the membrane fraction was followed for the cytoplasmic protein digestion.

### Data Protocol
Separation of the peptides was carried on by liquid chromatography (LC) with an EASY-nLC™ II LC system (Thermo Fisher) and measured in an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Purified peptides (1 µg for the extracellular fraction and 5 µg for cytoplasmic and membrane fractions) were loaded onto in-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 μm, o.d. 360 μm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.0 μm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) by the LC system with 10 µL of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min without trapping. The peptides were subsequently eluted using a nonlinear 180 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo). After a survey scan at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap using lockmass correction, the five most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Singly charged ions, as well as ions without detected charge states, were not selected for MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with a normalized collision energy of 35, and the fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap.  Raw data was imported into MaxQuant (1.6.3.3)5 incorporated with an Andromeda search engine. Database search was carried out against reversed B. subtilis 168 or IIG Bs27 47 24 strain databases, with manually added IsaA, SpaR, and SpaK sequences, and with common contaminants added by MaxQuant. The parameters used for the database search were: peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm, min fragment ions matches per peptide: 1, match between runs was enabled with default settings, primary digest mode: trypsin, missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl C (+57.0215), variable modifications: methionine oxidation (+15.9949), acetylation N, and K (+42.0106). Results were filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on spectrum, peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretion, Bacillus subtilis, Cell factory, Isaa, Stress response, Minimized genome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


