### Accession
PXD019031

### Title
A Cytoskeletal Protein Complex is Essential for Division of Intracellular Amastigotes of Leishmania mexicana (LAN1416)

### Description
Previous studies in Leishmania mexicana have identified the cytoskeletal protein KHARON as being important for both flagellar trafficking of the glucose transporter GT1 and for successful cytokinesis and survival of infectious amastigote forms inside mammalian macrophages. KHARON is located in three distinct regions of the cytoskeleton: the base of the flagellum, the subpellicular microtubules, and the mitotic spindle. To deconvolve the different functions for KHARON, we have identified two partner proteins, KHAP1 and KHAP2, that associate with KHARON. KHAP1 is located only in the subpellicular microtubules, while KHAP2 is located at the subpellicular microtubules and the base of the flagellum. Both the KHAP1 and KHAP2 null mutants are unable to execute cytokinesis but are able to traffic GT1 to the flagellum. These results confirm that KHARON assembles into distinct functional complexes and that the subpellicular complex is essential for cytokinesis and viability of disease-causing amastigotes but not for flagellar membrane trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite culture: Wild type Leishmania mexicana MNYC/BZ/62/M379 promastigotes were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Scientific Hyclone), 0.1 mM xanthine, 5 microgram/ml of hemin, 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), and 100 microgram/ml streptomycin (Gibco). Promastigote cultures were maintained at 26 C without supplemental CO2.   Construction of episomes for protein expression: BirA*::KH was constructed by the PCR amplification of the Myc-BirA* cassette from the pLew100-MycBirA* expression vector, followed by subcloning into the Sma1 site of the Leishmania pX72-Hyg expression vector, which is a modified version of the pX63-Hyg expression vector. Then the genomic KH open reading frame was PCR amplified and cloned into the Kpn1 and EcoRV sites in pX72-Hyg to generate pX72-Hyg-Myc-BirA*::KH. This episome was transfected into wild-type and delta-kh parasites and BirA*::KH expression was verified by Western blot.  BioID MS experiment: L. mexicana promastigote cultures of wild type parasites and the BirA*::KH-expressing parasites were grown to ~5 x10**6 cells/ml, then biotin was added to the cultures to a final concentration of 50 micromolar and cells were incubated overnight to a final density of 1-2x10**7 cells/ml. Cells (1-2x10**9) incubated with biotin were collected, washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS: 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4), and then resuspended in PEME + protease inhibitors (2 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 M piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid)–NaOH (PIPES-NaOH), pH 6.9 supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics)), and pelleted again. Detergent extracted cytoskeletons were prepared by incubating the biotin treated cells in PEME buffer with protease inhibitors plus 0.5% Nonidet P-40 (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation at 3400 x g for 5 min at room temperature. This pellet was then solubilized in lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris, 0.4% SDS, pH 7.4) by incubation on a rocker for 15 min followed by sonication using 3 pulses of 15 seconds at maximum power (Sonic Dismembrator, 500W, Fisher Scientific). After sonication, samples were spun at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4 C and the supernatant was added to 400 microliters of streptavidin resin (Pierce High Capacity Streptavidin-agarose Resin, Thermo Scientific Pierce) and incubated overnight at 4 C. These streptavidin resins were then repeatedly washed by rotating mixing, 5 min for each wash. This included five washes with 1 ml of Buffer 3 (8 M urea, 200 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) containing 0.2% SDS (5 min each), five washes with 1 ml of Buffer 3 with 2.0% SDS, five washes with 1 ml of Buffer 3 with no SDS (5 min each), two washes with 1 ml of Buffer A (200 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.0), and finally two washes with 1 ml of Tris, pH 8.0. Samples were stored in 500 microliters of Tris, pH 8.0, at 4 C until trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: After binding proteins to streptavidin resins as described above, the resins were suspended in 500 microliters of 100 mM Tris buffer, pelleted by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 5 min, resuspended in 100 microliters of ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and 1 microgram of trypsin (Sigma) was added. After incubation overnight at 37 C with shaking, the sample containing the suspended beads, digested proteins, and an additional 100 microliters wash of water were transferred to 0.45-micron spin filters (Millipore, Burlington, MA) and beads were removed by brief centrifugation. Peptides were recovered in the supernatant, filtered, taken to dryness by vacuum concentration, and dissolved in 40 microliters of 5% formic acid. Samples were injected onto a 1 mm x 8 mm OPTITRAP peptide cartridge (Optimize Technologies) at 20 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid. After loading, the trap cartridge was placed in-line with a 0.5 mm x 25 cm 5 micron Zorbax SB-C18 column (Agilent Technologies), and peptides separated by a 7.5-30% acetonitrile gradient over 60 min at 10 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid using a 1100 series capillary HPLC (Agilent Technologies).   Mass spectrometry was performed using an LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent collection of MS/MS spectra used the dynamic exclusion feature of the instrument’s control software (repeat count equal to 1, exclusion list size of 100, exclusion duration of 30 sec, and exclusion mass width of -1 to +4 ) to obtain MS/MS spectra of the 5 most abundant parent ions following each survey scan from m/z 350-2000. The tune file was configured with a 275 C capillary temperature, one microscan, a maximum inject time of 50 msec and AGC target of 3 x 10**4 in MS mode and maximum ion time of 100 msec and AGC target of 1 x 10**4 in MS2 mode. Peptides were identified using the program Sequest (version 28 rev. 12 Thermo Scientific) using a L. mexicana TriTryp database (downloaded April 2013) amended by adding 179 common contaminant proteins, and sequence-reversed entries. The search used trypsin specificity, differential mass increase of 16 for oxidized methionines, 2.5 Da average parent ion tolerance, and 1 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance. Matches to sequence reversed entries were used to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) as previously described (see https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). The FDRs were 1.9% for peptides, and less than 1% for proteins (127 protein identifications, 1 reversed match).  In addition to basic parsimonious protein inference, extended parsimony logic was used to group proteins having large fractions of common peptide sequences. Shared (mapping to more than one protein) or unique (mapping to just one protein) peptides were defined in the context of the final list of inferred proteins. Total spectral counts were computed as the sum of all unique peptide counts plus a fraction of the shared peptide counts. The fractional splitting of shared peptide counts was done based on the relative unique peptide counts of the proteins containing the shared peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Infectious disease, Protein targeting, Leishmania, Cytoskeleton, Cytokinesis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Scott M. Landfear
Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


