### Accession
PXD027749

### Title
Peripheral blood CD4+CCR6+ compartment differentiate HIV-1 positive elite controllers from long-term successfully treated individuals

### Description
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) has the potency of suppressing systemic viral replication and spread. Still, persistent human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV) survive for decades during treatment in latently infected cells, making up the latent viral reservoir. This reservoir is believed to reside in subtypes of memory T cells and cell from monocytic lineages, but some functional and naïve T cells have also shown to carry latent HIV. Eradication of latently infected cells, in terms of a sterilizing cure, have proven to be a hurdle since there is a heterogeneity in mechanisms governing latency and integration site into the genome. Over the course of suppressive therapy, persisting HIV, sustained by low levels of viral replication, homeostatic proliferation, and cell to cell transmission, is a driver of chronic immune activation in the body. For the immune system to elicit an appropriate inflammatory response it is dependent on secretion of inflammatory molecules, such as chemokines and cytokines. Most chemokines are pro-inflammatory factors that facilitate leukocyte recruitment to site of inflammation where they can exert their regulatory role in response to pathological and physiological stressors e.g., infection, inflammation, and tissue damage. Alterations in chemokine receptor expression and chemokine levels modulates the activity of the immune response and in HIV infection contribute to chronic inflammation and mortality. Therefore, people living with HIV on suppressive therapy (PLWH) are at higher risk of age associated co-morbidities due to elevated immune activation and chronic inflammation induced by ART toxicities, microbiome dysbiosis leading to microbial translocation and dysregulated immune cell activation and function. As a result, the causative HIV pathogenesis and immune dysfunction further chronic immune activation. This result in a vicious cycle as immune activation is driver of HIV disease progression and inflammaeging leading to earlier onset of age-related diseases. An alternative approach in cure strategies is a functional cure for HIV aiming at suppressing viral replication without ART. A model for functional cure studies are elite controllers (EC). EC constitute a small fraction of HIV+ individuals (<0.5%) exhibiting the unique characteristic of natural control of viral replication in absence of ART. However, there is a population-based heterogeneity of how these individuals naturally supress viral replication. This heterogeneity is caused by viral genetic factors, variability of integration site in the human genome, together with host response against the pathogen and immunological factors. In terms of immune cell activation, studies have shown how EC maintain lower levels of inflammatory markers compared to PLWH. Contradictory, some studies have shown elevated inflammatory markers in EC which could be attributed to the heterogeneity of the EC group or as others have shown it is a consequence of loss of spontaneous control of HIV. Therefore, as no consensus exist further studies comparing variability of immune function between EC and ART can aid in understanding the mechanisms of natural control of HIV. In our recent study (Sperk et al 2021, iScience) we hypothesised that modulated CCR6/CCL20 chemokine axis and CCR2-CCL7-CCL2 signalling can play a protective role in the EC phenotype. Downregulation of CCR2 and CCR6 receptors in lymphocytes and higher plasma abundance of CCL4, CCL7 and CCL20 in EC compared to the HIV-negative controls can provide natural resistance to HIV-infection. In the present study, we further extended our analysis to evaluate the expression profile dynamics of key chemokine receptors, CCR2, CCR3, CCR5 and CCR6, in successfully treated PLWH. We compared well treated PLWH with HIV-1 elite controllers and its association with HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, cell populations of interest were isolated for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based untargeted proteomics analysis to evaluate specific characteristics regulating these cell populations and their role in HIV persistence. Our study provides important understanding of the chemokine receptor dynamics and its role in HIV persistence that differentiate elite controllers from long term treated PLWH.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by adding 8M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer. Samples were vortexed and sonicated in cold bath for 10 min. Protein concentration was estimated with Pierce Micro BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37C and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAM) for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade from Promega) with a 1:20 ratio enzyme:protein overnight at 37C. Resulting peptides were cleaned-up using C-18 stage tips (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a speedvac (Eppendorf). Cleaned peptides were labeled with TMT11plex™ tags (ThermoFisher) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and individual TMT tags were dissolved in dry acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were labeled by adding the respective TMT tag solution, the mix was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, the reaction was quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Labeled peptides were mixed in three different batches, a pool of samples was used across the three batches to normalize and evaluate batch effect (channel 131C).  Labeled peptides were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, columns were washed with 100% ACN and then conditioned with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and loaded into the column by centrifugation at 3000 x g for 2 min. Columns were washed with 5% ACN in 0.1% triethanolamine (TEA), and peptides were eluted in eight different fractions by centrifugation at 3000 x g according to the ACN concentration in 0.1% TEA solutions: 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, 22,5, 25 and 50%. All fractions were dried down in a speedvac (Eppendorf) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) hyphenated to an Orbitrap™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in an Acclaim PepMap trap column, 2 μm x 75 μm ID x 2 cm (Thermo Scientific) and separated in an EASY-Spray™ HPLC Column, 2 μm x 75 μm ID x 500 mm (Thermo Scientific) using a 120 min linear gradient. Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, isolating the top 20 most intense precursors at 120,000 mass resolution in the mass range of m/z 375 – 1400, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 30s, precursors were isolated with 0.7 Th width. MS/MS scans were obtained using high collision energy of 34%, resolution of 45,000 and maximum IT of 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against both SwissProt human and human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) databases using the search engine Mascot Server v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd) in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software environment allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMT6plex modification of lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
HIV-1 infection induces a chronic inflammatory environment not restored by suppressive antiretroviral therapy (ART). As of today, the effect of viral suppression and immune reconstitution in people living with HIV-1 (PLWH) has been well described but not completely understood. Herein, we show how PLWH who naturally control the virus (PLWH<sub>EC</sub>) have a reduced proportion of CD4<sup>+</sup>CCR6<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup>CCR6<sup>+</sup> cells compared to PLWH on suppressive ART (PLWH<sub>ART</sub>) and HIV-1 negative controls (HC). Expression of CCR2 was reduced on both CD4<sup>+</sup>, CD8<sup>+</sup> and classical monocytes in PLWH<sub>EC</sub> compared to PLWH<sub>ART</sub> and HC. Longer suppressive therapy, measured in the same patients, decreased number of cells expressing CCR2 on all monocytic cell populations while expression on CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells increased. Furthermore, the CD4<sup>+</sup>CCR6<sup>+</sup>/CCR6<sup>-</sup> cells exhibited a unique proteomic profile with a modulated energy metabolism in PLWH<sub>EC</sub> compared to PLWH<sub>ART</sub> independent of CCR6 status. The CD4<sup>+</sup>CCR6<sup>+</sup> cells also showed an enrichment in proteins involved in apoptosis and p53 signalling in PLWH<sub>EC</sub> compared to PLWH<sub>ART</sub>, indicative of increased sensitivity towards cell death mechanisms. Collectively, this data shows how PLWH<sub>EC</sub> have a unique chemokine receptor profile that may aid in facilitating natural control of HIV-1 infection.

### Keywords
Hiv, Peripheral blood, Cd4+ccr6+-

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Campus Solna, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Campus Solna, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden


