### Accession
PXD031094

### Title
Pan-claudin family interactome analysis reveals shared and specific interactions

### Description
Interactome study of the pan-claudin family by combining two complementary pull-down techniques followed by mass spectrometry to create an interaction landscape of the claudin family. Co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP) of recombinant claudins expressed in MDCK-C7 cells provided information about interactions beyond the already known TJ proteins. A protein interaction screen on a peptide matrix (PRISMA) allowed mapping interactions along the disordered cytosolic C-terminal region of claudins and studying the effect of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on these interactions. The new interaction partners of the C-terminus of several claudins were confirmed by proximity ligation assays (PLA) and revealed their possible implications in localized biological processes in epithelial cells. By combining these approaches, we created an extended interaction map of the claudin protein family, expanding the current knowledge in the field.

### Sample Protocol
Claudin CoIPs were performed in MDCK-C7 cells heterologously expressing recombinant human claudin proteins N-terminally fused to YFP or CFP, and cytosolic eGFP as a control using GFP-Trap® nanobodies. 23 claudin CoIPs were analyzed by mass spectrometry after on-bead protein digestion, stage tip peptide clean-up. MS data was acquired on a Q-Exactive HFX in DDA mode. Proteins interacting with the disordered C-terminal tail of the different claudins were identified using the PRISMA methodology: the amino acid (aa) sequence of the claudins C-termini was used to generate a library of 15 aa long overlapping peptides with a 5 aa window shift mapping the cytosolic tails of the different members of the claudin family. 169 peptides (unmodified and modified) were synthesized by SPOT synthesis on a cellulose membrane that was incubated with MDCK-C7 nuclei-depleted cell lysate. Spots containing the interacting proteins pulled down from the cell lysate were subjected to in solution digestion and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 96-well plates (Waters). MS data was acquired by a Q-Exactive HF operated in DDA mode with a top10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 searching against the Canis lupus familiaris UniProt database (2018). Settings were kept as default, methionine oxidation and deamidation (NQ) were included as a variable modification, cystein carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and quantitation was done using label-free quantification (Fast LFQ). ‘match between runs’ (MBR) was enabled to increase the number of identifications. For the PRISMA data, the search was done against an additional second database containing the C-terminal sequence of all human claudin isoforms to detect the synthetic tryptic peptides coming from the membrane. Input samples and groups of peptides from the same claudin were set to non-consecutive fractions so the MBR algorithm works only with runs within the same fraction. FOr the CoIP data, LFQ intensity values of Claudin pull-downs were compared against the GFP control by two-sample moderated t-test. For PRISMA, moderated t-test pairwise comparisons were done between the unmodified peptides from each claudin isoform on one hand, and between the unmodified and the phosphorylated versions of the same peptides on the other with a significance cut-off of 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we provide a protocol for the systematic screening of protein-protein interactions mediated by short linear motifs using the Protein Interaction Screen on a peptide Matrix (PrISMa) technique. We describe how to pull down interacting proteins in a parallelized manner and identify them by mass spectrometry. Finally, we describe a bioinformatic workflow necessary to identify highly probable interaction partners in the large-scale dataset. We describe the application of this method for the transient interactome of the claudin protein family. For complete details on the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to Suarez-Artiles et&#xa0;al.<sup>1</sup>.

### Keywords
Pulldown, Interactome, Claudin, Peptide pulldown, Lc-ms/ms, Prisma

### Affiliations
Proteomics of cellular signaling, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Strassen, Luxembourg. Department of Life Sciences and Medicine, University ofLuxembourg, Campus Belval, Luxembourg.
Max-Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Lorena Suarez-Artiles

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Proteomics of cellular signaling, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Strassen, Luxembourg. Department of Life Sciences and Medicine, University ofLuxembourg, Campus Belval, Luxembourg.


