### Accession
PXD012690

### Title
Identification of AGR2 interacting proteins in T47D cells using label-free quantification

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis with label-free quantification to identify proteins interacting with AGR2 protein in T47D breast cancer cells

### Sample Protocol
T47D human cancer lines were maintained in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 300 μg/ml L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. Cells were grown up to 80% confluence and then were washed three times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 0.1 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2) directly on plates. 0.6 mM dithiobis[succinimidylpropionate] (DSP) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) in 1.4% DMSO in PBS (control: DMSO in PBS) was applied for 30 min at room temperature (10 ml of solution per 15 cm dish). The crosslinking reaction was stopped by addition of Tris pH 7.5 (10 mM final concentration) for 15 min. Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in NP-40 Lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA pH 8, 1% NP40, 1% protease inhibitors, 1 mM PMSF), incubated on ice with shaking for 30 min and then sonicated by 30× 0,1 s pulses and 1 s pauses on maximum power (Vibra-Cell, Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT, USA) and centrifuged 14,000 g/4 °C/30 min. RC-DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France) was used to determine protein concentration. 200 µl of streptavidin-agarose suspension (Merck KGaA - Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was washed in 0.1% Tween20 in PBS (PBS-T) and labeled with 4.5 µl of biotinylated 6aa-aptamer (5 mg/ml in DMSO) E7 (AGR2-targeting, PTTIYY) overnight on rotating wheel at 4 °C and washed 6× with PBS-T (13). The aptamer containing mixtures were mixed with 400 µg of total protein lysate from T47D cells and incubated overnight at 4 °C on rotating wheel and then washed 6× with PBS-T. 50 µl of 0.1 M glycine pH 2.5/10 min/room temperature were used for elution of precipitated protein. The eluates were neutralized with 5 µl of 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8. Trypsin digestion was performed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as follows. Whole eluate was added onto Vivacon 500 ultrafiltration spin columns (10 kDa membrane cutoff, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) with 200 µl of UT buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5). The columns were centrifuged at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. 100 μl of UT buffer was then added onto the columns followed by addition of 40 µl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, mixed and left in thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 min/600 rpm/37 °C to reach a complete reduction of proteins. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. Subsequently, 100 μl of UT buffer and 20 μl of 300 mM iodoacetamide were added onto the columns and mixed. The samples were alkylated firstly for 1 min/600 rpm/25 °C in thermomixer and then 20 min in dark without shaking, followed by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. The columns were washed 2 times with 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged for 14,000g/20 min/20 °C. The digestion was performed by the addition of 2 μl of 0.25 μg/μl trypsin (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by incubation for 12 h at 37 °C in a wet chamber. The digests were collected by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. The columns were then washed again with 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C and the digests were desalted as described previously (http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/pr800622b). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on NanoAcquity LC system (Waters, Milford, CA, USA) on-line connected to LTQ Orbitrap (OT) Velos MS system (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA, USA) 0.1 × 2 mm pre-column and separated on a home-made 5 µm 100 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA, USA) 0.75 × 150 mm column with a gravity-pulled emitter. The analytical separation was run for 65 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0–1 min 95% C and 5% D, then to 65% C and 35% D at 55 min, and 20% C and 80% D at 65 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was set to 60000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. Maximum of 8 precursors were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ. For MS/MS in the LTQ, the ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 m/z), dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The samples were run in four technical replicates (injections).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed in MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 (www.maxquant.org) using Andromeda database search algorithm. The data analysis parameters were as follows: Database: UniProt/SwissProt human database 2017_03 downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org (2017/03/30) with 20,183 protein sequences (complemented by database of common protein contaminants according to the standard Andromeda settings), enzyme name: Trypsin (cleaving polypeptides at the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine), max. missed cleavage sites 2, taxonomy: Homo sapiens. Decoy database search: PSM FDR 0.01, protein FDR 0.01, site FDR 0.01. Tolerances: 20 ppm/4.5 ppm (first search/main search) peptide tolerance and 0.5 Da IT MS/MS fragment match tolerance. Modifications: Dynamic (variable): oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (K). Static (fixed): carbamidomethyl (C). Label-free quantification (LFQ): Fast LFQ, min. ratio count 2.

### Publication Abstract
Anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) known to be overexpressed in many human epithelial cancers and is involved in cell migration, cellular transformation, angiogenesis, and metastasis. This protein inhibits the activity of the tumor suppressor p53, and its expression levels can be used to predict cancer patient outcome. However, the precise network of AGR2-interacting partners and clients remains to be fully characterized. Herein, we used label-free quantification and also stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture-based LC-MS/MS analyses to identify proteins interacting with AGR2. Functional annotation confirmed that AGR2 and its interaction partners are associated with processes in the ER that maintain intracellular metabolic homeostasis and participate in the unfolded protein response, including those associated with changes in cellular metabolism, energy, and redox states in response to ER stress. As a proof of concept, the interaction between AGR2 and PDIA3, another ER-resident PDI, was studied in more detail. Pathway analysis revealed that AGR2 and PDIA3 play roles in protein folding in ER, including post-translational modification and in cellular response to stress. We confirmed the AGR2-PDIA3 complex formation in cancer cells, which was enhanced in response to ER stress. Accordingly, molecular docking characterized potential quaternary structure of this complex; however, it remains to be elucidated whether AGR2 rather contributes to PDIA3 maturation in ER, the complex directly acts in cellular signaling, or mediates AGR2 secretion. Our study provides a comprehensive insight into the protein-protein interaction network of AGR2 by identifying functionally relevant proteins and related cellular and biochemical pathways associated with the role of AGR2 in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Anterior gradient protein 2; protein-protein interactions; protein disulfide isomerase; lc-ms; label-free quatification

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University


