### Accession
PXD015101

### Title
Glycated proteomics T1D glycemic control

### Description
Compare differences in glycated proteome between good and poorly controlled T1D human plasma

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma proteins (10 mg/mL, diluted by using 50 mM NH4HCO3) were dissolved in 8 M urea and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37°C; 40 mM iodoacetamide was added to alkylate free sulfhydryl groups by incubating for 0.5 h at 37°C in the dark. Samples were then diluted with 1.1 ml 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) to reduce the urea concentration to below 1 M. CaCl2 (1mM) was added before adding sequencing-grade trypsin. A two-step digestion was performed by adding trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w, enzyme: protein) and incubating samples at 37°C for 4h; followed by adding the same amount of trypsin and incubating overnight at 37°C. The final digestion mixture was passed through C18 SPE cartridges (Biotage) for desalting and eluted peptide solutions were concentrated by speed-vac. The concentration of peptides was measured again using BCA assay to make sure similar amount of peptides were loaded onto analytical column for every sample.

### Data Protocol
The acquired datasets were analyzed by using SEQUEST HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a UniProt human database (12/3/2014) containing 89,734 entries for protein identification and Progenesis QI for Proteomics 3.0 (PQIP, Nonlinear Dynamics) for protein quantification. The search parameters were as follows: variable modifications of protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da), and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da). The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed for the search. Trypsin/P was selected as the specific proteolytic enzyme. For glycated protein analysis, glycation (162.052823 Da) was added as the variable modiﬁcations in PD search. Peptide identification was performed using a 4.5 ppm precursor ion tolerance; the product ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. Peptide-spectrum matches were adjusted to 1% FDR. For the parameters in PQIP search, automatic alignment was used which auto-identified the most suitable run in all the experiment as retention time reference. MS features with charge state of 1 and > 7 were excluded. Protein quantification was based on the three most abundant peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycemic control, Type 1 diabetes, Amadori modification, Glycated proteome

### Affiliations
UNCG

### Submitter
Qibin  Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
UNCG


