### Accession
PXD035923

### Title
Ribosome r-protein content during stationary phase

### Description
The aim of this study was to determine the fate of ribosomes and r-proteins. In this respect, SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeled Amino acids in cell Culture) based experimental approach was used (Fig. 1). E.coli cells were grown in MOPS medium supplemented with “heavy” labeled arginine (Arg10) and lysine (Lys8). At the mid-log phase, the culture was further supplemented with a 20-fold molar excess of “light” unlabeled arginine (Arg0) and lysine (Lys0), divided into 8 aliquots, and grown for 14 days. Cell samples were collected at day one (24h), day two (48h), and subsequently in 48h intervals over the following 12 days. The ribosome particles were isolated using sucrose gradient centrifugation. the quantities of r-proteins in the 70S ribosome fraction were determined using SILAC based LC-MS/MS and normalized to the corresponding values of day one.

### Sample Protocol
70S ribosomes from stationary phase and reference cells were mixed in 1:1 molar ratio and precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) overnight at 4oC. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (16000 g for 60 min) at 4oC, washed twice with 80% ice-cold acetone, and air-dried at 37oC for 5 minutes. All subsequent sample preparations were conducted at room temperature. Proteins were dissolved in 50 µL of 8M urea/2M thiourea solution, reduced for 1 h at 56oC by adding 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and carbamidomethylated with 5 mM chloroacetamide for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) at an 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio for 4 h. Urea concentration in the solution was reduced by adding 4 vol of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and peptides were further digested using mass spectrometry grade trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) overnight. Enzymes were inactivated by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were desalted on self-made reverse-phase C18 StageTips columns and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Agilent 1200 nanoflow LC via nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon). 1 mg of purified peptides were injected at a flow rate of 700 nl/min into 75 mm x 150 mm fused silica emitter (Proxeon), packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120C18-AQ, 3 mm stationary phase beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and eluted over 120 min using linear gradient of 3% to 40% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid) in solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode and a „lock mass” option was enabled for m/z 445.120030 to improve mass accuracy. Precursor ion full scan spectra (m/z 300 to 1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap in profile with a resolution 60000 at m/z 400 (target value of 1000 000 ions and maximum injection time 500 msec). The five most intense ions were fragmented in linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35.0%) and spectra were acquired in centroid (target value of 5000 ions and maximum injection time 150 msec). Dynamic exclusion option was enabled (exclusion duration 120 s) and ions with unassigned charge state as well as singly charged ions were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant (v1.5.6.0) with default settings, except that the minimal peptide length for the specific and non-specific search was 5 amino acids. Unique peptides were used for quantification, main search peptide tolerance was 8 ppm, and variable modification was used for quantitation of oxidation (methionine). The peptide identification search was carried out against E. coli K-12 MG1655 protein sequence database from UniprotKB (as of Oct. 2019). The search results were filtered and transformed using Perseus (v1.6.14.0). For proteins bL20, bL33, bL34, bS20, and bS21 MS data analysis was done using the Mascot search engine and Skyline as described in (Lilleorg et al, 2019). Each protein was quantified through SILAC ratios H/M, L/M, and/or (L+H)/M, comparing unlabeled (L) and/or “heavy”-labeled (H) relative quantities against medium-heavy labeled (M) internal reference.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial ribosomes are composed of three rRNA and over 50 ribosomal protein (r-protein) molecules. r-proteins are essential for ribosome assembly and structural stability and also participate in almost all ribosome functions. Ribosomal components are present in stoichiometric amounts in the mature 70S ribosomes during exponential and early stationary growth phases. Ribosomes are degraded in stationary phase; however, the stability and fate of r-proteins during stationary growth phase are not known. In this study, we report a quantitative analysis of ribosomal components during extended stationary-phase growth in Escherichia coli. We show that (i) the quantity of ribosomes per cell mass decreases in stationary phase, (ii) 70S ribosomes contain r-proteins in stoichiometric amounts, (iii) 30S subunits are degraded faster than 50S subunits, (iv) the quantities of 21 r-proteins in the total proteome decrease during 14&#x2009;days (short-lived r-proteins) concomitantly with the reduction of cellular RNA, and (e) 30 r-proteins are stable and form a pool of free r-proteins (stable r-proteins). Thus, r-proteins are present in nonstoichiometric amounts in the proteome of E. coli during the extended stationary phase. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Ribosome degradation has been extensively described from the viewpoint of its main component, rRNA. Here, we aim to complement our knowledge by quantitatively analyzing r-protein degradation and stability both in the ribosomes and in the whole-cell proteome during stationary phase in E. coli. r-proteins are considered to be very stable in the proteome. Here, we show that a specific set of r-proteins are rapidly degraded after release from the rRNA. The degradation of r-proteins is an intriguing new aspect of r-protein metabolism in bacteria.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Ribosomal proteins, E.coli, Proteome

### Affiliations
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Kaspar Reier

### Lab Head
Dr Tiina Tamm
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia


