### Accession
PXD006747

### Title
Discovery of Tamoxifen and N-Desmethyl Tamoxifen Protein Targets in MCF-7 Cells Using Large-Scale Protein Folding and Stability Measurements, part 2

### Description
The proteins in an MCF-7 cell line were probed for tamoxifen (TAM) and n-desmethyl tamoxifen (NDT) induced stability changes using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique in combination with two different quantitative proteomics strategies. Together the SILAC- and iTRAQ-SPROX experiments described here enabled over 1000 proteins to be assayed for TAM- and NDT- induced protein stability changes, and a total of 163 and 200 protein hits were identified in the TAM and NDT studies, respectively. A subset of high confidence hits were assessed for experimental links to the ER using a STRING analysis. TAM was shown to induce stabilization of Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), a protein recently shown to bind the estrogen receptor. TAM was shown to directly interact with purified recombinant YBX1 with Pulse Proteolysis (PP). These results support YBX1 as a direct protein target of TAM. Proteins with altered expression levels with TAM and NDT treatment were identified with SILAC quantitation. In total, 799 and 671 proteins were probed for TAM- and NDT- induced expression changes, respectively, and 49 and 30 proteins had altered expression. This work also involved the use of a novel data analysis strategy to identify protein targets of ligands using the SPROX technique.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots containing 200 µL of MCF-7 lysate were incubated with 300 µM TAM/10% DMSO (v/v), 300 µM NDT/10% DMSO (v/v) or 10% DMSO to generate the +TAM, +NDT, and control samples, respectively. Each sample was distributed into a series of buffers containing 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4) and increasing concentrations of GdmCl. The SPROX reaction was performed by treatment with 3% H2O2 (v/v) and was quenched with excess methionine. The final GdmCl concentrations in the buffers were 0.5 M, 1.0 M, 1.3 M, 1.5 M, 1.7 M, 2.0 M, 2.7 M and 3.0 M. The protein in each denaturant-containing buffer was precipitated with TCA and samples were submitted to a bottom-up proteomics analysis using iTRAQ quantitation. The protein samples from the 0.5 M, 1.0 M, 1.3 M, 1.5 M, 1.7 M, 2.0 M, 2.7 M and 3.0 M GdmCl were labeled with 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121 iTRAQ reagents, respectively. The labeling reaction was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with the exception that 0.5 units of each iTRAQ reagent was used in the labeling reactions. The iTRAQ labeled samples were combined for the +TAM, +NDT and control samples. Methionine-containing peptides were enriched using a Pi3TM Methionine Reagent kit (Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In total, three iTRAQ-SPROX analyses were performed on the control, +TAM, and +NDT samples. Samples analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite ETD equipped with an EASY-nLC system  were analyzed at the Proteomics Resource at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. The trapping column was a 100 μm × 2 cm Integrafrit column (New Objective) packed with 200 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 μm material , and the column was a 75 μm × 25 cm PicoFrit column packed with 100 Å Magic C18 AQ 5 μm material. The flow rate was 400 nl/min. The LC gradient was 5 to 7% solvent B over 2 min, 7 to 35% solvent B over 90 min, 35 to 50% solvent B over 1 min, isocratic at 50% solvent B for 9 min, increased from 50 to 95% B over 1 min, and finally isocratic at 95% solvent B for the last 8 min. Product ion scans (resolution 15,000) were collected for the top 10 most intense peaks in a given precursor scan (resolution 60,000) with an intensity threshold of 5,000, and dynamic exclusion of a given m/z ratio was set at 1 scan in a 0.75 min window. The precursor isolation width was 1.2 m/z. The scan range for the precursor scan was 400–1,800 m/z and 100–2,000 m/z for the product ion scan. Collision induced dissociation was achieved using HCD with normalized collision energy of 40% and an HCD activation time of 0.1 ms. Samples analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus high-resolution mass spectrometer with a nanoAcuity UPLC system and a nanoelectrospray ionization source was performed at the Duke Proteomics Facility. Approximately 4 µL of sample was injected and trapped on a Symmetry C18 180 µm × 20 mm trapping column for 3 min at 5 µL/min (99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid), followed by the analytical separation on a 75 µm × 250 mm column packed with 1.7 µm Acquity HSST3 C18 stationary phase. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 3 to 30% B over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min with a column temperature of 55 °C. Data collection on the QExactive Plus mass spectrometer was performed in a DDA mode of acquisition with a resolution (r) of 70,000 (at m/z 200) for full MS scan from m/z 375 – 1600 with a target AGC value of 1×106 ions in profile mode, followed by 20 MS/MS scans at r=17,500 (at m/z 200) in centroid mode, using an AGC target value of 1×105 ions, a max fill time of 60 ms, and normalized collision energy of 30 V. A 30 s dynamic exclusion was employed to decrease MS/MS oversampling. LC-MS/MS analysis with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was performed at the Proteomics Resource at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. The LC system was configured in a vented format that consisted of a fused-silica nanospray needle packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ 100Å reverse-phase media and a trap (IntegraFrit™ Capillary, 100 µm inner diameter, New Objective) containing Magic C18 AQ 200Å (2 cm). 1.8 µg of peptides was loaded onto the column from each sample and separated using a two-mobile-phase system. The chromatographic separation was achieved over a 106-min gradient from 3% to 50% B (3-6% B for 2 min, 6–33% B for 90 min, 30–50% B for 7 min, and 50% B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent MS/MS mode over the m/z range of 350–1500. The mass resolution was set to 120,000.  The cycle time was set to 3 seconds, and the most abundant ions from the precursor scan were selected for MS/MS analysis using 40% normalized HCD collision energy and analyzed with an Orbitrap with the resolution set to 15000. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds and selected ions were required to have an intensity of 50000.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data generated in the iTRAQ-SPROX experiments was searched against the SwissProt Human database version 2016-04-13 with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.1.21). All data was searched with the fixed modifications cysteine MMTS modification and iTRAQ 8-plex lysine and N-termini modification. The oxidation of methionine was searched as a variable modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed. The parameters for the Orbitrap Elite included a 10 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor masses and 0.8 Da for fragment mass tolerance. The parameters for the Q-Exactive included a 10 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor masses and 0.02 Da for fragment mass tolerance. The parameters for the Orbitrap Fusion included a 10 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor masses and 0.6 Da for fragment mass tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
The proteins in an MCF-7 cell line were probed for tamoxifen (TAM) and n-desmethyl tamoxifen (NDT) induced stability changes using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique in combination with two different quantitative proteomics strategies, including one based on SILAC and one based on isobaric mass tags. Over 1000 proteins were assayed for TAM- and NDT-induced protein stability changes, and a total of 163 and 200 protein hits were identified in the TAM and NDT studies, respectively. A subset of 27 high-confidence protein hits were reproducibly identified with both proteomics strategies and/or with multiple peptide probes. One-third of the high-confidence hits have previously established experimental links to the estrogen receptor, and nearly all of the high-confidence hits have established links to breast cancer. One high-confidence protein hit that has known estrogen receptor binding properties, Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), was further validated as a direct binding target of TAM using both the SPROX and pulse proteolysis techniques. Proteins with TAM- and/or NDT-induced expression level changes were also identified in the SILAC-SPROX experiments. These proteins with expression level changes included only a small fraction of those with TAM- and/or NDT-induced stability changes.

### Keywords
N-desmethyl tamoxifen, Sprox, Tamoxifen

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Duke University Durham, North Carolina
Duke University

### Submitter
Ryenne Ogburn

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Department of Chemistry, Duke University Durham, North Carolina


