### Accession
PXD030309

### Title
Proteome-wide cellular thermal shift assay reveals novel crosstalk between brassinosteroid and auxin signaling

### Description
Despite the growing interest in using chemical genetics in plant research, small-molecule target identification remains a major challenge. The cellular thermal shift assay coupled with high-resolution massspectrometry (CETSA MS) that monitors changes in the thermal stability of proteins caused by their interactions with small molecules, other proteins, or post-translational modifications allows the identification of drug targets, or the study of protein-metabolite and protein-protein interactions mainly in mammalian cells. To showcase the applicability of this method in plants, we applied CETSA MS to intact Arabidopsis thaliana cells and identified the thermal proteome of the plant-specific glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) inhibitor, bikinin. A comparison between the thermal- and the phospho-proteomes of bikinin revealed the auxin efflux carrier PIN-FORMED1 (PIN1) as a novel substrate of the Arabidopsis GSK3s that negatively regulate the brassinosteroid signaling. We established that PIN1 phosphorylation by the GSK3s is essential for maintaining its intracellular polarity that is required for auxin-mediated regulation of vascular patterning in the leaf thus, revealing a novel crosstalk between brassinosteroid and auxin signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Four-day old PSB-L cell cultures (30 ml) were incubated with DMSO or 50 µM Bikinin (30 min), washed with 8 ml HEPES buffer (pH 7.5, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl, with protease inhibitor cOmplete ULTRA Tablets and DMSO or 50 µM Bikinin) and centrifuged (300 g, 3 min). The supernatant was removed and HEPES buffer added in a 1:1 ratio. Divide 200 µl cell cultures were divided into PCR tubes (200 µL), centrifuged and 100 µl supernatants was removed. The cells were lysed by 6 cycles of freeze thawing in liquid nitrogen. Two metal bullets were added to the PCR tubes and cells were ground with a Retsch machine.  The lysate was isolated and centrifuged (20,000 x g for 15 min at 15°C) and the supernatant was isolated and reduced with 15 mM DTT (30 min at 50°C) and alkylated with 30 mM IAA (15 min at RT, dark). The protein concentration was determined with Bradford assay (3 mg/mL) and Amphipol (Apols) was added to a final concentration (w:v) of 0.1%. Apols and the protein material were co-precipitated by acidifying the sample with TFA (1% final concentration) and incubating 10 min at RT. after centrifugation (15 min at 20,000 x g a 15°C) the supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended in 500 µL 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.4). App. 500 µg of protein material was isolated and digested ON with trypsin (w:w 1:100) at 37°C and 600 rpm. The peptide mixture was again acidified with TFA (1% final concentration) and incubated for 10 min at RT. Apols was precipitated and the peptides mixture isolated. One third of the material was loaded for fractionation with reversed phase at an increased pH (pH 5.5) on a Agilent 1100 series. The fractions were collected over 80 min in 10 fractions per 1 min and dried completely in the SpeedVac. After resuspension in loading solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) the peptide concentration was determined (Lunatic, unchained labs). 2 µg per fraction was loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the needle (pulled in-house). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent and eluted with a non-linear 120 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 2.7 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target  3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms) acquired at a resolution of  60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution  15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 80 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >7 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 28% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
The ten individual obtained LC-MS/MS raw files were searched as one experiment with the MaxQuant software (v1.6.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against A. thaliana proteins using the UniProt database (January 2018, un-reviewed). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini.  A minimum of one peptide in total was required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceChemical genetics, which investigates biological processes using small molecules, is gaining interest in plant research. However, a major challenge is to uncover the mode of action of the small molecules. Here, we applied the cellular thermal shift assay coupled with mass spectrometry (CETSA MS) to intact <i>Arabidopsis</i> cells and showed that bikinin, the plant-specific glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) inhibitor, changed the thermal stability of some of its direct targets and putative GSK3-interacting proteins. In combination with phosphoproteomics, we also revealed that GSK3s phosphorylated the auxin carrier PIN-FORMED1 and regulated its polarity that is required for the vascular patterning in the leaf.

### Keywords
Auxin, Cellular thermal shift assay, Brassinosteroids, Chemical genetics

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University; 9052 Ghent, Belgium;  Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB; 9052 Ghent, Belgium
VIB-Ugent

### Submitter
Jarne Pauwels

### Lab Head
Dr Eugenia Russinova
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University; 9052 Ghent, Belgium;  Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB; 9052 Ghent, Belgium


