### Accession
PXD022546

### Title
Mannose Receptor glycoprotein ligands in A549 cells

### Description
The macrophage mannose receptor (CD206, MR) is an endocytic lectin receptor which plays an important role in homeostasis and innate immunity. The MR contains C-type lectin domains (CTLD) whose specificity for endogenous glycans and glycoprotein ligands have not been well studied.  To gain more insights into the recognition by the MR, we used the murine MR CTLD 4-7 coupled to the Fc-part of IgG (MR-Fc) to investigate its glycan and glycoprotein recognition. As lung cancer tissue and the lung cancer cell line A549 showed intense MR-Fc binding, we further investigated the MR glycoprotein ligands in those cells by immunoprecipitation and glycoproteomic analysis. All enriched glycoproteins, of which 42 were identified, contained pauci- or oligomannose N-glycans, confirming the microarray results. Our study demonstrates that the MR CTLD4-7 is highly selective for pauci- and oligomannosidic N-glycans, structures that are often elevated in tumor cells, and suggest a potential role for the MR in tumor biology.

### Sample Protocol
MR glycoprotein ligands were pulled down from A549 cell lysates using MR-Fc-Protein G magnetic beads. Enrichment in the presence of EDTA served as a negative control. Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion, followed by C18-RP-LC-MS/MS analysis on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide identification was performed using Byonic version 3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.). Trypsin was set as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The glycan database was “N-glycan 309 mammalian” and “O-glycan 9 common”. The following modifications were allowed: carbamidomethyl (Cys; fixed), oxidation (Met; variable common 1), pyroglutamine on N-term (Gln, variable, rare 1), ammonia-loss N-term (Cys; variable rare 1), acetylation N-term (variable rare1), deamidation (Asn, variable common 1), formylation N-term (variable rare1). Glycopeptides with a score above 250 were selected and further manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
The macrophage mannose receptor (CD206, MR) is an endocytic lectin receptor which plays an important role in homeostasis and innate immunity, however, the endogenous glycan and glycoprotein ligands recognized by its C-type lectin domains (CTLD) have not been well studied. Here we used the murine MR CTLD4-7 coupled to the Fc-portion of human IgG (MR-Fc) to investigate the MR glycan and glycoprotein recognition. We probed 16 different cancer and control tissues using the MR-Fc, and observed cell- and tissue-specific binding with varying intensity. All cancer tissues and several control tissues exhibited MR-Fc ligands, intracellular and/or surface-located. We further confirmed the presence of ligands on the surface of cancer cells by flow cytometry. To characterize the fine specificity of the MR for glycans, we screened a panel of glycan microarrays. Remarkably, the results indicate that the CTLD4-7 of the MR is highly selective for specific types of pauci- and oligomannose N-glycans among hundreds of glycans tested. As lung cancer tissue and the lung cancer cell line A549 showed intense MR-Fc binding, we further investigated the MR glycoprotein ligands in those cells by immunoprecipitation and glycoproteomic analysis. All enriched glycoproteins, of which 42 were identified, contained pauci- or oligomannose N-glycans, confirming the microarray results. Our study demonstrates that the MR CTLD4-7 is highly selective for pauci- and oligomannosidic N-glycans, structures that are often elevated in tumor cells, and suggest a potential role for the MR in tumor biology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Glycoproteomics, A549, Mannose receptor

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Director, HMS Center for Glycoscience Director, National Center for Functional Glycomics CLS 11087 - 3 Blackfan Circle Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Kathrin Stavenhagen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Cummings
Harvard Medical School Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Director, HMS Center for Glycoscience Director, National Center for Functional Glycomics CLS 11087 - 3 Blackfan Circle Boston, MA 02115, USA


