### Accession
PXD003630

### Title
Insights into the response of soybean mitochondrial proteins initiated by varying sizes of aluminum oxide nanoparticles under flooding stress

### Description
2-day-old soybeans were treated with flooding and flooding with aluminum oxide nanoparticles of three varying sizes. Total proteins extracted from root including hypocotyl and mitochondrial proteins extracted from root tip were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (150 µg) were purified by phase separation using standard procedures (Komatsu et al., 2013). Mitochondrial proteins were extracted from root tip. after purification the proteins were dried. The dried pellets were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and proteins were reduced by treatment with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56ºC, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37ºC in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase (sequencing grade; Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme/protein concentration at 37ºC for 16 h. The resulting tryptic peptides were acidified to pH < 3 with 10 µL of 20% formic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC) mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences; Phytozome, version 9.1; http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) (Schmutz et al., 2010). In the Mascot searches, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was also performed.      Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences; Phytozome, version 9.1; http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) (Schmutz et al., 2010). In the Mascot searches, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was also performed.

### Publication Abstract
Rapid developments in nanotechnology have led to the increasing use of nanoparticles (NPs) in the agricultural sector. For possible interactions between NPs and crops under flooding stress to be investigated, the molecular mechanisms in soybeans affected by exposure to various sizes of Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs were analyzed using a proteomic technique. In plants exposed to 30-60 nm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs, the length of the root including hypocotyl was increased, and proteins related to glycolysis were suppressed. Exposure to 30-60 nm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs mediated the scavenging activity of cells by regulating the ascorbate/glutathione pathway. Hierarchical clustering analysis indicated that ribosomal proteins were also increased upon exposure to flooding-stressed plants with 30-60 nm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs. Mitochondrion was the target organelle of Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs under flooding-stress conditions. Mitochondrial proteomic analysis revealed that the abundance of voltage-dependent anion channel protein was increased upon exposure to flooding-stressed soybeans with 135 nm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs, indicating the permeability of the mitochondrial membrane was increased. Furthermore, isocitrate dehydrogenase was increased upon exposure of plants to 5 nm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs under flooding conditions. These results suggest that Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> NPs of various sizes affect mitochondrial proteins under flooding stress by regulating membrane permeability and tricarboxylic acid cycle activity.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Root, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Aluminum oxide nanoparticles

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan


