### Accession
PXD042759

### Title
Respiratory Health Outcomes in Neonates (RHiNO) Study Urine Proteomics

### Description
Urine sampled from preterm-born (<34 weeks gestation) school-aged (7-12yrs) children and term born (>/=37 weeks gestation). Spirometry, exercise testing and cardiovascular assessment performed at time of sampling. Preter-born children with low lung function entered a randomised placebo controlled trial of inhaler therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analysed at the University of Bristol, UK Proteomics Facility. 190μl of urine was digested with trypsin (1.25µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) eleven plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol and the labelled samples pooled.  The pooled sample was desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.The TMT-labelled pool was fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min, 6-15% B over 58min, 15-32% B over 58min, 32-40% B over 5min, 40-90% B over 1min, held at 90% B for 6min and then reduced to 1% B over 1min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  The TMT-labelled pool underwent a further fractionation to try and maximise peptide yield. The second fractionation used the above methodology again with a different gradient protocol: 6 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min, 6-25% B over 118min, 25-40%B over 3min, 40-90%B over 1min, held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) again with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for both fractionation processes. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.   All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s±10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%.  For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 50,000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded October 2019: 150786 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Tagged

### Affiliations
Department of Child Health, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, UK
Cardiff University

### Submitter
Chris Course

### Lab Head
Dr Sailesh Kotecha
Department of Child Health, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, UK


