### Accession
PXD003747

### Title
Myostatin Deficiency But Not Anti-Myostatin Blockade Induces Marked Proteomic Changes in Mouse Skeletal Muscle

### Description
Recent studies have reported the deleterious physiological and metabolic changes in Mstn-/- mice including impaired force generation and susceptibility to contraction-induced injury.  Such observations have raised the concerns about the functional quality of the increased muscle resulting from therapeutic blockade of Mstn. Here we provide proteomic evidence to demonstrate that therapeutic Mstn inhibition has minimal effects on muscle proteome composition whereas the genetic ablation of Mstn induces marked changes.  Furthermore, this study also represents the first proteomic analysis of the pharmacological blockage of the Mstn/activin receptor pathway being actively pursued as a potential therapy for multiple muscle wasting disorders.

### Sample Protocol
We generated 13C6-Lysine-labeled SILAC mice according to the method described by Kruger et al.  Briefly, female C57 BL6 Mice from Taconic Laboratories  (F0 generation) of 3-4 weeks of age were fed SILAC 13C6 L-Lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) chow for 5 weeks.  A breeding triad (two females and one male) was then initiated.  F0, F1 and F2 generations were all maintained on SILAC chow.  The 13C6 L-Lysine labeled GA muscle tissue was then dissected from F2 generation SILAC mice at 8-10 weeks of age and stored at -80o C until further use.   Mstn-/- mice were generated by replacing a 5.3 kb DNA fragment spanning exons 1-3 of the Mstn gene with the lacZ reporter gene through VelociGene® technology as previously described [16]. The resulting Mstn-/- mice had a genetic background of 75% C57BL/6 and 25% 129SvJ.  At 21 weeks of age, GA muscles from male Mstn-/- (n = 4) and male wild type (n = 4) mice were dissected and stored -80 oC. In this study, GA muscle was selected because of its mass increase and mixed fast- and slow-twitch muscle fiber type. For anti-Mstn antibody treatment, a highly specific and fully humanized myostatin antibody (REGN1033) was generated using VelocImmune® mice and the attributes of this antibody were characterized in details in a recent study [7]. Two groups of C57BL/6 male mice (n = 4/group) at 10 weeks of age were treated with REGN1033 or an isotype control twice weekly for 2 weeks at the dose of 10 mg/kg via subcutaneous injection according to the previous study [7]. GA muscles were dissected at the end of the treatment (day 14). All mouse experiments were performed under the approval of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and are in accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Protein extraction and in-gel lys-C digestion GA muscle tissues isolated from each mouse was individually ground on dry ice and proteins were extracted using RIPA lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 25mM Tris-HCl, 1%NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate) containing 1X Roche protease inhibitor cocktail.  Protein concentration was measured using Bradford-based Bio-Rad protein assay kit. Lysates were pooled within each group (wild type, Mstn-/-, isotype control-treated, REGN1033-treated) and mixed an equal amount of SILAC-labeled lysate as described previously [15].  30 μg mixed proteins were separated on a 10-16% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Life Technologies). The gel lane was sliced into 5 sections and diced into ~1 × 1 mm cubes.  Gel pierces were destained with 50% acetonitrile solution, reduced with 50mM DTT, and alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide. 30µl sequencing-grade lys-C enzyme (Promega) at 12.5 ng/µl was added to the gel pieces with additional digestion buffer (50mM NH4HCO3) to cover gel pieces.  After overnight digestion at 37o C, peptides were extracted twice with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, dried by speedVac, and resolubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  LC-MS/MS and data analysis The peptide samples prepared as above were loaded onto a nanoViper Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo) and separated using a nanoViper Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo).  The gradient was delivered by an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo) at 250 nL/min.  A 90-minute elution gradient with mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was as follows (percentage B): 2 to 10% at 10 min, linear to 30% at 80 min, and linear to 45% at 90 min.     The peptides eluted from the column were ionized via Thermo EASY-SprayTM source at 1.6 kV and analyzed by an Orbitrap Elite hybrid ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo).  Survey scans were carried out in the high field Orbitrap analyzer with resolution at 120,000 and automatic gain control targeted at 106 ions over a mass range of m/z 300-1500 and maximal ion fill time of 20 ms. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially fragmented via collision-induced dissociation, and scanned in the dual-pressure linear ion trap cells with dynamic exclusion window of 60 s. For each MS2 scan, 104 ions were accumulated with a maximal fill time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0 (Thermo) and searched against UniProt reference mouse proteome database (entry:42,793) via search engine Mascot Version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science).  The search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (M) as a variable modification, SILAC K+6 for a quantitation, 8 ppm for MS tolerance, 0.8 Da for MS/MS tolerance, and 1 missed cleavage. The identified peptides were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and then the grouped proteins filtered using Mascot MudPIT MOWSE score to obtain 1% FDR for protein identification with at least one unique peptide sequence to the protein group entry. The relative SILAC quantitation was carried out in the Proteome Discoverer software. The peptide SILAC ratio was based on the intensity ratio detected over multiple full scans and the protein ratio was the median SILAC ratio among all the SILAC-pairs quantified for the protein group entry.  It should be noted that the same protein had to be identified and quantified in the two different experimental conditions (e.g., wild type vs Mstn-/- and isotype control-treated vs REGN1033-treated) in order to obtain the relative abundance using SILAC mouse tissue as internal standard.

### Publication Abstract
Pharmacologic blockade of the myostatin (Mstn)/activin receptor pathway is being pursued as a potential therapy for several muscle wasting disorders. The functional benefits of blocking this pathway are under investigation, in particular given the findings that greater muscle hypertrophy results from Mstn deficiency arising from genetic ablation compared to post-developmental Mstn blockade. Using high-resolution MS coupled with SILAC mouse technology, we quantitated the relative proteomic changes in gastrocnemius muscle from Mstn knockout (Mstn(-/-) ) and mice treated for 2-weeks with REGN1033, an anti-Mstn antibody. Relative to wild-type animals, Mstn(-/-) mice had a two-fold greater muscle mass and a &gt;1.5-fold change in expression of 12.0% of 1137 quantified muscle proteins. In contrast, mice treated with REGN1033 had minimal changes in muscle proteome (0.7% of 1510 proteins &gt;1.5-fold change, similar to biological difference 0.5% of 1310) even though the treatment induced significant 20% muscle mass increase. Functional annotation of the altered proteins in Mstn(-/-) mice corroborates the mutiple physiological changes including slow-to-fast fiber type switch. Thus, the proteome-wide protein expression differs between Mstn(-/-) mice and mice subjected to specific Mstn blockade post-developmentally, providing molecular-level insights to inform mechanistic hypotheses to explain the observed functional differences.

### Keywords
Silac mouse, Quantitative proteomics, Gastrocnemius, Myostatin knockout, Anti-myostatin blocking antibody

### Affiliations
Regeneron
Regeneron Proteomics and Biomarkers

### Submitter
Robert Salzler

### Lab Head
Dr Xunbao Duan
Regeneron Proteomics and Biomarkers


