### Accession
PXD040186

### Title
RNA to rule them all: Critical steps in Lassa virus ribonucleoparticle assembly and recruitment

### Description
Lassa virus is a negative-strand RNA virus with only four structural proteins that causes periodic outbreaks in West Africa. The nucleoprotein (NP) encapsidates the viral genome, forming the ribonucleoparticles together with the viral RNA and the L protein, which have to be continuously restructured during viral genome replication and transcription. Z protein is important for ribonucleoparticle recruitment, viral particle assembly and budding, and has also been shown to interact with the L protein. However, the interaction of NP, viral RNA and Z is poorly understood. Here, we characterize the interactions between Lassa virus NP, Z and RNA using structural mass spectrometry. We identify the presence of RNA as the driver for disassembly of ring-like NP trimers into monomers to subsequently form higher order assemblies. We locate the interaction site of Z and NP and demonstrate that while NP binds Z independently of the presence of RNA, this interaction is pH-dependent. These data improve our understanding of ribonucleoparticle assembly and recruitment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins for native MS analysis were buffer-exchanged into 150 mM ammonium acetate (99.99 % purity) at pH 7.5 (if not indicated otherwise) by at least three cycles of centrifugation at 13.000 g and 4°C in centrifugal filter units (Amicon 3,000 or 30,000 molecular cutoff and 500 µl volume). Proteins were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to clear the sample from possible protein aggregates occurring during the buffer exchange. Protein concentration after buffer exchange ranged from 5 to 100 µM. Proteins were mixed with or without ligands on ice and subsequently introduced to a mass spectrometer.  Samples were introduced to the mass spectrometer by gold-coated capillaries made from borosilicate glass tubes (inner diameter: 0.68 mm, outer diameter: 1.2 mm; World Precision Instruments). Capillaries were pulled in a two-step program using a micropipette puller (P-1000, Sutter Instruments) with a squared box filament (2.5 mm by 2.5 mm, Sutter Instruments) Capillaries were afterwards gold-coated using a sputter coater (5.0 × 10−2 mbar, 30.0 mA, 100 s, three runs to vacuum limit 3.0 × 10−2 mbar argon, CCU-010, Safematic) Data acquisition was performed on a nanoESI Q-ToF II mass spectrometer (Waters/Micromass) modified for high mass experiments in positive ion mode. Samples were ionized with voltages at the capillary of 1450 V and at the cone of 150 V. Pressure of the in-source region was constantly at 10 mbar. Pressure in the collision cell was at 1.5 x 10-2 mbar argon. Quaternary structure of protein complexes was determined in MS/MS mode with acceleration voltage ranging between 50- 400 V across the collision cell. The quadrupole profile was 1,000 to 10,000 m/z throughout all experiments. Cesium iodide (25mg/ml) in aqueous solution was used to calibrate the instrument and the data.   The NP-RNA assembly experiment (Figure 6) was performed on a Q Exactive Ultra-High Mass Range (UHMR) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode with a mass range from 350 to 20.000 m/z and a nano ESI source. Following parameters were used: Capillary voltage was kept at 1.2 kV, source temperature at 50 °C, noise level parameter at 4.64, S-lens radio frequency level 200, in source CID at 5 eV, resolution at 6250 setting value, ion injection time of 100 ms. Nitrogen was used in the HCD cell with a trapping gas pressure of 5 setting value with ultra-high vacuum readout at around 2.5 x 10-10 mbar. HCD energy setting was at 100. Instrument detector parameters were set to low m/z. 10 microscans were summed into 1 scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MassLynx V4.1, (Waters) for QToF2 datasets or Xcalibur for UHMR datasets by combining spectra and exporting them into txt file format. Following evaluation regarding full width at half maximum (FWHM) was done with mMass (Martin Strohalm). Experimental mass, area under the curve (AUC) and visualization was evaluated with Unidec (Michael T. Marty). Kd determination was calculated after.

### Publication Abstract
Lassa virus is a negative-strand RNA virus with only four structural proteins that causes periodic outbreaks in West Africa. The nucleoprotein (NP) encapsidates the viral genome, forming ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) together with the viral RNA and the L protein. RNPs must be continuously restructured during viral genome replication and transcription. The Z protein is important for membrane recruitment of RNPs, viral particle assembly, and budding and has also been shown to interact with the L protein. However, the interaction of NP, viral RNA, and Z is poorly understood. Here, we characterize the interactions between Lassa virus NP, Z, and RNA using structural mass spectrometry. We identify the presence of RNA as the driver for the disassembly of ring-like NP trimers, a storage form, into monomers to subsequently form higher order RNA-bound NP assemblies. We locate the interaction site of Z and NP and demonstrate that while NP binds Z independently of the presence of RNA, this interaction is pH-dependent. These data improve our understanding of RNP assembly, recruitment, and release in Lassa virus.

### Keywords
Native ms, Lassa virus

### Affiliations
CSSB
Centre for Structural Systems Biology, Leibniz Institute of Virology (LIV), Faculty V: School of Life Sciences, University of Siegen, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY)

### Submitter
Lennart Sänger

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Centre for Structural Systems Biology, Leibniz Institute of Virology (LIV), Faculty V: School of Life Sciences, University of Siegen, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY)


