### Accession
PXD024033

### Title
Targets of kinase/phosphatase signalling pair StkP/PhpP in S. pneumoniae and their involvement in response to cell wall stress

### Description
Streptococcus pneumoniae is an opportunistic human pathogen which encodes a single eukaryotic-type Ser/Thr protein kinase StkP and its functional counterpart protein phosphatase PhpP. These signalling enzymes play a crucial role in the coordination of cell division and growth in pneumococcus. In this study, we determined the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of relevant mutants. A comparison with the wild type provided a representative data set of new phosphoacceptor sites and StkP-dependent substrates. StkP phosphorylates key proteins involved in cell division and cell wall biosynthesis in unencapsulated laboratory Rx1 strain as well as encapsulated virulent strain D39. Moreover, we show that StkP plays important role in eliciting an adaptive response induced by cell wall directed antibiotic. Phosphorylation of WalK sensor kinase and decline of the abundance of WalK and proteins of core WalR/K regulon implies cross-talk between StkP and WalR/K two-component system. Inspection of proteome profiles revealed gene clusters regulated by catabolite control mechanism suggesting a tight coupling of carbon flow and cell wall homeostasis. The disbalance of steady-state protein phosphorylation in the mutants as well as after antibiotic treatment is accompanied by accumulation of global Spx regulator indicating Spx-mediated envelope stress response. In summary, StkP translates the sensed signal about the cell-wall status to key cell division and regulatory proteins and in this way controls cell cycle and cell wall homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were resuspended in cold lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 0.3 U/µl benzonase (Merck), 1% Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (Sigma) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail Complete, EDTA-free (Roche). Cells were mechanically disintegrated using glass beads in a FastPrep homogenizer (ThermoScientific). Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Pierce). Bacterial lysates corresponding to 1 mg of protein material were subjected to chloroform-methanol extraction and precipitated proteins were dried on Speed-Vac. Precipitates were dissolved in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), diluted by 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reach 1% SDC concentration, and mixed with phosphatase inhibitors (cocktail II, Merck). Proteins were reduced by dithiotreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested by trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at 1:50 ratio (trypsin:proteins) overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted. Peptides were eluted by 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA and volumes corresponding to approx. 40 µg of peptides were transferred into new tubes and dried in Speed-Vac for proteome analysis. The rest of peptide material was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Eluates were first acidified by TFA solution containing glutamic acid as an excluder, followed by the addition of TiO2 particles (GL Sciences) into each sample and vortexing for 20 min at a room temperature. Beads were then washed sequentially by buffers with decreasing amount of TFA and phosphopeptides were eluted by ammonia solution (pH ≈ 11). Each sample was subjected to two identical cycles of the enrichment and TiO2-eluates from the same fraction were pooled, desalted, and dried in Speed-Vac. Phosphoproteome samples were analyzed by reversed-phase nano LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano connected to Q-Exactive Plus) employing DDA approach (Top12). MS spectra of 300-1700 m/z range were acquired at resolution of 70,000. Only multiply charged precursors ions with minimal AGC target of 6×10^3 counts and not fragmented during previous 20 s were admitted for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Tandem mass spectra were acquired with following settings; resolution at 35,000, AGC target value at 1×10^6, maximum ion injection time at 120 ms, and normalized collision energy set to 28. Proteome samples were acquired using MS range of 350–1600 m/z. Minimal AGC target for triggering MS/MS was 1.2×10^4 and resulting spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution. Each sample was analyzed twice (i.e. in technical duplicate).

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteome and proteome data sets were processed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.5.0. Data were searched against FASTA with protein sequences of Streptococcus pneumoniae strains D39 (UP000001452; June 9, 2020) or R6 (UP000000586; March 6, 2019) both downloaded from Uniprot with the latter containing also sequences of Sp294-expressed StkP and other potential polypeptides generated by mutagenesis.  MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of contaminants. Phosphosite identification was done using these MaxQuant parameters: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled); maximum of 2 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide z = 7; minimal length of peptide 7 amino acids, maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and acetylation (protein N-term), oxidation (M), and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to 5. Trypsin with no cleavage restriction was set as a protease. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm, taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was 0.01 with separate FDR filtering for each modification set to 0.01. MaxQuant parameters for processing of proteome data were identical except for only oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications. All hits identified in searches as contaminants were filtered out. Proteins were quantified using MaxLFQ function with at least 2 peptide ratios required for pair-wise comparisons of protein abundance between samples. Phosphoproteome data sets of D39 were also processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 2.3) connected to the Mascot (ver. 2.5.1). The search was performed against reference protein database of S. pneumoniae strain D39 (UP000001452; May 27, 2020) downloaded from Uniprot. Parameters for MASCOT search were as follows: trypsin as an enzyme with maximally 2 missed cleavage sites per peptide; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and phosphorylation (STY) were set as dynamic modifications. Localization of phosphosites was performed using ptmRS node implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 which was run in PhosphoRS mode using diagnostic fragment ions. Only proteins and peptides with high confidence (FDR 0.01) were considered for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae is an opportunistic human pathogen that encodes a single eukaryotic-type Ser/Thr protein kinase StkP and its functional counterpart, the protein phosphatase PhpP. These signaling enzymes play critical roles in coordinating cell division and growth in pneumococci. In this study, we determined the proteome and phosphoproteome profiles of relevant mutants. Comparison of those with the wild-type provided a representative dataset of novel phosphoacceptor sites and StkP-dependent substrates. StkP phosphorylates key proteins involved in cell division and cell wall biosynthesis in both the unencapsulated laboratory strain Rx1 and the encapsulated virulent strain D39. Furthermore, we show that StkP plays an important role in triggering an adaptive response induced by a cell wall-directed antibiotic. Phosphorylation of the sensor histidine kinase WalK and downregulation of proteins of the WalRK core regulon suggest crosstalk between StkP and the WalRK two-component system. Analysis of proteomic profiles led to the identification of gene clusters regulated by catabolite control mechanisms, indicating a tight coupling of carbon metabolism and cell wall homeostasis. The imbalance of steady-state protein phosphorylation in the mutants as well as after antibiotic treatment is accompanied by an accumulation of the global Spx regulator, indicating a Spx-mediated envelope stress response. In summary, StkP relays the perceived signal of cell wall status to key cell division and regulatory proteins, controlling the cell cycle and cell wall homeostasis.

### Keywords
Ampicillin treatment, Ser/thr protein kinase stkp, Phosphatase phpp, Phosphoproteome, Cell wall stress, Signalling, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i., Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Branny
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i., Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic


