### Accession
PXD020742

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS Proteomics of human skin and LabSkin model

### Description
We report for the first time label-free quantification of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (XME), transporters, redox enzymes, proteases and nucleases in six human skin explants and a 3D living skin equivalent model from LabSkin.  More than 2000 proteins were identified and quantified from total cellular protein. This systematic determination of functional equivalence between human skin and LabSkin is a key step towards the construction of a representative human in vitro skin model, which can be used as an alternative to current animal-based tests for chemical safety and for predicting dosage of topically administered drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Human skin tissues from one male and five female donors, were taken from “healthy” individuals undergoing routine abdominoplasty surgery. Approximately 3 g of human skin tissue and 1.5 g of LabSkin were washed twice. From the human tissues, the subcutaneous layer was removed and skin samples were cut into small pieces, washed and incubated overnight at 4 ºC with 10 mL lysis buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) incorporating enzymatic inhibitor. Samples were mechanically homogenised (Ultra Turrax T25); the homogenate was centrifuged at 9,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 ºC, and the supernatant was collected in a clean tube and clarified using DNAse. Protein content in the LabSkin and human skin samples was estimated by Bradford assay.  100 µg of each fraction was spiked with an internal standard protein mixture containing 17 pmol equine myoglobin, 12 pmol bovine cytochrome c and 3 pmol BSA. To each fraction containing the standards, sodium deoxycholate was added to achieve a final concentration of 10% (w/v). The mixture was mixed well and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used for digestion with trypsin.  Dried peptides samples were resuspended in 100 µL loading buffer [97% (v/v) HPLC water, 3% (v/v) HPLC acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid] and 1.0 µL of each sample was loaded in duplicate on an UltiMate® 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatograph (RSLC) (Dionex, Surrey, UK) coupled to an on-line Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were reversed-phase separated on a PepMap™ RSLC C18 column (2 µm particles, 100 Å, 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length) (Thermo Scientific, UK) preceded by a C18 PepMap100 µ-precolumn (5 µm, 100 Å, 5 µm inner diameter, 5 mm length) (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). A multi-step gradient was used from 4% to 40% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 minutes . The composition of buffer A was HPLC grade water containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Data were acquired in the positive ion mode in a datadependent manner alternating between survey MS and MS/MS scans. MS scans were performed over the range of 100−1500 m/z, at 60,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3×106 , and 100 ms maximal injection time. The top 18 precursor ions were sequentially selected for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 28% normalized collision energy and precursor isolation window of 1.2 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired at 30,000 resolution, AGC of 5×104 and 120 ms maximal injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using a customised database, which included human UniprotKB proteome (UP000005640), containing 71,790 sequences (Oct 2019), supplemented with forward and reverse sequences, in addition to 5 in-house QconCAT sequences (designed for the analysis of human enzymes and transporters) and 4 sequences of standard proteins (ALBU_BOVIN, MYG_HORSE, CYC_BOVIN and ADH1_YEAST).  Mass tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ions. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed for trypsin/P digestion. Peptide false discovery rate was set as 1% and peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acid length were considered. Evidence data files were used for targeted and global proteomic data analysis.  After initial processing the MaxQuant data were stripped of protein identifiers and rebuilt.  A global razor was constructed by assigning any non-unique peptides to as many proteins for which unique peptides could be detected.  This was done on a dataset by dataset basis, so that if a unique peptide was detected in one or more samples in any dataset, non-unique peptides could be used as a basis for quantification in the other samples.  The razor involves first ranking proteins by number of detected peptides and then by order in “Human Proteome CAPKR10”.  This bespoke database (21234 sequences) was constructed from the reduced (one sequence, one protein) Uniprot Human Protein fasta file, available at with additional proteins (from the full Uniprot database used by MaxQuant) added when they are detected in our samples.  Finally, this database is organized so that intact proteins are favoured over fragments and cDNA-derived proteins, and long primary sequences are favoured over short sequences.  This database contains a small number of single nucleotide polymorphic variants of the ABC transporters ABCB3 and ABCC6.

### Publication Abstract
ABC transporters (ATP-binding cassette transporter) traffic drugs and their metabolites across membranes, making ABC transporter expression levels a key factor regulating local drug concentrations in different tissues and individuals. Yet, quantification of ABC transporters remains challenging because they are large and low-abundance transmembrane proteins. Here, we analysed 200 samples of crude and membrane-enriched fractions from human liver, kidney, intestine, brain microvessels and skin, by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 32 (out of 48) ABC transporters: ABCD3 was the most abundant in liver, whereas ABCA8, ABCB2/TAP1 and ABCE1 were detected in all tissues. Interestingly, this atlas unveiled that ABCB2/TAP1 may have TAP2-independent functions in the brain and that biliary atresia (BA) and control livers have quite different ABC transporter profiles. We propose that meaningful biological information can be derived from a direct comparison of these data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Labskin, Lc-ms/ms, Skin

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester.

### Submitter
Jill Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester.


