### Accession
PXD003311

### Title
CodY regulates the activity of the virulence quorum sensor PlcR

### Description
In Gram-positive bacteria, cell-cell communication mainly relies on cytoplasmic sensors of the RNPP family. Activity of these regulators depends on their binding to secreted signaling peptides that are imported into the cell. These quorum sensing regulators control important biological functions in bacteria of the Bacillus cereus group, such as virulence and necrotrophism. The RNPP quorum sensor PlcR, in complex with its cognate signaling peptide PapR, is the main regulator of virulence in B. cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Recent reports have shown that the global stationary phase regulator CodY, involved in adaptation to nutritional limitation, is required for the expression of virulence genes belonging to the PlcR regulon. However, the mechanism underlying this regulation was not described. Using genetics and proteomics approaches, we showed that CodY regulates the expression of the virulence genes through the import of PapR. We report that CodY positively controls the production of the proteins that compose the oligopeptide permease OppABCDF, and of several other Opp-like proteins. It was previously shown that the pore components of this oligopeptide permease, OppBCDF, were required for the import of PapR. However, the role of OppA, the substrate-binding protein (SBP), was not investigated. Here, we demonstrated that OppA is not the only SBP involved in the recognition of PapR, and that several other OppA-like proteins can allow the import of this peptide. Altogether, these data complete our model of quorum sensing during the lifecycle of Bt and indicate that RNPPs integrate environmental conditions, as well as cell density, to coordinate the behavior of the bacteria throughout growth.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane-enriched fraction preparation — Bt 407 - and Bt ∆codY cells were grown at 37°C in LB and samples were collected by centrifugation 1h before (t-1), at (t0) and 1h after (t1) the transition from exponential to stationary phase (100mL, 50mL and 50mL, respectively). The pellets were washed once with PBS and stored at -20°C until further processing. The pellets were thawed, resuspended in lysis buffer (KPO 4 pH6.6 100 mM, lysozyme 100 μg/mL, anti-protease cocktail (Roche) 1x) at an OD 600 =35 and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. The suspensions were sonicated on ice and sonication efficiency was verified by microscopic observation. A nuclease cocktail (DNAseI 10 μg/mL, RNaseA 10 μg/mL, MgCl 2 1 mM, CaCl 2 1 mM was added to the samples that were then incubated on ice for 1h. The suspensions were centrifuged at 5000g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was then further centrifuged at 100000g for 1h at 4°C. The pellets were then resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer (Sigma) and kept at 4°C overnight until completely solubilized before protein concentration was measured using the 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare). This experiment was repeated 3 times and 10μg of proteins from each sample were then loaded on 12% SDS- polyacrylamide gels poured together form the same master mix. A short migration was then performed. Protein In-Gel Digestion — Each lane of short migration was cut and washed for 15 min with an acetonitrile / 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate mixture (1:1). Digestion was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the quantity of modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) was 0.1 μg per sample. Digestion was achieved for 6 h at 37°C. The supernatant was conserved. Peptides were extracted by 5% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (v/v). Supernatant and extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 50 μl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Nano Liquid Chromatography Coupled to Mass Spectrometry in Tandem — A Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Eksigent 2Dnano LC were used for the nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. 4 µl of sample were injected on the nanoLc-Ultra system (Eksigent) chain. The peptide separation was achieved with a total gradient of 97 minutes. Eluted peptides were analyzed on-line with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) using a nanoelectrospray interface.

### Data Protocol
The Bacillus thuringiensis  Bt407 database was downloaded from Uniprot KB database site (www.uniprot.org, december 2014, 6858 protein entries). This database was merged and in conjunction with reverse and contaminant databases, were searched by X!Tandem (Sledge Hammer version 2013.09.01.1, http://www.thegpm.org/tandem/) using X!TandemPipeline (version 3.3.4) developed by PAPPSO platform (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/).  To take redundancy into account, proteins with at least one peptide in common were grouped. This allowed to group proteins of similar function. Within each group, proteins with at least one specific peptide relatively to other members of the group were reported as sub-groups.  Label free quantification of proteins was achieved in Spectral counting which is a strategy to determine a relative quantification of protein from their number of spectra obtained with tryptic peptides in mass spectrometry. This quantification is based on the fact that the more of a particular protein is present in a sample, the more MS spectra are detected for peptides of that protein.

### Publication Abstract
In Gram-positive bacteria, cell-cell communication mainly relies on cytoplasmic sensors of the RNPP family. Activity of these regulators depends on their binding to secreted signaling peptides that are imported into the cell. These quorum sensing regulators control important biological functions in bacteria of the Bacillus cereus group, such as virulence and necrotrophism. The RNPP quorum sensor PlcR, in complex with its cognate signaling peptide PapR, is the main regulator of virulence in B. cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Recent reports have shown that the global stationary phase regulator CodY, involved in adaptation to nutritional limitation, is required for the expression of virulence genes belonging to the PlcR regulon. However, the mechanism underlying this regulation was not described. Using genetics and proteomics approaches, we showed that CodY regulates the expression of the virulence genes through the import of PapR. We report that CodY positively controls the production of the proteins that compose the oligopeptide permease OppABCDF, and of several other Opp-like proteins. It was previously shown that the pore components of this oligopeptide permease, OppBCDF, were required for the import of PapR. However, the role of OppA, the substrate-binding protein (SBP), was not investigated. Here, we demonstrated that OppA is not the only SBP involved in the recognition of PapR, and that several other OppA-like proteins can allow the import of this peptide. Altogether, these data complete our model of quorum sensing during the lifecycle of Bt and indicate that RNPPs integrate environmental conditions, as well as cell density, to coordinate the behavior of the bacteria throughout growth.

### Keywords
Cody, Quorum-sensing, Bacillus, Regulation, Signaling peptide, Virulence regulon, Shot gun, Mass spectrometry, Opp, Plcr

### Affiliations
INRA
INRA, UMR1319,MICALIS

### Submitter
HENRY CELINE

### Lab Head
Dr Celine Henry
INRA, UMR1319,MICALIS


