### Accession
PXD010426

### Title
Low pH-responsive proteins revealed by a 2-DE based MS approach and related physiological responses in Citrus leaves

### Description
After long-term low pH treatment, 2D electrophoresis and mass spectrum were conducted to investigate different proteiomic profile in Citrus sinensis and Citrus grandis leaves samples.

### Sample Protocol
Before MS/MS analysis, the protein pellet was redissolved in 0.8 μL matrix solution [5 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid diluted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 50% (v/v) acetonitrile]. Then the mixture was spotted onto a MALDI target plate (AB SCIEX). MS analysis of peptide was performed on an AB SCIEX 5800 TOF/TOF. The UV laser was operated at a 400 Hz repetition rate with wavelength of 355 nm. The accelerated voltage was operated at 20 kV, and mass resolution was maximized at 1600 Da. Myoglobin digested with trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument with internal calibration mode.

### Data Protocol
All acquired spectra of samples were processed using TOF/TOF ExplorerTM Software (AB SCIEX) in a default mode. The data were searched by GPS Explorer (Version 3.6) with the search engine MASCOT (Version 2.3, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA). The search parameters were as follow: viridiplantae database (1850050 sequences; 642453415 residues), trypsin digest with one missing cleavage, MS tolerance was set at 100 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Protein with scores greater than 70 were considered statistically significant (P < 0.05) and accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrus grandis, Leaves, Citrus sinensis, Proteomics, Low ph, 2-de

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lintong Yang
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


