### Accession
PXD037158

### Title
O-fucosylation of Thrombospondin Type I Repeats on Thrombospondin 1 is dispensable for trafficking to Platelets

### Description
Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) is a secreted extracellular matrix glycoprotein that regulates a variety of cellular and physiological processes. THBS1’s diverse functions are attributed to interactions between the modular domains of THBS1 with an array of proteins found in the extracellular matrix. THBS1’s three Thrombospondin Type 1 Repeats (TSRs) domains are modified with O-linked glucose-fucose disaccharide and C-mannose. It is unknown whether these modifications impact trafficking and/or function of THBS1 in vivo. The O-fucose is added by Protein O-fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2) and is sequentially extended to the disaccharide by β3glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT). The C-mannose is added by one or more of four C-mannosyltransferases. O-fucosylation by POFUT2/B3GLCT in the endoplasmic reticulum has been proposed to play a role in quality control by locking TSR domains into their 3-dimensional fold, allowing for proper secretion of many O-fucosylated substrates. Prior studies showed the siRNA knockdown of POFUT2 in HEK293T cells blocked secretion of TSRs 1-3 from THBS1. Here we demonstrated that secretion of THBS1 TSRs 1-3 was not reduced by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of POFUT2 in HEK293T cells and demonstrated that knockout of Pofut2 or B3glct in mice did not reduce trafficking of endogenous THBS1 to platelet secretory granules, a major site of THBS1 expression. Additionally, we demonstrated that all three TSRs from platelet THBS1 were highly C-mannosylated, which has been shown to stabilize TSRs in vitro. Combined these results suggested that POFUT2 substrates with TSRs that are also modified by C-mannose may be less susceptible to trafficking defects resulting from loss of the glucose-fucose disaccharide.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets from all genotypes were isolated as described above and lysed in RIPA buffer containing a 1 X EDTA-free PIC tablet (Roche, Cat # 1187358001) by sonicating for 2 one-second pulses, rotated at 4°C for 20 minutes and clarified by centrifugation for 10 minutes, max speed at 4°C. Quantification of lysates was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Cat # 23227). Roughly 10 μg of protein from each sample was denatured and reduced for 5 minutes at 50°C in a buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 mM of TCEP, then alkylated using 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 500 ng of chymotrypsin (Thermo Fisher, Cat # 90056) or 250 ng of chymotrypsin plus 250 ng of trypsin (Thermo Fisher, Cat # 90058) or 250 ng of chymotrypsin plus 250 ng of Glu-C (Sigma Aldrich, Cat # P2922-100UN) for 4 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, samples were then acidified with 5% formic acid, sonicated for 20 minutes, then desalted with a C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Cat # ZTC18S960). Samples were then injected onto a Q-Exactive mass spec equipped with a nanoLC with the same parameters as described previously (Neupane, S., Berardinelli, S.J., et al. 2022) but using a 90-minute linear gradient instead.

### Data Protocol
Detection and quantification of all O-fucose and C-mannose peptides was performed as previously described (Neupane, S., Berardinelli, S.J., et al. 2022) using a whole mouse database (Uniprot Proteome Identifier: UP000000589). Lists of all proteins found and THBS1 PSMs and scan numbers for representative EICs in Figures 5A-5C, S2D, S3E and S4E from each .raw file can be found in Supplementary Tables S1-S20. Detection of the THBS1 N-glycan peptide glycoforms was performed using Byonic software version 2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) as a node in Proteome Discover version 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher) and was searched against an in-house generated database containing all THBS1 isoforms found in the whole mouse database (Uniprot Proteome Identifier: UP000000589). Spectra generated in Byonic was used for each N-glycan glycoform for Figures S5A-S5E to observe sugar ions that Proteome Discoverer does not detect. Quantitation for each N-glycan glycoform detected was performed by generating Extracted Ion Chromatograms using Xcalibur Qual Browser software version 2.0.3.2 (Thermo Fisher) and taking area under the curve. Lists of all proteins found and THBS1 PSMs and scan numbers for representative EICs in Figures S5F from each .raw file can be found in Tables S1-S18. For the comparison of THBS1 to von Willebrand factor, raw files were processed through Proteome Discoverer version 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher) to identify and quantify peptides. Default processing and consensus workflows provided by Proteome Discover were used for precursor ion quantitation. To determine protein abundances, the TopN approach was used in which the top 5 most abundant peaks/peptides from each protein were averaged and used for quantitation of each protein. Filters were set to a 1% false discovery rate and minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids and samples were searched against a whole mouse database (Uniprot Proteome Identifier: UP000000589). The generated data was exported to an Excel file by Proteome Discoverer in which the total protein abundance for each sample was calculated by summarizing all protein abundances and can be found in Tables S19-S20. Samples were then normalized to the sample with the highest protein abundance which was then used to determine average abundance for all proteins. Fold changes between THBS1 and von Willebrand factor in each genotype were then calculated by dividing knockout average of THBS1 by the control/wild type average of von Willebrand factor. Statistical significance was determined by performing a two-tailed t-test. Supplementary Table S1 contains a list of the Supplementary Tables used to generate data in all figures.

### Publication Abstract
Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) is a secreted extracellular matrix glycoprotein that regulates a variety of cellular and physiological processes. THBS1's diverse functions are attributed to interactions between the modular domains of THBS1 with an array of proteins found in the extracellular matrix. THBS1's three Thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSRs) are modified with O-linked glucose-fucose disaccharide and C-mannose. It is unknown whether these modifications impact trafficking and/or function of THBS1 in vivo. The O-fucose is added by Protein O-fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2) and is sequentially extended to the disaccharide by &#x3b2;3glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT). The C-mannose is added by one or more of four C-mannosyltransferases. O-fucosylation by POFUT2/B3GLCT in the endoplasmic reticulum has been proposed to play a role in quality control by locking TSR domains into their three-dimensional fold, allowing for proper secretion of many O-fucosylated substrates. Prior studies showed the siRNA knockdown of POFUT2 in HEK293T cells blocked secretion of TSRs 1-3 from THBS1. Here we demonstrated that secretion of THBS1 TSRs 1-3 was not reduced by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of POFUT2 in HEK293T cells and demonstrated that knockout of Pofut2 or B3glct in mice did not reduce the trafficking of endogenous THBS1 to secretory granules of platelets, a major source of THBS1. Additionally, we demonstrated that all three TSRs from platelet THBS1 were highly C-mannosylated, which has been shown to stabilize TSRs in vitro. Combined, these results suggested that POFUT2 substrates with TSRs that are also modified by C-mannose may be less susceptible to trafficking defects resulting from the loss of the glucose-fucose disaccharide.

### Keywords
Pofut2/o-fucosylation/c-mannosylation/thrombospondin 1/protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States of American
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Steven Berardinelli

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S. Haltiwanger
Associate Professor, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States of American


