### Accession
PXD017025

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic characterization reveals subclass-specific molecular aberrations within triple-negative breast cancer

### Description
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is regarded as the most aggressive subtype of breast cancer lacking targeted therapies. This is attributed to its high heterogeneity that complicates elucidation of its molecular aberrations. Here, we report identification of specific proteome expression profiles pertaining to two TNBC subclasses, basal A and basal B, through in-depth proteomics analysis of breast cancer cells. We observed that kinases and proteases displayed unique expression patterns within the subclasses, similar to whole proteome clusters. Systematic analyses of protein-protein interaction and co-regulation networks of these kinases and proteases unraveled dysregulated pathways and plausible targets for each TNBC subclass. Among these, we identified kinases AXL, PEAK1 and TGFBR2, and proteases FAP, UCHL1 and MMP2/14, as specific targets for basal B subclass, which represents the more aggressive TNBC cell lines. Our study thus highlights intricate mechanisms and distinct targets within TNBC, and emphasizes that these have to be exploited in a subclass-specific manner rather than a one-for-all TNBC therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and sample preparation for mass spectrometry:
For harvesting, cell lines were grown to 90-100% confluency and rinsed with cold PBS before removal from cell culture dish by trypsinizing. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 7 minutes at 4 °C followed by washing with cold PBS and re-pelleting. Subsequently cell pellets were snap-frozen on dry-ice and stored at -80 °C. Cells were lysed by addition of approximately 3x pellet volume lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and repeated passing of the suspension through a 1 ml pipette tip. Undissolved debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 20 minutes, and the supernatant was transferred to a new low-bind tube followed by addition of 1 µl benzonase and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature, before protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent as per manufacturer’s instructions. For pooled sample control, equal protein amounts from each cell lysate were combined and used for all replicates. 150 µg of proteins per sample were subsequently reduced by addition of 100 mM dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 minutes. The reduced samples were subjected to alkylation by addition of 100 mM iodacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated further for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were then digested by addition of LysC (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako) in a protein:enzyme ratio of 1:100 and overnight incubation at 37 °C. Subsequently, urea concentration in the samples was reduced to 1 M by addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate before protein digestion using Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio for 8 hours at 37 °C. After digestion, the samples were desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction and peptide concentration was determined using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific) followed by drying under vacuum.

TMT10plex labeling:
The TMT10plex Label reagents (Thermo Scientific) were first equilibrated to room temperature and suspended using 41 µl anhydrous acetonitrile. 100 µg of digested dried peptides were re-suspended in 40 µl of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before being added to the appropriate TMT label reagent in random order. After gentle mixing of the TMT label and sample, the labeling reaction was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by addition of 8 µl quenching reagent (5% Hydroxylamine in 100 mM TEAB) for 15 minutes to quench the reaction. Subsequently labeled samples were combined, briefly vortexed, and split into two equal parts for fractionation using IEF and bRP-LC. Samples were stored at -80 °C until further use.

Sample fractionation by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRP-LC):
Peptide sample volume was reduced to 20 µl under vacuum followed by resuspension in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 to final volume of 110 µl. The sample was then fractionated using a 3.0x150mm XBridge C18 3.5 µm column on a Shimadzu Nexera XR HPLC system with fraction collector. Fractionation was accomplished by applying a 45 minute gradient from 4 to 72% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 with a flowrate of 0.5 ml/min. A total of 48 fractions were consecutively combined into 15, followed by freeze-drying under vacuum prior to MS analysis.

Sample fractionation by off-gel isoelectric focussing (IEF):
Peptide samples were fractionated using Immobiline Drystrip pH 3-10 NL, 24 cm on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent, G3100AA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. 24 fractions were collected and desalted using self-packed C18 stage tips, followed by freeze-drying under vacuum prior to MS analysis.

Liquid Chromatography – Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS):
Dried samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, followed by loading of 2 µg total peptides per fraction onto a trap column of C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 of 5µm, 100 Å, 100 µm I.D. x 2 cm and an analytical column of PepMap RSLC C18, 2um, 100 Å, 75µm I.D. x 50 cm using Thermo Easy nLC 1000. The LC solvent A comprised of 0.1 M formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and LC solvent B comprised of 0.1 M formic acid in 95% acetonitrile. Tryptic peptides were separated using a 3 hour gradient from 8–38% solvent B with a flowrate of 200 nl/min and subsequently analyzed using Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer operating in positive ion mode. MS data was recorded in data-dependent acquisition mode, for acquiring full scan MS spectra (m/z 310 – 1510) with a resolution of R=120,000 at an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Data dependent mode is set to cycle time for 3 seconds. Each MS2 scan were sequentially isolated to an AGC target value of 1e5 with resolution of 60,000 and maximum injection time of 105 ms and fragmented using HCD collision energy of 34% at MS2 level with fixed first mass at 120 and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identification and quantification Mass spectrometry raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and proteins were identified using the integrated Sequest HT search engine. Search was performed against human database (2019-06) for fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were stated as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation at cysteines and TMT-modifications at any peptide N-terminus and lysine were included as static modifications in the search parameters. Threshold for peptide and protein validation was set to 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR). Quantification was based on MS2 TMT reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50 and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10. Protein abundance was normalized to equal total protein for each TMT-channel.  Proteome expression data analysis A pooled sample from all cell lysates was labeled with the 126 TMT-reporter within each TMT10plex set. To normalize for batch variation between TMT sets, median protein abundance of all 126-channels was calculated and subsequently protein abundance of each TMT set was multiplied by a corresponding correction factor, followed by log2-ratio calculation to median pooled protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive subtype of breast cancer lacking targeted therapies. This is attributed to its high heterogeneity that complicates elucidation of its molecular aberrations. Here, we report identification of specific proteome expression profiles pertaining to two TNBC subclasses, basal A and basal B, through in-depth proteomics analysis of breast cancer cells. We observed that kinases and proteases displayed unique expression patterns within the subclasses. Systematic analyses of protein-protein interaction and co-regulation networks of these kinases and proteases unraveled dysregulated pathways and plausible targets for each TNBC subclass. Among these, we identified kinases AXL, PEAK1, and TGFBR2 and proteases FAP, UCHL1, and MMP2/14 as specific targets for basal B subclass, which represents the more aggressive TNBC cell lines. Our study highlights intricate mechanisms and distinct targets within TNBC and emphasizes that these have to be exploited in a subclass-specific manner rather than a one-for-all TNBC therapy.

### Keywords
Protease, Kinase, Proteomics, Triple-negative, Breast cancer, Tnbc, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IMCB
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673

### Submitter
Asfa Alli Shaik

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673


