### Accession
PXD027343

### Title
AKIRIN2 controls the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates

### Description
AKIRIN2 regulates the import of proteasomes into the nucleus. To analyze AKIRIN2-containing proteasome complexes, we performed co-immunoprecipitation of GST-tagged AKIRIN2, followed by sucrose gradient centrifugation and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis of GST-AKIRIN2 protein complexes, 2.5 nmol purified recombinant GST-AKIRIN2 bait protein was incubated with 7 mL cytoplasmatic HeLa cell extract supplemented with 0.1 mg/mL BSA, 4 mM ATP, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM Phenylmethyl-sulfonylfluorid (PMSF) and cleared of cellular aggregates by centrifugation at 39,000 × g for 30 min at 4 ˚C using a Sorvall LYNX 6000 centrifuge (Thermo Fisher). MagneGST™ Glutathione Particles (Promega) were preincubated for 30 min with 2 mg/mL BSA in buffer A (25 mM BisTris pH 6.5, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 4 mM ATP). 200 µL of bead slurry was added to each replicate and incubated overnight at 4 ˚C on a rotating shaker. Beads were washed 5x with 2 mL wash buffer. Proteins were eluted twice for 30 min at 4 ˚C with 300 µL of buffer A supplemented with 25 mM GSH, 50 mM NaCl, 0.02% NP-40 and both elution samples were combined. 200 µL eluate were loaded on a 10-30% (w/v) sucrose density gradient prepared in buffer A. Gradients were run in an Optima XE-90 ultracentrifuge with a SW60Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) for 16 h at 121,300 × g at 4 °C, manually fractionated into 200 µL fractions and examined via SDS-PAGE. Individual fractions were precipitated with 80% acetone, resuspended in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 and reduced with 10 mM DTT at 95°C for 10 min. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min at RT protected from light, before quenching with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at RT and digest with 400 ng trypsin at 37 °C overnight. The digest was acidified by addition of TFA acid to 1% and a similar aliquot of each sample was supplemented with 10 fmol Pierce Retention Time Calibration peptide standard (PRTC, ThermoScientific) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The eluted peptides were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (all parts Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min and a linear 1 hour gradient ramping from 2 to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, ,was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 380-1200, resolution 60,000, target value 1x106), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 28, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 30.000, a target value of 1x105, intensity threshold of 1x104 and maximum injection time 105 ms. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (including charge state 2-5) were excluded for 30 s. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (v2.5.0.402, Thermo Scientific) and the created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda (v2.0.0.16129) against the Uniprot-reference-proteome database, taxonomy Homo sapiens (20,545 sequences; 11,396,349 residues), supplemented with common contaminants and PRTC peptide sequences, with mass tolerance ±10 ppm and number of missed trypsin cleavages ≤ 2. Results were filtered with 1 % FDR cutoff to generate a sub-database that was searched setting carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed and oxidation of Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr, deamidation on Asn and Gln, 13C6 15N4 SILAC label on arginine and 13C6 15N2 SILAC label on lysine as variable modifications. Peptide areas and proteins were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant. Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides via intensity-based absolute quantification and normalized to the sum of PRTC standard peptide areas.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Akirin2, Protein degradation, Nuclear import, Crispr/cas9 screen, Proteasome

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna  Austria Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Zuber
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna  Austria Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria


