### Accession
PXD020403

### Title
Mitochondrial defects contribute to impaired translational in SMA motor neurons

### Description
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disease, characterized by loss of lower alpha motoneurons, which leads to proximal muscle weakness. SMA is caused by reduced levels of Survival of Motor Neuron protein due to biallelic deletions or mutations in the SMN1 gene. Dysfunctional mitochondria can harm cells by decreased ATP production, but also by increased oxidative stress due to elevated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, whole proteome analysis was performed using the Taiwanese SMA mouse model on an FVB/N background to identify changes in the proteome related to oxidative stress. Therefore, primary WT and SMA motoneurons were treated with a known anti-oxidant N-Acetylcysteine, the ROS inducer menadione and the cell culture supplement sodium pyruvate. Furthermore, this study aims to investigate changes in mRNA translation initiation affected by oxidative stress in SMA.

### Sample Protocol
Primary motoneurons (MN) were isolated from E13.5 wild-type (WT) FVB/N mice and SMA mice. Four biological replicates of WT MNs and three biological replicates of SMA MNs were used. After 10 days in vitro, cells were treated for 1 h with 50 mM pyruvate, 10 µM NAC or 100 µM menadione lysed in RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and further processed for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Proteins were precipitated using ice-cold acetone. Pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor. This was followed by an in-solution reduction using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature (RT), an alkylation using 40 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min in the dark and digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C for 4 hours at RT. Samples were diluted with 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB) to a final concentration of Urea ≤ 2 M following digestion with trypsin over night at RT. To stop enzymatic digestion, samples were acidified with 1% formic acid. Acidified samples were purified using styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) Stage Tips. All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 91.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 17.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. DDA library runs were acquired from distinct pools of the sample groups. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.0 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s. For the acquisition of the samples the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode. For MS1 and MSMS scans the maximum IT was restricted to 60 ms and the AGC target was set to 1e6 charges. The MS1 scan was acquired from 400-1220 m/z at a resolution of 35,000. MSMS scans were acquired in in DIA mode using 25 x 24 m/z windows covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1000 at a resolution of 17,500.  The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 3. Stepped normalized collision energy was set to 27%. The MSMS spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed with assay specific hybrid library using default settings in Spectronaut 13. The library was generated by searching a mus musculus fasta library (UP000000589, 50331 entries from Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) with DDA library runs plus all DIA sample runs using PulsarX and direct DIA. Normalized log2 intensities were exported for protein identifications with q-values below 0.01. Perseus was used for subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disease characterized by loss of lower motor neurons, which leads to proximal muscle weakness and atrophy. SMA is caused by reduced survival motor neuron (SMN) protein levels due to biallelic deletions or mutations in the SMN1 gene. When SMN levels fall under a certain threshold, a plethora of cellular pathways are disturbed, including RNA processing, protein synthesis, metabolic defects, and mitochondrial function. Dysfunctional mitochondria can harm cells by decreased ATP production and increased oxidative stress due to elevated cellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Since neurons mainly produce energy via mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, restoring metabolic/oxidative homeostasis might rescue SMA pathology. Here, we report, based on proteome analysis, that SMA motor neurons show disturbed energy homeostasis due to dysfunction of mitochondrial complex I. This results in a lower basal ATP concentration and higher ROS production that causes an increase of protein carbonylation and impaired protein synthesis in SMA motor neurons. Counteracting these cellular impairments with pyruvate reduces elevated ROS levels, increases ATP and SMN protein levels in SMA motor neurons. Furthermore, we found that pyruvate-mediated SMN protein synthesis is mTOR-dependent. Most importantly, we showed that ROS regulates protein synthesis at the translational initiation step, which is impaired in SMA. As many neuropathies share pathological phenotypes such as dysfunctional mitochondria, excessive ROS, and impaired protein synthesis, our findings suggest new molecular interactions among these pathways. Additionally, counteracting these impairments by reducing ROS and increasing ATP might be beneficial for motor neuron survival in SMA patients.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Mitochondria, Smn, Initiation of mrna translation, Spinal muscular atrophy

### Affiliations
Institute of human genetics, University of cologne
Institute of human genetics, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Maximilian Paul Thelen

### Lab Head
Dr Min Jeong Kye
Institute of human genetics, University of cologne


