### Accession
PXD038901

### Title
Specific post-translational modifications of the soluble tau protein distinguish between Alzheimer’s disease, 4R-, and 3R-tauopathies

### Description
The tau protein aggregates in several neurodegenerative disorders, referred to as tauopathies. The type of tau isoforms (4R/3R) observed in brain aggregates is used to classify tauopathies. However, distinguishing tauopathies in cerebrospinal fluid remains challenging. Here, we demonstrated that the difference in tau isoforms between tauopathies is only observed in aggregates, not in soluble brain extracts. We therefore used untargeted mass spectrometry to characterize all post-translational modifications of both the aggregated and the soluble tau protein obtained from human brain tissue of patients with Alzheimer’s disease, cortico-basal degeneration, Pick’s disease, and fronto-temporal lobe degeneration. We found specific soluble signatures predictive of each tauopathy and its peculiar type of aggregated tau isoforms. These findings provide potential targets for developing cerebrospinal fluid assays able to distinguish between tauopathies in vivo. The comparison between soluble and aggregated tau features indicates potential mechanisms of tau aggregation, providing novel therapeutic leads for these diseases

### Sample Protocol
Insoluble and soluble Tau proteins were extracted from post mortem brain tissue samples and fractionated as previously described.The Sarkosyl-soluble protein fractions (“S”) were transferred to clean tubes and the pellet (Sarkosyl-insoluble proteins fraction, “P”) was dislodged/washed twice in low salt buffer, gently dried and solubilized by incubation in urea buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 8M urea) for 30 min at 20°C followed by brief (1 s) sonication at 20% amplitude. For all samples, protein concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Thermo Scientific™, #23225). “S” fractions typically contained about 10 µg/µl of protein while “P” fractions contained about 4 µg/µl of protein. For each sample, soluble tau proteins were enriched from the “S” fractions by immunoprecipitation (IP). Post-IP FA eluate (100 µl) were vacuum dried and resuspended in 50µl buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) for digestion with 2ng/µl of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, #V511A) at 37°C for 16h. Digests were vacuum dried and resuspended in MS injection (3.5% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and 1µl of mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analyses. No enrichment step was performed on the insoluble protein fractions, since less than ten different proteins were shown to become insoluble in brains with tauopathies. Solubilized aggregates (P) were dilute 8-fold in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 to decrease the urea concentration to 1M final.  Proteins (4 µg) were digested by incubation with sequencing grade trypsin at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 at 37°C for 16h. The samples were vacuum-dried and resuspended in MS injection buffer (see above) and the peptide concentration was measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the same chromatographic set up and MS configuration described above. Peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Ions were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60.000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 seconds for ions above a threshold ion count of 5.0E3 in the MS survey scan with 60.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50ms. MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E5 ions and a maximum injection time set to dynamic. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) on a human protein database obtained from Uniprot. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966Da,) ubiquitination of lysine (+ 114.042), acetylation and methylation on lysine (+42.016 Da and + 14.015 Da respectively) were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using the program Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%. For abundance comparison, abundance ratios were calculated by Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of the precursor intensities within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1. Modified (phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation, and methylation) peptide abundances corresponded to their respective extracted ion chromatogram. Pairwise group comparisons were performed for each PTM by unpaired Wilcoxon’s tests (P < 0,05). For each PTM, multiple group comparisons were performed via Kruskal-Wallis test (P < 0,05) and a false discovery rate (FDR) with a threshold specified at 0.01. For the soluble fractions, as the abundances of total-peptides and tau-peptides were constant across all samples (Extended Data Fig. s3a), no normalization was applied. Despite constant amounts of total-peptides across all insoluble fractions, amounts of tau-peptides were variable. Insoluble sample peptide abundance values were thus normalized to the tau R-domain.

### Publication Abstract
Tau protein aggregates in several neurodegenerative disorders, referred to as tauopathies. The tau isoforms observed in post mortem human brain aggregates is used to classify tauopathies. However, distinguishing tauopathies ante mortem remains challenging, potentially due to differences between insoluble tau in aggregates and soluble tau in body fluids. Here, we demonstrated that tau isoforms differ between tauopathies in insoluble aggregates, but not in soluble brain extracts. We therefore characterized post-translational modifications of both the aggregated and the soluble tau protein obtained from post mortem human brain tissue of patients with Alzheimer's disease, cortico-basal degeneration, Pick's disease, and frontotemporal lobe degeneration. We found specific soluble signatures for each tauopathy and its specific aggregated tau isoforms: including ubiquitination on Lysine 369 for cortico-basal degeneration and acetylation on Lysine 311 for Pick's disease. These findings provide potential targets for future development of fluid-based biomarker assays able to distinguish tauopathies in vivo.

### Keywords
Tauopathies, Brain, Post-translational modifications, Humain, Tau

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Université Catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain) and Institute of Neuroscience (IONS), 1200 Brussels, Belgium Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Neurology Department, 1200 Brussels, Belgium Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Radiology, Gordon Center for Medical Imaging, Boston, MA, USA.

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard J. Hanseeuw
Université Catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain) and Institute of Neuroscience (IONS), 1200 Brussels, Belgium Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Neurology Department, 1200 Brussels, Belgium Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Radiology, Gordon Center for Medical Imaging, Boston, MA, USA.


