### Accession
PXD009265

### Title
Combining high resolution and exact calibration to boost statistical power: A well-calibrated score function for high-resolution MS2

### Description
This project reanalzyes data from 4 other projects. Information about the samples can be found in the following four publications. The four samples used in this study include a ocean metaproteome sample, a human sample, a E. coli sample, and a Plamodium falciparum sample.   B. N. Pease, E. L. Huttlin, M. P. Jedrychowski, E. Talevich, J. Harmon, T. Dillman, N. Kannan, C. Doerig, R. Chakrabarti, S. P. Gygi, and D. Chakrabarti. Global analysis of protein expression and phosphorylation of three stages of Plasmodium falciparum intraerythrocytic development. Journal of Proteome Research, 12:4028–4045, 2013.  Damon H. May, Emma Timmins-Schiffman, Molly P. Mikan, H. Rodger Harvey, Elhanan Borenstein, Brook L. Nunn, and William S. Noble. An alignment-free metapeptide strategy for metaproteomic characterization of microbiome samples using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Journal of Proteome Research, 15(8):2697–2705, 2016. PMID: 27396978.  M. Kim, S. M. Pinto, D. Getnet, R. S. Nirujogi, S. S. Manda, R. Chaerkady, A. K. Madugundu, D. S. Kelkar, R. Isserlin, S. Jain, et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature, 509(7502):575–581, 2014.  Hansjrg G ̋tzke, Claudio Muheim, A.F. Maarten Altelaar, Albert J.R. Heck, Gianluca Maddalo, and Daniel O. Daley. Identification of putative substrates for the periplasmic chaperone yfgm in Escherichia coli using quantitative proteomics. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 14(1):216–226, 2015.

### Sample Protocol
Please see project description for the references of the publications from which data came from.

### Data Protocol
We have created a new score function that takes advantage of both high-resolution MS2 data and statisical calibration. Details of the method can be found in the publication.

### Publication Abstract
To achieve accurate assignment of peptide sequences to observed fragmentation spectra, a shotgun proteomics database search tool must make good use of the very high-resolution information produced by state-of-the-art mass spectrometers. However, making use of this information while also ensuring that the search engine's scores are well calibrated, that is, that the score assigned to one spectrum can be meaningfully compared to the score assigned to a different spectrum, has proven to be challenging. Here we describe a database search score function, the "residue evidence" (res-ev) score, that achieves both of these goals simultaneously. We also demonstrate how to combine calibrated res-ev scores with calibrated XCorr scores to produce a "combined p value" score function. We provide a benchmark consisting of four mass spectrometry data sets, which we use to compare the combined p value to the score functions used by several existing search engines. Our results suggest that the combined p value achieves state-of-the-art performance, generally outperforming MS Amanda and Morpheus and performing comparably to MS-GF+. The res-ev and combined p-value score functions are freely available as part of the Tide search engine in the Crux mass spectrometry toolkit ( http://crux.ms ).

### Keywords
Human, Plasmodium, Ocean, E. coli, Score function

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences Department of Computer Science and Engineering University of Washington
University of Washington

### Submitter
Andy Lin

### Lab Head
Dr William Stafford Noble
Department of Genome Sciences Department of Computer Science and Engineering University of Washington


