### Accession
PXD046546

### Title
RNA polymerase II acts to promote the organization of chromatin following DNA replication

### Description
In mammals, following the passage of the replisome, nucleosomes lose their defined positioning and transcription contributes to their re-organisation. However, whether transcription plays a greater role in the organization of chromatin following DNA replication remains unclear. By performing iPOND-TMT time course experiments in the presents of transcription inhibition, we show that RNAPII promotes the re-association of hundreds of proteins with newly replicated DNA (Data uploaded under PXD046514). To show that this function of RNAPII is specific to newly replicated chromatin, an iPOND-TMT 24hr chase experiment was performed in the presence of transcription inhibition to examine its effect on the protein binding on steady state chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND was performed as described previously (Sirbu et al., 2012). In short, 1 × 10e8 asynchronised TIG-3-20 cells (per time point) were labelled with 20 μM EdU for 1h, grown in medium containing 20 μM thymidine for another 24h, and treated with DMSO, 1 μM Triptolide or 50 μM 5,6-dichlorobenzimida-zole 1-b-D-ribofuranoside 2h or 6h prior harvesting. All samples were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde for 15 min at RT followed by 5 min incubation with 0.125 M glycine to quench the formaldehyde. Afterward, cells were scraped from the plate (on ice), permeabilized in 0.25% Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 min at RT and washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS. To conjugate biotin to EdU-labeled DNA, click chemistry reactions were performed for 1.5 h in the dark (10 μM Biotin-azide [Thermo Fisher, B10184], 10 mM Sodium ascorbate, 2 mM CuSO4 in 1xPBS). Cells were lysed (1% SDS in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, protease inhibitor), sonicated (Bioruptor, Diagenode), the lysate diluted 1:1 (v/v) with cold PBS containing protease inhibitor, and streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher, 65002) used to capture the biotin-conjugated DNA-protein complexes. Captured complexes were washed extensively using lysis buffer and 1 M NaCl. The proteins were eluted under reducing conditions by boiling in 2X LSB sample buffer for 30 min.

### Data Protocol
MaxQaunt software was used for the database searching and TMT quantification of proteins. All replicates were searched together, with the fasta and parameter files uploaded.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how chromatin organisation is duplicated on the two daughter strands is a central question in epigenetics. In mammals, following the passage of the replisome, nucleosomes lose their defined positioning and transcription contributes to their re-organisation. However, whether transcription plays a greater role in the organization of chromatin following DNA replication remains unclear. Here we analysed protein re-association with newly replicated DNA upon inhibition of transcription using iPOND coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry. We show that nucleosome assembly and the re-establishment of most histone modifications are uncoupled from transcription. However, RNAPII acts to promote the re-association of hundreds of proteins with newly replicated chromatin via pathways that are not observed in steady-state chromatin. These include ATP-dependent remodellers, transcription factors and histone methyltransferases. We also identify a set of DNA repair factors that may handle transcription-replication conflicts during normal transcription in human non-transformed cells. Our study reveals that transcription plays a greater role in the organization of chromatin post-replication than previously anticipated.

### Keywords
Dna replications, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Susanne Bandau

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Alabert
Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, United Kingdom


