### Accession
PXD012424

### Title
differentially expressed N-glycopeptides in HepG2 related to LO2 cell line

### Description
With isotopically dimethyl labeling, ZIC-HILIC enrichment, C18 pre-fractionation, differentially expressed N-glycosylation in HCC HepG2 cells (relative to normal liver LO2 cells) were analyzed using penta-HILIC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
With isotopically dimethyl labeling, ZIC-HILIC enrichment, C18 pre-fractionation, differentially expressed N-glycosylation in HCC HepG2 cells were analyzed using penta-HILIC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The identification and quantitation of these LC-MS/MS datasets were performed using house-made search engine GPSeeker.

### Publication Abstract
N-Glycosylation, being one of the most common and complex protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), is known to have microheterogeneity with the presence of different N-glycan structures at a single specific glycosite. These different structures may have exactly the same monosaccharide composition but totally different differential expressions and pathological relevance. Mass spectrometry-based N-glycoproteomics has so far been successful in large-scale characterization of these N-glycans at the composition level, and structure-level identification and quantitation is urgently needed. Here we report our development of the intact N-glycopeptide search engine GPSeeker and the GPSeeker-centered quantitative structural N-glycoproteomics pipeline. In benchmark characterization of differentially expressed N-glycosylation in hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells relative to LO2 cells, 5&#x202f;405 and 1&#x202f;081 intact N-glycopeptides with putative linkage structures were identified and quantified with isotopic dimethyl labeling and 2D liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Among the&#xa0;5&#x202f;405 IDs, 837 were identified with no less than one&#xa0;structure diagnostic fragment ion for the N-glycan moieties. Besides double isomers of sialic acid linkages and fucose sequences, quadruple isomers from combination of two linages and two sequences were chromatographically separated and confidently identified; microheterogeneity with different differentially expressions were observed on 183 out of the 231 quantified&#xa0;N-glycosites. This GPSeeker-centered quantitative structural N-glycoproteomics pipeline can be widely applied to precise qualitative and quantitative characterization of N-glycosylation with physiological and pathological relevance.

### Keywords
N-glycopeptides, Human liver, Q excactive, Hcc

### Affiliations
Tongji University, China
School of Chemical Science & Engineering and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China

### Submitter
Kaijie Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhixin Tian
School of Chemical Science & Engineering and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China


