### Accession
PXD023049

### Title
Immunomodulation of T helper cells by tumour microenvironment in oral cancer is associated with rapid membrane-associated Vitamin D signalling pathway

### Description
The immune system plays a key role in the protective response against oral cancer, however the tumour microenvironment (TME) is able to impair this anti-cancer response by modulating T helper (Th) responses and promoting an anti-inflammatory environment. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) and Th2 effector cells (Teff) have been associated with bad prognosis in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), however it is unknown the main chemoattractant or immunomodulatory mechanisms associated with the enrichment of these subsets in OSCC. We characterised T helper-like lineages in Teff and Tregs and evaluated the main immunomodulatory changes induced by the TME in OSCC. Our phenotypic data revealed a higher distribution of tumour-infiltrating CCR8+ and Th2-like Treg in OSCC in comparison with non-malignant samples, whereas the percentages of Th1 cells were reduced in cancer. We then analysed the presence of CCR8 ligands and the chemoattractant effect of tumour secretomes, however despite observing higher presence of CCR8 ligand CCL18, we only observed reduced migration of Teff to tumour secretomes. The direct effect of the TME was then analysed by exposing T cell subsets to cancer secretomes and we observed that the TME induced higher expression of CCR8 and immunomodulatory molecules on both subsets. Finally, the proteomic analysis of the TME suggests that these changes were associated with the rapid membrane-associated vitamin D signalling pathway. In summary, the TME from OSCC promotes immunomodulatory changes by regulating CCR8 expression and disbalancing the Th1/Th2 repertoire.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome Protein Depletion  The secretome proteins were depleted with Top 2 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific), 200 ug of secretome proteins were added per column and the protocol suggested by the manufacturer was followed.  Protein extraction and digestion for nLC-MS / MS   The previously depleted proteins were subjected to precipitation using 5: 1 v / v cold acetone 100% v/v and incubated overnight at -20°C, then they were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed 3 times with acetone at 90% v / v, later the proteins were dried in a rotary concentrator at 4°C, and finally they were resuspended in 8 M urea with 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. The proteins were reduced using a final concentration of 20 mM DTT for 1 h, then they were alkylated incubating for 1 h with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark, then the proteins were quantified using the Qubit protein quantification kit. 10 ug of total proteins were diluted to 1 M urea using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, then the proteins were digested with trypsin / LyC (Promega) in a 1:50 ratio overnight at 37°C. The peptides were cleaned using Pierce C-18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) using the protocol suggested by the manufacturer, the eluted peptides were dried using a rotary concentrator at 4°C, and resuspended in 2% ACN with 0.1% v / v Formic Acid (MERCK), and quantified using Direct detect (MERCK Millipore).  Liquid Chromatography  200 ng of secretome tryptic peptides were injected in nanoELUTE (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) ultra-high pressure nano-flow chromatography system was coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry - quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) with a modified nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). Liquid chromatography was performed at 50°C and with a constant flow of 400 nL/min on a reversed-phase column Aurora Series CSI (25 cm x 75µm i.d. C18 1.6 µm) (ionopticks Australia). Mobile phases A and B were watered with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and 99.9/0.1% ACN/formic acid (v/vol), respectively. In 90-min experiments, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 2 to 5% B 1 min, 5 to 17% B within 55 min, followed by an increase to 25% B within 21 min and further to 35% within 13 min, followed by a washing step at 85% B and re-equilibration.  timsTOF Pro Mass Spectrometry  All further experiments were acquired with a 100 ms ramp and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per topN acquisition cycle. In TOF mass spectrometry, signal-to-noise ratios can conveniently be increased by summation of individual TOF scans. Thus, low-abundance precursors with an intensity below a ‘target value’ were repeatedly scheduled for PASEF-MS/MS scans until the summed ion count reached the target value (e.g. four times for a precursor with the intensity 5000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and a target value of 20,000 a.u.). The target value to 20,000 a.u was set. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded from m/z 100 to 1700. Suitable precursor ions for PASEF-MS/MS were selected in real time from TIMS-MS survey scans by a sophisticated PASEF scheduling algorithm. A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions. quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700, and the collision energy was ramped stepwise as a function of increasing ion mobility: 52 eV for 0 –19% of the ramp time; 47 eV from 19 –38%; 42 eV from 38 –57%; 37 eV from 57–76%; and 32 eV for the remainder (Meier et al., 2018). The TIMS elution voltage was calibrated linearly to obtain reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0) using three selected ions of the Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix (m/z 622, 922, 1222)(Stow et al., 2017). Collisional cross sections were calculated from the Mason Schamp equation (Mason & McDaniel, 1988).

### Data Protocol
Database searching   Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Tims Control version 2.0. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON Canada; version 10.5 (2019-11-20)). PEAKS Studio X+ was set up to search the [UniProt_SwissProt] database (unknown version, 21.040 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. PEAKS Studio X+ was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in PEAKS Studio X+ as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and carbamyl of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in PEAKS Studio X+ as variable modifications.   Criteria for protein identification  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Th-like tregs, Oral cancer, Immunomodulation, Cancer immunology, Ccr8

### Affiliations
Molecular and Translational Immunology Laboratory, Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology Department, Pharmacy Faculty, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
Molecular and Translational Immunology Laboratory, Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology Department, Pharmacy Faculty, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile

### Submitter
Estefania  Nova-Lamperti

### Lab Head
Dr Estefania Nova-Lamperti
Molecular and Translational Immunology Laboratory, Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology Department, Pharmacy Faculty, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile


