### Accession
PXD007255

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Fasciola hepatica somatic proteome and secretome

### Description
Background The parasite Fasciola hepatica infects a broad range of mammals with impunity.  Following ingestion of parasites (metacercariae) by the host, newly excysted juveniles (NEJ) emerge from their cysts, rapidly penetrate the duodenal wall and migrate to the liver.  Successful infection takes just a few hours and involves negotiating hurdles presented by host macromolecules, tissues and micro-environments, as well as the immune system. Results Transcriptome and proteome analysis of F. hepatica metacercariae and NEJ revealed the rapidity and multitude of metabolic and developmental alterations this parasite undergoes to accomplish infection.  We show that metacercariae are metabolically active, contrary to the view that this stage is dormant.  Following ingestion, the NEJ expend vital energy stores and rapidly adjust their metabolic pathways to cope with their new increasingly anaerobic environment.  Temperature increases induce neoblast proliferation and the remarkable up-regulation of genes associated with growth and development.  Cysteine proteases synthesised by gastrodermal cells are secreted to facilitate invasion and tegumental transporters are varied to deal with osmotic/salinity changes.  Major proteins of the total NEJ secretome include proteases, proteases inhibitors, anti-oxidants as well as an array of immunomodulators that likely disarm host innate immune effector cells. Conclusions The challenges of infection by F. hepatica parasites are met by rapid metabolic and physiological adjustments that expedite tissue invasion and immune evasion that facilitate growth, development and maturation.  Our molecular analysis of the critical process of host invasion has identified key targets for future drug and vaccine strategies directed at preventing parasite infection.

### Sample Protocol
Metacercariae were excysted and newly excysted parasites (NEJ) recovered together with the excystment media at 1hr and 3hr post-excystment.  Further NEJs were cultured for up to 48hr in culture media (RPMI) and the culture media and parasites recovered for analysis. Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analyses were carried out by Proteomics Platform of the Quebec Genomics Center (CHU de Quebec Research Centre, Canada). Secreted proteins (10µg) were concentrated 10 times, followed by 3 washes using an Amicon Ultra 3kDa column with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer before being dried by evaporation in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Somatic proteins were extracted from metacercariae and NEJ parasites at 3hr, 24hr and 48hr post-excystment excysted as above, by homogenisation in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Pefabloc (Sigma), 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 0.1% SDS, 1mM E64 (Sigma)) and placed on ice for 30 min. The extracted proteins were then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min to remove any insoluble components and the supernatant stored at -20°C until use.  Proteins were analysed by 1-DE SDS PAGE using 4-12% Criterion XT gels (BioRad) and staining with SYPRO Ruby protein gel stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Bands of interest were extracted from gels and placed in 96- well plates and washed with water.   In-gel tryptic digestion was performed on a MassPrep liquid handling robot (Waters, Milford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s specifications and to the protocol of Shevchenko et al., 1996 with the modifications suggested by Havlis et al., 2003. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed using 126nM of modified porcine trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 18h. Digestion products were extracted using 1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile followed by 1% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile. The recovered extracts were pooled, vacuum centrifuge dried and then re-suspended into 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer fitted with a nanospray III ion source (ABSciex, Concord, ON) and coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC, using 2 µl of the re-suspended sample.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Paragon and Progroup algorithms (Protein Pilot version 4.5; ABSciex) and analysed using Mascot (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science) and X!Tandem.  The secretome proteome data was set up to search against 3 custom F. hepatica databases, assuming digestion with trypsin: (1) Database comprised of the gene models identified from the F. hepatica genome (101,780), (2) Database comprised of all available F. hepatica EST sequences from NCBI and F. hepatica transcriptome sequencing projects (633,678 entries; ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/pathogens/Fasciola/), (3) Database comprised of the Trematoda specific sequences within the non-redundant NCBI dataset (1,541,675 entries).  The protein identifications were consistent across all three databases, with the database derived from the draft F. hepatica genome resulting in the greatest number of protein identifications, which were used for all subsequent analysis.  The somatic proteome data was set up to search against the F. hepatica database comprised of the gene models identified from the F. hepatica genome (101,780).  Fragment and parent ion mass tolerance were set at 0.100 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and pyro glutamate formation of the N-terminus (Glu->pyro-Glu and Gln->pyro-Glu) were specified as variable modifications.  Scaffold (v4.3.2; Proteome Software Inc) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and calculate protein abundance using the Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The parasite <i>Fasciola hepatica</i> infects a broad range of mammals with impunity. Following ingestion of parasites (metacercariae) by the host, newly excysted juveniles (NEJ) emerge from their cysts, rapidly penetrate the duodenal wall and migrate to the liver. Successful infection takes just a few hours and involves negotiating hurdles presented by host macromolecules, tissues and micro-environments, as well as the immune system. Here, transcriptome and proteome analysis of <i>ex vivo F. hepatica</i> metacercariae and NEJ reveal the rapidity and multitude of metabolic and developmental alterations that take place in order for the parasite to establish infection. We found that metacercariae despite being encased in a cyst are metabolically active, and primed for infection. Following excystment, NEJ expend vital energy stores and rapidly adjust their metabolic pathways to cope with their new and increasingly anaerobic environment. Temperature increases induce neoblast proliferation and the remarkable up-regulation of genes associated with growth and development. Cysteine proteases synthesized by gastrodermal cells are secreted to facilitate invasion and tissue degradation, and tegumental transporters, such as aquaporins, are varied to deal with osmotic/salinity changes. Major proteins of the total NEJ secretome include proteases, protease inhibitors and anti-oxidants, and an array of immunomodulators that likely disarm host innate immune effector cells. Thus, the challenges of infection by <i>F. hepatica</i> parasites are met by rapid metabolic and physiological adjustments that expedite tissue invasion and immune evasion; these changes facilitate parasite growth, development and maturation. Our molecular analysis of the critical processes involved in host invasion has identified key targets for future drug and vaccine strategies directed at preventing parasite infection.

### Keywords
Metacercariae, Fasciola hepatica, Somatic proteome, Nej, Es proteins, Secretome

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast
Professor in Infectious Diseases School of Biological Sciences Medical Biology Centre (MBC) Queen's University Belfast Belfast UK

### Submitter
Krystyna Cwiklinski

### Lab Head
Dr John P Dalton
Professor in Infectious Diseases School of Biological Sciences Medical Biology Centre (MBC) Queen's University Belfast Belfast UK


