### Accession
PXD045226

### Title
Protein Phosphorylation Orchestrates Acclimations of Arabidopsis Plants to Environmental pH

### Description
In lieu of strategies to escape unfavorable conditions, plants have evolved mechanisms to cope with and adapt to changes in their environment. Environment pH (pHe) is a key parameter that dictates a surfeit of conditions of critical importance for plant survival and fitness. Besides responses to altered availability of essential nutrients, changes in pHe recalibration of cytoplasmic and apoplastic pH despite constant fluctuations. To elucidate processes allowing such acclimations, we conducted a comprehensive proteomic/phosphoproteomic survey of plants subjected to transient exposure to acidic or alkaline pH, an approach that covered more than 60% of the protein-coding genes of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Differentially (phospho)peptides displayed moderate concordance to previously published transcriptomic data sets, indicative of extensive post-transcriptomic regulation. This finding is corroborated by the discovery of xx so far undocumented, possibly pH-specific phospho-sites in response to alterations in pHe. Both low and high pHe altered proton-translocation across the plasma membrane. In pH 7.5 plants, transport but not assimilation of nitrogen was strongly induced, possibly to increase cytosolic H+ concentration. Mutants defective in the nitrate transporter nrt2.1 exhibited longer roots at low pH and increased density of root hairs at high pH, suggesting a moonlighting role of NRT2.1 in root growth. Only a few pH-responsive proteins were associated with the transport of iron and zinc, the availability of which is altered by pHe. Intricate phosphorylation of the ABC transporters PDR7 and PDR8 suggests pH-dependent phospho-switches in substrate specificity, tipping the balance between growth and defense. Unexpectedly, pHe provoked pronounced, changes in the leaf proteome, possibly communicated via an elaborate calcium-dependent signaling network. Moreover, we show that the TPLATE compounds EH1 and EH2 are differentially phosphorylated at multiple sites in response to pHe, indicating that the endocytic cargo protein trafficking is orchestrated by pHe.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using SDS and suspension trapping, and proteins were digested using Lys-C and trypsin. Digested peptides were labeled with TMT10plex. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-IMAC tip. Peptides were analyzed using Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were searched using Mascot and Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against TAIR10 database. TMT 10plex (peptide N-term and R) and carbamidomethyl (C) were selected as fixed modifications. Oxidation (M) and phospho (STY) were selected as variable modifications. Protein and peptide FDR were set as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Protein phosphorylation, Environment ph

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Schmidt
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica


