### Accession
PXD016875

### Title
An Anti-Cancer Gold(III)-Activated Porphyrin Scaffold that Covalently Modifies Protein Cysteine Thiols

### Description
Cysteine thiols of many cancer-associated proteins are attractive targets of anti-cancer agents. Herein, we unequivocally demonstrate a distinct thiol-targeting property of gold(III) mesoporphyrin IX dimethyl ester (AuMesoIX) and its anti-cancer activities. While the binding of cysteine thiols with metal complexes usually occurs via M–S bond formation, AuMesoIX is unique in that the meso-carbon atom of the porphyrin ring is activated by the gold(III) ion to undergo nucleophilic aromatic substitution with thiols. AuMesoIX was shown to modify reactive cysteine residues and inhibit the activities of anti-cancer protein targets including thioredoxin, peroxiredoxin, and deubiquitinases. Treatment of cancer cells with AuMesoIX resulted in the formation of gold-bound sulfur-rich protein aggregates, oxidative stress-mediated cytotoxicity, and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins. Importantly, AuMesoIX exhibited effective anti-tumor activity in mice. Our study has uncovered a gold(III)-induced ligand scaffold reactivity for thiol targeting that can be exploited for anti-cancer applications.

### Sample Protocol
A2780 cells (8×106 cells) were seeded in 10-cm dishes and allowed to grow for 24 h before incubation with AuMesoIX (4 μM) or DMSO (0.5%) for 1 h. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, followed by trypsinization and further washing, and evenly distributed into six 0.2 mL PCR tubes. Aliqouts of the AuMesoIX- and DMSO-treated cells were heated in parallel at designated temperature (37, 43, 49, 54, 60 and 65 °C) in a thermo cycler for 3 min and kept at room temperature for another 3 min. The cells were then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyzed with three freeze-thaw cycles. The cell lysates were subjected to centrifugation at 100,000 × g at 4 °C for 20 min, and the soluble proteins in the supernatant were transferred into new tubes. Protein concentrations of the soluble proteins in the samples incubated at 37 °C were measured and normalized in the amount of proteins used for trypsin digestion.  Proteins were denatured in urea buffer (6 M urea in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0)) at 60 °C for 10 min, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and carboxyamidomethylated by iodoacetamide. The concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M with 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0) before trypsin digestion at 37 °C for 16 h. The proteolysis was halted by adding formic acid (5%) and the digests were subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. Peptides were labeled with 6-plex TMT (TMT6, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, enabling relative quantification of six different temperature points from 37 °C to 65 °C in a single experiment. The labeling reactions were performed in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) for 1 h at room temperature and quenched with hydroxylamine. For respective AuMesoIX and DMSO treatments, the TMT-labeled peptides were combined into a single sample, desalted using stop-and-go-extraction tips (StageTips) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific) with a Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo-Scientific) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo-Scientific). A 15-cm-long fused silica emitter (50 μm I.D., 360 μm O.D., 15 μm Tip I.D.; New Objective, Inc.) was packed with 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) as analytical column. TMT labelled samples were resuspended in buffer A (LC-MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and injected into the analytical column by the autosampler of the Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were separated by a 240-min organic solvent gradient at a flow rate of 125 nL/min and sprayed directly into MS. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated with a positive ion voltage of 2000 V and a transfer tube temperature of 320 °C. A data-dependent method was used for data acquisition in Orbitrap Fusion. The full scans from 350 to 1800 m/z were recorded at a resolution of 120 K. The HCD MS/MS scans were recorded at a resolution of 30 K with the following parameters: isolation mode was quadrupole, isolation window was se to 1.2 Da, collision energy (%) was set to 38 and the first mass was set to 100.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching against the Uniprot human database (downloaded on 10 July 2018, 172997 entries) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). The search type was set to Reporter ion MS2, 6-plex TMT. The protein abundance at 37 °C was set to 1 and relative protein quantification at each temperature was calculated. TPP R package was used to determine the melting curves and significant Tm shifts (Childs D, Kurzawa N, Franken H, Doce C, Savitski M, & Huber W (TPP: Analyze Thermal Proteome Profiling (TPP) Experiments.(2017). R package version 3(6).).

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine thiols of many cancer-associated proteins are attractive targets of anticancer agents. Herein, we unequivocally demonstrate a distinct thiol-targeting property of gold(III) mesoporphyrin IX dimethyl ester (AuMesoIX) and its anticancer activities. While the binding of cysteine thiols with metal complexes usually occurs via M-S bond formation, AuMesoIX is unique in that the <i>meso</i>-carbon atom of the porphyrin ring is activated by the gold(III) ion to undergo nucleophilic aromatic substitution with thiols. AuMesoIX was shown to modify reactive cysteine residues and inhibit the activities of anticancer protein targets including thioredoxin, peroxiredoxin, and deubiquitinases. Treatment of cancer cells with AuMesoIX resulted in the formation of gold-bound sulfur-rich protein aggregates, oxidative stress-mediated cytotoxicity, and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins. Importantly, AuMesoIX exhibited effective antitumor activity in mice. Our study has uncovered a gold(III)-induced ligand scaffold reactivity for thiol targeting that can be exploited for anticancer applications.

### Keywords
Gold • porphyrin • ligand reactivity• cysteine thiol conjugation • anti-tumor agents

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry and Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Di HU

### Lab Head
Dr Chi-Ming Che
State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry and Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China


