### Accession
PXD028980

### Title
Proximity Proteomics Revealed Dicer1 and Transporters as Client Proteins of Aha1

### Description
Co-chaperone Aha1 activates HSP90 ATPase to promote the folding of client proteins. However, the client proteins of Aha1 are largely unknown. By employing ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) based proximity labeling, we identified 32 proximity proteins of HSP90 that are modulated by genetic depletion of Aha1. Among them, Dicer1 is one of the top-ranked proteins, which were further confirmed by streptavidin pull-down followed by Western blot analysis, demonstrating the reliability of the approach. Flag pull-down result showed interactions between endogenous HSP90 and Dicer1 and Aha1. The Dicer1 level is regulated synergistically by Aha1 and HSP90. Maturation-dependent interaction results showed a preferential binding of Aha1 and HSP90 to nascently translated Dicer1. Reconstitution of Aha1-depleted cells with WT Aha1 restored Dicer1 level, while the HSP90-binding-defective E67K mutant exhibited partial restoration. Moreover, knockdown of Aha1 and inhibition of HSP90 can diminish the levels of mature miRNA, let-7b and mir-30a. Overall, our study uncovers, for the first time, Dicer1 and transporter proteins as clients of Aha1 and HSP90.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling was conducted as described previously. In brief, approximately 20 million cells were incubated in complete medium containing 500 µM of biotin phenol for 30 min followed by incubation with 1.0 mM H2O2 for 1 min. The reaction was quenched by washing the cells with a quenching buffer (5 mM of Trolox, 10 mM of sodium ascorbate and 10 mM of sodium azide in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and PBS twice each. Cells were lysed with 500 µL of CelLytic M (Sigma) containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and the above-described quenching buffer. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 RPM at 4°C for 10 min to remove cell debris. Approximately 1 mg of total proteins were incubated with streptavidin-conjugated agarose beads (Pierce Thermo) overnight at 4°C. The beads were subsequently washed with 500 µL of CelLytic M twice, 1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2CO3, and twice with CelLytic M again. Biotinalyted proteins were eluted by incubating the beads in 3× protein loading buffer containing 2 mM biotin at 95°C for 5 min. The resulting proteins were resolved by a 15% SDS-PAGE gel for approximately 1 cm. Gel bands corresponding to protein molecular weight larger than 15 kDa were excised and cut into 1 mm3 cubes for in-gel trypsin digestion. Cysteine reduction and alkylation were conducted by incubating the gel pieces in 10 mM dithiothreitol and 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 37°C and 20 min at RT in dark, respectively. The proteins were subsequently digested with 200 ng of modified MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C overnight. The peptide mixture was dried in a Speed-vac and desalted with OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications; and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Mass tolerance for both MS1 and MS2 were set to 20 ppm. A maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage was allowed, and the peptides were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min. For protein identification, peptide spectra were searched against a target-decoy human Uniprot database proteome (UP000005640) and filtered at 1% protein FDR. Normalized label-free quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2 was used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Aha1 is a co-chaperone of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), and it stimulates the ATPase activity of HSP90 to promote the folding of its client proteins. By employing ascorbate peroxidase (APEX)-based proximity labeling and proteomic analysis, we identified over 30 proteins exhibiting diminished abundances in the proximity proteome of HSP90 in HEK293T cells upon genetic depletion of Aha1. Dicer1 is a top-ranked protein, and we confirmed its interactions with HSP90 and Aha1 by immunoprecipitation followed by western blot analysis. Genetic depletion of Aha1 and pharmacological inhibition of HSP90 both led to reduced levels of Dicer1 protein. Additionally, HSP90 and Aha1 bind preferentially to newly translated Dicer1. Reconstitution of Aha1-depleted cells with wild-type Aha1 substantially rescued Dicer1 protein level, and a lower level of restoration was observed for&#xa0;complementation with&#xa0;the HSP90-binding-defective Aha1-E67K, whereas an Aha1 mutant lacking the first 20 amino acids-which abolishes its chaperone activity-failed to rescue Dicer1 protein level. Moreover, knockdown of Aha1 and inhibition of HSP90 led to diminished levels of mature microRNAs (miRNAs), but not their corresponding primary miRNAs. Together, we uncovered a novel mechanism of HSP90 and Aha1 in regulating the miRNA pathway through promoting the folding of Dicer1 protein, and we also demonstrated that Aha1 modulates this process by acting as an autonomous chaperone and a co-chaperone for HSP90.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Aha1, Dicer1, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside

### Submitter
Yen-Yu Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside


