### Accession
PXD036939

### Title
MHC-IP MS of EpiScan A02 SARS-CoV-2 library

### Description
Identification of CD8+ T-cell epitopes is critical for the development of immunotherapeutics. Existing methods for MHC-I ligand discovery are time-intensive, specialized and unable to interrogate specific proteins on a large scale. Here we present EpiScan, which uses surface MHC-I levels as a readout for whether a genetically encoded peptide is an MHC-I ligand. Oligonucleotide synthesis permits facile screening for MHC-I ligands amongst predetermined starting pools comprising >100,000 peptides. We exploit this programmability of EpiScan to uncover an unappreciated role for cysteine that increases the number of predicted ligands by 12-21%, reveal affinity hierarchies by analysis of biased-anchor peptide libraries, and screen viral proteomes for MHC-I ligands. Using these data, we generate and iteratively refine peptide binding prediction predictions to create EpiScan Predictor, or ESP.  ESP performed comparably to other state-of-the-art MHC-I peptide binding prediction algorithms while not suffering from underrepresentation of cysteine-containing peptides.  Thus, targeted immunopeptidomics using EpiScan will accelerate CD8+ T-cell epitope discovery towards the goal of patient-specific immunotherapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-A*02:01 EpiScan cells bearing the SARS-CoV-2 library were sorted in one bin based on surface MHC-I.  After recovering from sorting, the cells were expanded and then 200 million cells were harvested by incubating with Accutase (#A6964 from Sigma) at RT and then washing twice in PBS.  Then cells were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.   For immunoprecipitation of MHC Class I and elution of associated peptides, the following reagents and buffers were used: Protease inhibitor (PI) tablet (Roche Complete Mini, EDTA free, # 11836170001), W6/32-sepharose (DMP-crosslinked Protein A sepharose at 20 mg/mL), Eppendorf Lo-Bind Microcentrifuge Tube (Eppendorf #022431081), Lysis buffer - Human class I (0.25% Sodium deoxycholate, 200μM iodoacetamide, 1% N-Octyl- B-D-thioglucoside. 1mM EDTA, 25 μg/mL DNase, Protease inhibitors: 1 tablet per 10mL buffer), Wash buffer 1 (Lysis buffer, no protease inhibitor), Wash buffer 2 (20 mM Tris-HCl, 400 mM NaCl, pH 8.0), Wash buffer 3 (20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0), Wash buffer 4 (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), MHC-I Elution buffer (0.1 M Acetic acid, 0.1% TFA).  Cell pellets were thawed on ice, then lysed at 50 million cells/mL of lysis buffer, incubating 30 min on ice. Insoluble material was pelleted at 800 × g for 5 min. Supernatant was centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. Resin was washed and combined with clarified lysates. Resin was mixed with lysates (normalized by BCA to lowest protein yield) by gentle rotation at 4°C overnight. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 800 × g for 5 min at 4°C. Three washes (Buffers 1-3) of the resin were performed, which consisted of the following: Add 2.5 mL of buffer to resin, vortex then centrifuge 800 × g, 5 min at 4°C then discard the supernatant. At wash #4, 0.75 mL of Buffer 4 was added, and the total volume was transferred to loBind tubes. Then, centrifuge 800 × g, 5 min at 4°C and discard the supernatant. 1 mL of Elution buffer was added to each tube and incubated at 37°C for 5 min. Samples were centrifuged at 800 × g for 5 min at 4°C to elute. Eluates (supernatant) were collected into new loBind Eppendorf tubes and stored at -80°C until transfer to MSB. Eluates were submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis and PRE and POST samples were tested by ELISA. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using a Waters HLB solid phase extraction plate. Half of each enriched sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Waters M-Class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 2hr gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated using a custom data-dependent method, with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and sequential MS/MS performed using high resolution CID and EThcD in the Orbitrap at 15,000 FWHM resolution. All MS data were acquired from m/z 300-800. A 3s cycle time was employed for all steps.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions) with the following parameters: Enzyme: None Database: SwissProt Human appended with the protein sequences of SARS-CoV-2 available as of 2/06/20 from the NCBI. Fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C). Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q), Acetyl (Protein N-term) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da PSM FDR: 1% PEAKS output was further processed using Microsoft Excel. Contaminant peptides like albumin, keratin and poly-proline peptides, such as HPPPPPPPP, were eliminated from the count of 9- through 11mers used for MS-EpiScan comparison analysis

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Episcan mhc-ip sars-cov-2 hla-a*02:01

### Affiliations
Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Peter Bruno

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Elledge
Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital


### SDRF
- organism: Homo Sapiens
- organism part: kidney
- cell type: kidney fibroblast
- disease: immortalized
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos

