### Accession
PXD007856

### Title
Sex determination of human remains from peptides in tooth enamel

### Description
Biological sex determination of human remains by means of a minimally destructive surface acid etch of tooth enamel and subsequent identification of sex chromosome linked isoforms of Amelogenin– an enamel-forming protein - by nano-liquid chromatography mass spectrometry(nanoLC-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Tooth enamel is washed with 3% H2O2 for 30 sec, and rinsed with ultrapure water. In the cap of a 0.2 mL microcentrifuge tube ca. 60 μL of 5% (v/v) HCl was placed leaving a convex meniscus protruding above the lip. An initial etch was performed by lowering the tooth onto the HCl and retaining contact for two minutes and was discarded. A second two-minute etch was then performed and retained as the etch solution. In an adjustable 0.5-10 μL pipette set to 10 μL a C18 resin loaded ZipTip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA, ZTC18S096) was conditioned three times with 100% acetonitrile, then three times with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid discarding each draw. The etch solution was bound to the ZipTip by pipetting the solution up and down ten times, discarding the last draw. The ZipTip was washed six times with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, discarding each wash. The adjustable pipette was set to 4 μL and the resin-bound peptides were eluted into a 4 μL 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid elution buffer and lyophilized. Samples were dissolved in 12 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water, centrifuged on a bench top centrifuge for 5 min to remove any particulate matter and transferred (10 μL) to glass autosampler vials. Five microliters was injected for analysis by reversed-phase nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoRS U3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a hybrid linear ion trap Orbitrap (Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were first loaded onto a C18 trapping cartridge (Pepmap100 C18; 0.3 x 5 mm ID; 5 μm particle size) for 10 min at a flow-rate of 5 μL/min with 0.1% TFA. Separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 μm; 5μmparticle size, C18 PepMap100, ThermoScientific) with a gradient starting at 1% and increased to 13.3% solvent B over 20 min, then to 25.6% over 15 min, 45% over 10 min, 99% over 15 min, held constant at 99% for 5 min, returned to 1% and equilibrated for 20 min. Nanoelectrospray ionisation (nano-ESI) was performed with a 10 μm uncoated silica tip emitter(New Objective, FS360-20-10-N-20). The MS was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode in which each full MS scan was collected in the Orbitrap (300–1,600 m/z, R = 60,000 @ 400 m/z) followed with up to nine MS/MS scan events performed in the linear ion trap where the most abundant peptide molecular ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID), using a normalized collision energy of 35%. Total MS acquisition time was 64 min.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against the human proteome (UniprotKB, 10/15) using MaxQuant (V 1.5.1.2) employing default search settings with methionine oxidation as variable modification, unspecific digestion mode and minimum peptide length of 6.

### Publication Abstract
The assignment of biological sex to archaeological human skeletons is a fundamental requirement for the reconstruction of the human past. It is conventionally and routinely performed on adults using metric analysis and morphological traits arising from postpubertal sexual dimorphism. A maximum accuracy of &#x223c;95% is possible if both the cranium and os coxae are present and intact, but this is seldom achievable for all skeletons. Furthermore, for infants and juveniles, there are no reliable morphological methods for sex determination without resorting to DNA analysis, which requires good DNA survival and is time-consuming. Consequently, sex determination of juvenile remains is rarely undertaken, and a dependable and expedient method that can correctly assign biological sex to human remains of any age is highly desirable. Here we present a method for sex determination of human remains by means of a minimally destructive surface acid etching of tooth enamel and subsequent identification of sex chromosome-linked isoforms of amelogenin, an enamel-forming protein, by nanoflow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Tooth enamel is the hardest tissue in the human body and survives burial exceptionally well, even when the rest of the skeleton or DNA in the organic fraction has decayed. Our method can reliably determine the biological sex of humans of any age using a body tissue that is difficult to cross-contaminate and is most likely to survive. The application of this method will make sex determination of adults and, for the first time, juveniles a reliable and routine activity in future bioarcheological and medico-legal science contexts.

### Keywords
Human, Tooth enamel, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Brighton School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences
University of Brighton

### Submitter
Nicolas Stewart

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Andre Stewart
University of Brighton School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences


