### Accession
PXD028522

### Title
Molecular architecture of the antiophidic protein DM64 and its binding specificity to myotoxin II from Bothrops asper venom

### Description
DM64 is a toxin-neutralizing serum glycoprotein isolated from the South American opossum Didelphis aurita. This ophiophagous marsupial is naturally resistant to snake envenomation and has evolved such biochemical defense as a trophic adaptation. The endogenous antitoxin is a human α1B-glycoprotein homolog of 64 kDa, specifically targeting myotoxic phospholipases A2, which account for most local tissue damage associated with viper snakebites. This study investigated the noncovalent complex formed between native DM64 and myotoxin II, a myotoxic calcium-independent phospholipase-like protein from Bothrops asper venom. Analytical ultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) data indicated that DM64 is monomeric in solution and binds equimolar amounts of the toxin. Initial attempts to solve the structure of DM64 experimentally failed due to technical limitations caused by N-glycan heterogeneity and low recovery of heterologous protein. Classical molecular modeling techniques were impaired by the lack of templates with more than 25% sequence identity with DM64. An integrative structural biology approach was then applied to generate a refined three-dimensional model of the inhibitor bound to myotoxin II. The five immunoglobulin-like domains of DM64 were individually modeled using the I-TASSER suite. Distance constraints generated by cross-linking mass spectrometry of the complex guided the docking of DM64 domains  to the crystal structure of myotoxin II (1CLP), using the Rosetta docking suite. The model of the DM64-myotoxin II complex was successfully fitted to a SAXS envelope. Inter-protein cross-links and limited hydrolysis analyses shed light on the inhibitor's regions involved with toxin interaction, revealing the critical participation of the first, third, and fifth domains of DM64. Our data showed that the fifth domain of DM64 binds to myotoxin II’s amino-terminal and -wing regions. The third domain of the inhibitor acts in a complementary way to the fifth domain. Their binding to these toxin regions presumably interferes with dimerization, a critical step in the allosteric activation of myotoxic PLA2-like proteins. Additionally, the first domain of DM64 likely interacts with the functional site of the toxin putatively associated with membrane anchorage. We propose that both mechanisms concur to effectively inhibit myotoxin II toxicity by DM64 binding. In summary, we argue such topological characterization of this toxin-antitoxin complex to constitute an essential first step toward the rational design of novel peptide-based antivenom therapies targeting snake venom myotoxins.

### Sample Protocol
DM64 (20 µg) and myotoxin II were dissolved in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5 and incubated at 25 °C for 15 min (1:1 and 1:2 mol/mol). The noncovalent complex formed between both proteins was stabilized with BS3 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90 min at 25°C. The reaction was stopped by quenching in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein (5-10 µM final concentration) to cross-linker ratios ranging from 1:500 to 1:2,800 mol/mol (this last corresponding to 1:20 w/w) were tested. DM64 and myotoxin II controls were individually submitted to the same experimental procedure, using the higher protein to cross-linker ratio. Aliquots (10%) of each sample were analyzed by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE) under reducing conditions (12%T, silver staining) (Laemmli, 1970;Heukeshoven and Dernick, 1985). Low molecular mass markers were from GE Healthcare. The remaining samples (90%) were submitted to size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 (GE Healthcare) to remove excess BS3 and (eventual) protein aggregates. Finally, the samples were digested in solution with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100 E:S, w/w) and porcine trypsin (1:50 E:S, w/w), as previously described (Bastos et al., 2020). The experiment was run in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linked peptides were analyzed by nLC-nESI-MS/MS on a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)(Fioramonte et al., 2018), modified as follows: a) a PicoFrit column (75 µm inner diameter, 15 µm tip)(New Objective) packed in-house (40 cm length) with ReproSil-PurC18-AQ (1.9 μm resin, 200 Å pore size)(Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used in all chromatographic runs; b) Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) was performed with Normalized Collision Energy (sNCE) of 30-40. At least two technical replicates of each biological replicate were analyzed. The software Spectrum Identification Machine for Cross-linked Peptides (SIM-XL version 1.5.1.7, available at http://patternlabforproteomics.org/sim-xl) (Lima et al., 2015;Fioramonte et al., 2018) was used. It searched uninterpreted MS/MS raw files against a local database, which comprised the FASTA sequences of DM64 and mature myotoxin II, with no decoy sequences included. The following parameters were used: full enzymatic specificity (Lys-C + trypsin), ≤ 3 missed cleavages allowed, mass tolerance filters of 5 ppm for both MS1 and MS2, fixed modification of cysteine residues (carbamidomethyl, +57.02146 Da), and hydrolyzed BS3 dead-end (+156.0786 Da) as variable modification. The mass shift of +138.068100 Da was considered peptides cross-linked with BS3. The software considered only MS/MS spectra that contained at least one of the following XL reporter ions: m/z 222.149, 239.1759, 240.159, or 305.2229. The assumed reaction site specificities for BS3 were KK, KS, SS, KN-TERM, SN-TERM. Identified spectra were submitted to automatic filtering (SIM-XL score ≥ 3; annotated fragment-ions/peptide chain ≥ 3), followed by careful manual verification based on recommended guidelines (Iacobucci and Sinz, 2017) to avoid misassignments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxin, Snake venom, Molecular modeling, Structural model, Inhibitor, Mass-spectrometry, Structure-function, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
Head of the Laboratory of Toxinology Oswaldo Cruz Institute Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ) Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Oswaldo Cruz Foundation

### Submitter
Viviane Bastos

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Gisele da Costa Neves Ferreira
Head of the Laboratory of Toxinology Oswaldo Cruz Institute Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ) Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.


