### Accession
PXD026067

### Title
Identification of Actin Filament Interactors in Giardia lamblia

### Description
The deep-branching protozoan parasite Giardia lamblia is the causative agent of the intestinal disease giardiasis. Consistent with its proposed evolutionary position, many pathways are minimalistic or divergent, including its actin cytoskeleton. Giardia is the only eukaryote known to lack all canonical actin-binding proteins. Previously, our lab identified a number of non-canonical Giardia lamblia actin (GlActin) interactors; however, these proteins appeared to interact only with monomeric or globular actin (G-actin), rather than filamentous actin (F-actin). To identify interactors, we used a chemical crosslinker to preserve native interactions, followed by an anti-GlActin antibody, Protein A affinity chromatography, and liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. We found 46 putative actin interactors enriched in the conditions favoring F-actin. None of the proteins identified contain known actin-interacting motifs, and many lacked conserved domains. Each potential interactor was then tagged with the fluorescent protein mNeonGreen and visualized in live cells. We categorized the proteins based on their primary localization; localizations included ventral disc, marginal plate, nuclei, flagella, plasma membrane, and internal membranes. One protein from each category was co-localized with GlActin using immunofluorescence microscopy. We also co-immunoprecipitated one protein from each category and confirmed three interactions. Most of the localization patterns are consistent with previously demonstrated GlActin functions, but the ventral disc represents a new category of actin interactor localization. These results suggest a role for GlActin in ventral disc function, which has previously been controversial.

### Sample Protocol
Purification and Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry Lysates were incubated overnight with an anti-GlActin antibody (6) at 4ºC, then incubated with 500 µL PierceTM Protein A agarose (Catalog number 20333) bead slurry and incubated with end-to-end mixing for 2 hours at room temperature. A total of four washes were performed by addition of 0.5 mL of wash buffer (G- or F-Buffer with an additional 150 mM NaCl), vortexed, and centrifuged for 2-3 minutes at 2500xg. For elution, 250 µL of 0.2 M Glycine pH 2.5 was added to the beads and incubated for 5 minutes, centrifuged for 3 minutes at 2500xg, and the supernatant was collected. This step was then repeated and the two eluate fractions were combined. The pH was then neutralized through addition of 50 µL 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5.  For each condition, 5X sample buffer (0.225 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 50% glycerol, 5% SDS, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 0.25 M DTT) was added to a final concentration of 1X subsequent to running on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with SYPRO Ruby (Pierce). Bands corresponding to the heavy and light antibody chains were excised from the gel and discarded; the remainder of the gels were divided into rectangles of approximately equal size. These rectangles were cut into squares of approximately 1-2 mm, washed with 200 µL water, then incubated with 200 µL of 50% acetonitrile and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonante for 5 minutes. After addition of another 200 µL acetonitrile and further incubation for 1 minute, the gel was dried with a speed vacuum, followed by another addition of 50 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 mM TCEP. Samples were then incubated at 60ºC for 1 hour, after which the supernatant was removed and replaced with 50 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10mM iodacetamide, then incubated for 20 minutes in the dark. Another wash was performed with 400 µL water and the 5-minute incubation with 200 µl 50% acetonitrile, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and following steps were repeated. Protein samples were then digested with 20 µL of 0.01 µg/µL Promega Trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. More ammonium bicarbonate was added to cover, followed by overnight digestion. Supernatant was then removed for LC/MS-MS analysis. Protein was further extracted from the gels by addition of 50 µL of acetonitrile, vortexing, and removing and saving supernatant. One last extraction was performed by addition of 50 µL 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, vortexing for 5 minutes, and then removing the supernatant. The supernatants were then combined, dried, and resuspended in solvent A, then analyzed by LC/MS-MS as described below.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry was performed on a Velos Pro (Thermo) with an EasyLC 1000 HPLC and autosampler (Thermo). Samples were solubilized in loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water), and 6 ul was injected via the autosampler onto a 150-μm Kasil fritted trap packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3-μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) to a bed length of 2 cm at a flow rate of 2 ul/min.   After loading and desalting using a total volume of 8 ul of loading buffer, the trap was brought on-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed to a length of 25 cm with the same Dr. Maisch beads. Peptides were eluted off the column using a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes, followed by 35-60% acetonitrile over 5 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  The mass spectrometer was operated using electrospray ionization (2 kV) with the heated transfer tube at 200 C using data dependent acquisition (DDA), whereby a mass spectrum (m/z 400-1600, normal scan rate) was acquired with up to 15 MS/MS spectra (rapid scan rate) of the most intense precursors found in the MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using Comet (1) searched against the protein sequence database GiardiaDB-3.1_GintestinalisAssemblageA_AnnotatedProteins.fasta to which was appended sequences of common contaminants (e.g., human keratins).  The peptide mass tolerance was 3 Da, and the fragment ions were sorted into 1 Da bins (roughly corresponding to a fragment ion mass tolerance of +/- 0.5 Da).  Semi-tryptic cleavages and up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and acetylation of the protein N-termini were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was a fixed modification.  False discovery rates (1%) were determined using PeptideProphet (2), and protein inferences were made using ProteinProphet (3).  Spectral count analysis was performed using Abacus (4).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Actin, Giardia

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Washington
University of Washington

### Submitter
Richard Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Paredez
Department of Biology, University of Washington


