### Accession
PXD011527

### Title
Ileum and colon goblet cell proteome

### Description
This study is a comparative proteomics study of FACS sorted Muc2 expressing and non expressing cells in mouse ileum and colon.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted cells from EC and GC population were solubilized in 30 µL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 100 mM DTT), heated 5 min at 95°C and digesed with subsequental digestion with LysC and trypsin on 30 kDa filters (Vivacon 500, Sartorious Biotech, Goettingen, Germany) according to FASP protocol. If fractionation was applied samples were pooled and processed according to the pipette tip SAX protocol where fractions at pH 11, 8, 6, 5, 4 and 3 and were collected. Finally the remaining peptides were eluted in 50%ACN, 0.5% FA, 0.25M NaCl. All samples were cleaned up with C18 StageTips. Peptides were analysed with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Shotgun analysis were peformed on 50 cm EASY-spray reverse –phase column (ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using 120 min gradient, 0-25% B (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. SAX fractionated peptides were analysed with a reverse-phase column (150 mm×0.075 mm inner diameter, New Objective, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), using 120 min gradient, 0-25% B for SAX pH 11 fraction, 5-40% B for SAX fractions pH 8, 6, 5, 4, and 3, 5-60% B for final elution of SAX columns (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile).  Q-Exactive was operated at 250°C capillary temperature and 2.0 kV spray voltage. Full mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a mass range from m/z 400 to 1600 with resolution of 70 000 (m/z 200). Twelve most intense peaks with a charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution of 17 500. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 60 ms for full MS scans and 64 ms for tandem mass spectrum and AGC targets 5e5 for both, full MS and tandem MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.7.4 by searching against mouse UniProt database (canonical database, downloaded 20180611, containing 53 444 proteins) combined with an in-house database containing al the human and mouse mucin sequences, including mCherry MUC2 (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). Searches were performed with full tryptic specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a variable modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set 1% both, for peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Quantification was done based on LFQ protocol included in MaxQuant search.

### Publication Abstract
The intestinal mucus layer, an important element of epithelial protection, is produced by goblet cells. Intestinal goblet cells are assumed to be a homogeneous cell type. In this study, however, we delineated their specific gene and protein expression profiles and identified several distinct goblet cell populations that form two differentiation trajectories. One distinct subtype, the intercrypt goblet cells (icGCs), located at the colonic luminal surface, produced mucus with properties that differed from the mucus secreted by crypt-residing goblet cells. Mice with defective icGCs had increased sensitivity to chemically induced colitis and manifested spontaneous colitis with age. Furthermore, alterations in mucus and reduced numbers of icGCs were observed in patients with both active and remissive ulcerative colitis, which highlights the importance of icGCs in maintaining functional protection of the epithelium.

### Keywords
Goblet cells, Proteomics, Colon, Ileum

### Affiliations
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg


