### Accession
PXD006673

### Title
Hip Osteoarthritis Functional Genomics

### Description
The aim of this work is to apply an integrated systems approach to understand the biological underpinnings of hip osteoarthritis that culminates in the need for total joint replacement (TJR). This study is a feasibility pilot that integrates functional genomics data from diseased and non-diseased tissues of OA patients who have undergone TJR. For each tissue, we characterised epigenetic marks (methylation), gene transcription (RNASeq) and expression (quantitative proteomics). We also generated genotype data on the HumanCoreExome array for each individual. This data is part of a pre-publication release.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and TMT Labeling The protein content of each sample was precipitated by the addition of 30 μL TCA 8 M at 4 °C for 30 min. The protein pellets were washed twice with ice cold acetone and finally re-suspended in 40 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS with pulsed probe sonication. Aliquots containing 20 μg of total protein were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1h at 60 °C, alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide and subjected to overnight trypsin (70 ng/μL) digestion. TMT 10-plex (Thermo Scientific) labelling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were pooled and the mixture was dried with speedvac concentrator and stored at -20 °C until the high-pH Reverse Phase (RP) fractionation.   Peptide fractionation  Offline peptide fractionation based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography was performed using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, 120 Å) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with autosampler. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase (B) was composed of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 100 μL mobile phase (A), centrifuged and injected for fractionation. The multi-step gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min was as follows: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% (B), for 35 min gradient to 35% (B), gradient to 80% (B) in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and  re-equilibration to 5% (B). Signal was recorded at 280 nm and fractions were collected in a time dependent manner every one minute. The collected fractions were dried with SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -20 °C until the LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS Analysis   LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and a volume of 7 μL was loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the μlPickUp mode at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a multi-step gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap  RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column (Dionex) retrofitted to an electrospray emitter (New Objective, FS360-20-10-D-20) at 45 °C. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 90 min gradient to 38% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 13 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 2 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B.  Precursors were selected with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 3×105 and IT 100 ms in the top speed mode within 3 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 1.2 Th. Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 35 ms. MS3 quantification spectra were acquired with further HCD fragmentation of the top 10 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) excluding neutral losses of maximum m/z 18. Iontrap isolation width was set at 0.7 Th for MS1 isolation, collision energy was applied at 55% and the AGC setting was at 5×104 with 80 ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired within 110-400 m/z with 60k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  The acquired mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT search in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da for the CID spectra. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages and minimum length of 6 amino acids. TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. Maximum two different dynamic modifications were allowed for each peptide with maximum two repetitions each. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a UniProt fasta file containing 20,165 reviewed human entries. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a custom TMT-10plex Quantification Method with integration window tolerance 15 ppm, integration method the Most Confident Centroid at the MS3 level. Only peptides uniquely belonging to protein groups were used for quantification. Normalized and scaled summed S/N TMT intensities were computed for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Proteogenomics, Lc-ms/ms, Osteoarthritis, Hip

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


