### Accession
PXD018330

### Title
A mass spectrometry analysis of the TAK1 protein complex in Jurkat T cells.

### Description
Negative regulation of immunoreceptor signaling is required for preventing hyperimmune activation and maintaining immune homeostasis. The roles of p38IP in immunoreceptor signaling remain unclear. Here, we show that p38IP suppresses T cell receptor (TCR)/LPS-activated NF-κB and p38 by targeting TAK1 kinase and that p38IP protein levels are downregulated in human-PBMCs from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, inversely correlating with the enhanced activity of NF-κB and p38. Mechanistically, p38IP interacts with TAK1 to disassemble the TAK1-TAB (TAK1-binding protein) complex. p38IP overexpression decreases TCR-induced binding of K63-linked polyubiquitin (polyUb) chains to TAK1 but increases that to TAB2, and p38IP knockdown shows the opposite effects, indicating unanchored K63-linked polyUb chain transfer from TAB2 to TAK1. p38IP dynamically interacts with TAK1 upon stimulation, because of the higher binding affinity of TAK1 and p38IP for sequential polyUb binding by TAB2 and TAK1, respectively. Moreover, p38IP specifically scaffolds the deubiquitinase USP4 to deubiquitinate TAK1 once TAK1 is activated. These findings reveal a novel role and the mechanisms of p38IP in controlling TCR/LPS signaling and suggest that p38IP might participate in RA pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat TAg cells were harvested and lysed. After clearance by centrifugation, whole-cell lysates were incubated overnight with the TAK1 antibody, and proteins were immunoprecipitated for an additional 4 h at 4 °C with protein G-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Immunoprecipitates were extensively washed five times with lysis buffer and were separated by SDS-PAGE. Then, the gel panel containing 70-140 kDa bands were excised from the Coomassie blue-stained gel and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem MS. The proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin in-gel. After the desalting procedure, the peptides were analyzed by the LTQ Orbitrap Elite system and Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For information dependent acquisition, survey scans acquired in 250 ms and 20 product ion scans were collected in 50 ms per scan. The search engine ProteinPilot V4.5 was used. The search settings were as follows: Sample Type (identification), Cys Alkylation:Iodoacetamide, Digestion (Trypsin), Instrument (TripleTOF 5600). The mass tolerance of MS1 and MS2 is 0.05 and 0.1 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Negative regulation of immunoreceptor signaling is required for preventing hyperimmune activation and maintaining immune homeostasis. The roles of p38IP in immunoreceptor signaling remain unclear. Here, we show that p38IP suppresses T-cell receptor (TCR)/LPS-activated NF-&#x3ba;B and p38 by targeting TAK1 kinase and that p38IP protein levels are downregulated in human PBMCs from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, inversely correlating with the enhanced activity of NF-&#x3ba;B and p38. Mechanistically, p38IP interacts with TAK1 to disassemble the TAK1-TAB (TAK1-binding protein) complex. p38IP overexpression decreases TCR-induced binding of K63-linked polyubiquitin (polyUb) chains to TAK1 but increases that to TAB2, and p38IP knockdown shows the opposite effects, indicating unanchored K63-linked polyUb chain transfer from TAB2 to TAK1. p38IP dynamically interacts with TAK1 upon stimulation, because of the polyUb chain transfer and the higher binding affinity of TAK1 and p38IP for polyUb-bound TAB2 and TAK1, respectively. Moreover, p38IP scaffolds the deubiquitinase USP4 to deubiquitinate TAK1 once TAK1 is activated. These findings reveal a novel role and the mechanisms of p38IP in controlling TCR/LPS signaling and suggest that p38IP might participate in RA pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Jurkat t cells, Tak1

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
Immunity

### Submitter
chensi zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingqiu Li
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.


