### Accession
PXD033418

### Title
Metaproteome plasticity sheds light on the ecology of the rumen microbiome and its connection to host traits

### Description
The arsenal of genes that microbes express reflect the way in which they sense their environment. We have previously reported that the rumen microbiome composition and its coding capacity are different in animals having distinct feed efficiency states, even when fed an identical diet. Here, we reveal that many microbial populations show divergent proteome production in function of the feed efficiency state. Thus, proteomic data serve as a strong indicator of host feed efficiency state phenotype, overpowering predictions based on genomic and taxonomic information. We highlight protein production of specific phylogenies associated with each of the feed efficiency states. We also find remarkable plasticity of the proteome both in the individual population and at the community level, driven by niche partitioning and competition. These mechanisms result in protein production patterns which exhibit functional redundancy and checkerboard distribution that are tightly linked to the host feed efficiency phenotype. By linking microbial protein  production and the ecological mechanisms that act within the microbiome feed efficiency states, our present work reveals a layer of complexity that bears immense importance to the current global of food security and sustainability.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation To extract total proteins, a modified protocol from Deusch and Seifert was used (Deusch S. & Seifert J. Catching the tip of the iceberg—evaluation of sample preparation protocols for metaproteomic studies of the rumen microbiota. Proteomics. 2015; 15:3590–5). Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 µl in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml chloramphenicol; 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) and incubated for 10 min at 60 °C and 1,200 rpm in a thermo-mixer after addition of 150 µl 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5; 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)). After the addition of 500 µl DNAse buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg/ml DNAse I), the cells were lysed by ultra-sonication (amplitude 51-60%; cycle 0.5; 4 × 2 min) on ice, incubated in the thermo-mixer (10 min at 37 °C and 1,200 rpm) and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged again. The proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding 20% pre-cooled trichloroacetic acid (TCA; 20% v/v). After centrifugation (12,000 × g; 30 min; 4 °C), the protein pellets were washed twice in pre-cooled ( 20 °C) acetone (2 × 10 min; 12,000 × g; 4 °C) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The protein pellet was resuspended in 2× SDS sample buffer (4% SDS (w/v); 20% glycerin (w/v); 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8; bromphenol blue (tip of a spatula, to add color), 3.6% 2 mercaptoethanol (v/v)) by 5 min sonication bath and vortexing. Samples were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C and separated by 1D SDS-PAGE (Criterion TG 4-20% Precast Midi Gel, BIO-RAD Laboratories, Inc., USA). As previously described, after fixation and staining, each gel line was cut into 10 pieces, destained, desiccated, and rehydrated in trypsin (Bonn F., et al., Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Analytical Chemistry, 2014. 86(15): p. 7421-7.). The in-gel digest was performed by incubation overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted with Aq. dest. by sonication for 15 min. The sample volume was reduced in a vacuum centrifuge.  MS measurement Before MS analysis, the tryptic peptide mixture was loaded on an Easy-nLC II or Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) system equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm; outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted with a nonlinear 156 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (95% acetonitrile (v/v); 0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) in solvent A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Overview scan at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap in a range of 300-2,000 m/z was followed by 20 MS/MS fragment scans of the 20 most abundant precursor ions. Ions without detected charge state as well as singly charged ions were excluded from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Original raw spectra files were converted into the common mzXML format, using MSConvert from ProteoWizard release 3.0.10141 (Adusumilli, Ravali, and Parag Mallick. "Data conversion with ProteoWizard msConvert." Proteomics. Humana Press, New York, NY. 2017), in order to further process it in downstream analysis. A proteomic search library was produced by predicting and translating genes over 107 rumen MAGs using Prodigal tool (version 2.6.3) (Hyatt, Doug, et al. "Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site identification." BMC bioinformatics 11.1. 2010), keeping only unique protein sequences. Protein sequences from the hosting animal (Bos taurus) and together with common contaminant protein sequences (64,701 in total) were added to the proteomic search library. The spectra file from each MS run of a given sample was searched against the protein search library, using the Comet search engine (version 2017.01 rev. 1) (A Deeper Look into Comet - Implementation and Features. Eng JK, Hoopmann MR, Jahan TA, Egertson JD, Noble WS, MacCoss MJ. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2015; Comet: an open source tandem mass spectrometry sequence database search tool. Eng JK, Jahan TA, Hoopmann MR. Proteomics. 2012) with default settings. The TPP pipeline (Trans Proteomic Pipeline version v5.1.0) (Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, a standardized data processing pipeline for large-scale reproducible proteomics informatics Deutsch EW, Mendoza L, Shteynberg D, Slagel J, Sun Z, Moritz RL. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2015; A uniform proteomics MS/MS analysis platform utilizing open XML file formats Keller A, Eng J, Zhang N, Li XJ, Aebersold R. Mol Syst Biol. 2005) was used to further process the COMET search results and produce a protein table for each sample. In detail, PeptideProphet (A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R. Anal Chem. 2003) was applied to validate peptide assignments, with filtering criteria set to probability of 0.001, accurate mass binning, non parametric errors model (decoy model) and decoy hits reporting. In addition, iProphet (iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves peptide and protein identification rates and error estimates Shteynberg D, Deutsch EW, Lam H, Eng JK, Sun Z, Tasman N, Mendoza L, Moritz RL, Aebersold R, Nesvizhskii AI. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011) was applied to refine peptide identifications coming from PeptideProphet. Finally ProteinProphet (A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R. Anal Chem. 2003) was applied to statistically validate peptide identifications at the protein level. This was carried out using the command: xinteract -N[my_sample_nick].pep.xml -THREADS=40 -p0.001 -l6 -PPM -OAPd -dREVERSE_ -ip [file1].pep.xml [file2].pep.xml .. [fileN].pep.xml > xinteract.out 2> xinteract.err. Then, TPP was used in order to produce a protein table from the resulting ProtXML files (extension ipro.prot.xml). Proteins belonging to a MAG that was absent from one or more of the twelve animal samples were removed from further analyses. Subsequently, proteins that had an identification probability < 0.9 were also removed as well as proteins supported with less than 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The arsenal of genes that microbes express reflect the way in which they sense their environment. We have previously reported that the rumen microbiome composition and its coding capacity are different in animals having distinct feed efficiency states, even when fed an identical diet. Here, we reveal that many microbial populations belonging to the bacteria and archaea domains show divergent proteome production in function of the feed efficiency state. Thus, proteomic data serve as a strong indicator of host feed efficiency state phenotype, overpowering predictions based on genomic and taxonomic information. We highlight protein production of specific phylogenies associated with each of the feed efficiency states. We also find remarkable plasticity of the proteome both in the individual population and at the community level, driven by niche partitioning and competition. These mechanisms result in protein production patterns that exhibit functional redundancy and checkerboard distribution that are tightly linked to the host feed efficiency phenotype. By linking microbial protein production and the ecological mechanisms that act within the microbiome feed efficiency states, our present work reveals a layer of complexity that bears immense importance to the current global challenges of food security and sustainability.

### Keywords
Feed efficient animal, Rumen microbiome, Lc-ms/ms, Rumen metaproteome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Anke Trautwein-Schult

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


