### Accession
PXD026304

### Title
Utilizing of quantitative proteomics to identify species-specific protein therapeutic target for treatment of leishmaniasis.

### Description
Identification of common Leishmania antigen proteins is important for practical purposes ranging from diagnostic to the development of a vaccine for the prevention of leishmaniasis. Moreover, we need to establish the potential drug targets that interrupt the replication and transmission of the pathogen to promote drug discovery. Therefore, the objective of this work was to provide the public proteome database which would be useful for the establishment of novel protein antigenicity for therapeutic purposes. This information would introduce the alternative protein targets for Leishmaniasis, allowing the development of therapeutic strategies for the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Leishmania cells were prepared by previous studies [Krobthong, S., et al., The anti-oxidative effect of Lingzhi protein hydrolysates on lipopolysaccharide-stimulated A549 cells. Food Bioscience, 2021: p. 101093]. Briefly, the cells were lysed by lysis buffer solution (0.5% Triton X-100, 10mM DTT, 10mM NaCl in 50mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. Proteins extracted were precipitated using ice-cold acetone and stored at -20 °C for 16 hours. After precipitation, the protein pellet was reconstituted in 0.2% RapidGest SF (Waters, UK) in 10 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce, New York, NY, USA), using bovine serum albumin as the standard. Prior to proteomics experiment, extraction efficiency and integrity are the very first qualities that need to be assessed for all protein samples. Quality assessment of extracted protein samples was conducted using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis method associated with Coomassie blue staining.  For the LC-MS/MS analysis, the total protein amount of 20 µg was subjected to trypsin digestion. Reduction of the sulfhydryl bonds by using 5 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 72oC for 1 hour and alkylation of sulfhydryl at room temperature for 25 minutes in the dark. The solution was cleaned up by the Desalting column (Zebra-spin). The flow-through solution was enzymatically digested by trypsin (Promega, Germany) at a ratio of 1:60 (enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37oC for 3 hours.  The digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and transferred to a TruView LCMS vial (Waters, UK).

### Data Protocol
A total of 600 ng peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS. The spectrum data was collected in a positive mode on an Orbitrap HF hybrid mass spectrometer combined with an EASY-nLC1000 nano-liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with a nano C18 column. LC conditions were the following: Mobile phase A and B were used, with mobile phase A composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B comprising 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded directly onto the analytical column C18 separation was first linear gradient separated according to 100 min long from 2-45% B from the nano-LC system at a constant flow rate of 300 nl·min−1. The analytical column was regenerated at 90% B for 10 minutes and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 25 minutes. The peptides were analyzed by applying a data-dependent TopN15 acquisition method, followed by a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at collision energy = 28. Full scan (MS) mass spectra were acquired from m/z 400 to 1600 with an AGC target set at 3 × 106 ions and a resolution of 120k. MS/MS scan was initiated when the ACG target reached 1×105 ions and a resolution of 15k.  The raw mass spectra (.raw file) were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with identified against the Uniprot protein database (organism: leishmania; 100,302 sequences) retrieved on 15 April 2021. For protein identification and quantification, the setting parameters were as follows: peptide tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.05 Da; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide = 3; digest enzyme = trypsin; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The False discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identification were both set to 0.01 (1%). The normalization of relative protein abundances ratio was performed by total peptide amount for each LC-runs (across all runs; n=12) by normalization algorithm (Total intensity count) of the software.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmaniasis is a tropical disease caused by <i>Leishmania</i> parasites, which are transmitted through the bites of infected sandflies. We focused on the emergence of leishmaniasis in Thailand caused by a species (<i>Leishmania orientalis</i>). Treatment by chemotherapy is not effective against <i>L. orientalis</i>. Hence, we intended to solve this issue using a proteomics approach to investigate protein profiles and <i>in silico</i> analysis for the identification of antigenic proteins from <i>L. orientalis</i>, <i>Leishmania martiniquensis</i>, and <i>Leishmania donovani</i>. Using principal component analysis (PCA), protein profile comparisons indicated that different species of <i>Leishmania</i> are different at the protein level. Proteomics analysis identified 6099 proteins. Among these proteins, 1065 proteins were used for further analysis. There were 16 proteins that were promising candidates for therapeutic aspects as they were abundantly expressed and common to all species. <i>In silico</i> analysis of protein's antigenicity revealed that eight proteins had the potential for the development of antigenic molecules. Protein profile information and these antigenic proteins may play key roles in the pathogeny of leishmaniasis and can be used as novel therapeutic targets against leishmaniasis in the future.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; orbitrap; antigenic molecules

### Affiliations
1.Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam Wong Wan Road, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand 2.Center for Advanced Studies in Nanotechnology for Chemical, Food and Agricultural Industries, KU Institute for Advanced Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand
Mahidol University

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Kiattawee Choowongkomon
1.Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam Wong Wan Road, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand 2.Center for Advanced Studies in Nanotechnology for Chemical, Food and Agricultural Industries, KU Institute for Advanced Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand


