### Accession
PXD016197

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of C57BL/6J mice after optic nerve crush Using iTRAQ Labeling

### Description
We used two groups of C57BL/6J mice, one with optic nerve crush on one eye, and another with no crush as control. Three mice were subjected to optic nerve crush, with sample names 121, 113, 114 and two were used as control with sample names 118 and 119. For the optic nerve crush, a surgical peritomy was made behind and above the eyeball and the eye muscles were gently retracted to expose the optic nerve. Dumont #5 forceps (FST) were used to crush the optic nerve approximately 0.5-1 mm behind the globe without damaging retinal vessels or affecting the blood supply.

### Sample Protocol
The iTRAQ labeling employs five isobaric (145 kDa) reagents. iTRAQ tag consists of an N-methyl piperazine reporter group (118 kDa or 119 kDa or 1210 kDa or 113 kDa or 114 kDa), a balance group, and an N-hydroxy succinimide ester peptide reacting group. Following preparation (denaturation, reduction, alkylation and digestion), each sample is labeled using one of the iTRAQ tags and then all iTRAQ labeled samples are pooled together. The peptide mixture is subjected to UHPLC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra are searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database using Proteome Discoverer software. Relative quantitation of peptides is determined based on the relative intensities of reporter ions released from iTRAQ-tagged peptides by fragmentation during tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The MS/MS spectra are searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database with the following settings: trypsin cleavage specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages, and N-terminal and dynamic iTRAQ modifications. Mass tolerance is specified to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Relaxed false discovery rate (FDR) is set to 0.05 and strict FDR is set to 0.01. Relative quantitation of peptides is determined based on the relative intensities of reporter ions released from iTRAQ-tagged peptides

### Publication Abstract
Growth cones (GCs) are structures associated with growing neurons. GC membrane expansion, which necessitates protein-lipid interactions, is critical to axonal elongation in development and in adult neuritogenesis. We present a multi-omic analysis that integrates proteomics and lipidomics data for the identification of GC pathways, cell phenotypes, and lipid-protein interactions, with an analytic platform to facilitate the visualization of these data. We combine lipidomic data from GC and adult axonal regeneration following optic nerve crush. Our results reveal significant molecular variability in GCs across developmental ages that aligns with the upregulation and downregulation of lipid metabolic processes and correlates with distinct changes in the lipid composition of GC plasmalemma. We find that these processes also define the transition into a growth-permissive state in the adult central nervous system. The insight derived from these analyses will aid in promoting adult regeneration and functional innervation in devastating neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Nerve crush, Optic nerve, Itraq

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA
University of Miami Bascom Palmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya, M. Tech., Ph. D.
University of Miami Bascom Palmer Eye Institute


