### Accession
PXD023017

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial complexes isolated from seedlings or mature leaves

### Description
Assembly of the plant OXPHOS complexes was studied using complexome profiling. mitochondria were extracted from seedlings or mature leaves of the reference organism Arabidopsis thaliana. In seedlings, a fast-growing tissue, mitochondria biogenesis is very active whereas in mature leaves, little biogenesis is occurring. Comparison of both datasets allow the identification of assembly intermediates that are accumulating in seedlings but not in leaves.

### Sample Protocol
Plant mitochondria were isolated. OXPHOS complexes were solubilized with 1% dodecylmaltoside and separated on a blue-native gel. each gel lane was cut in 30 fractions that were all analysed by mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were uploaded into Maxquant and analysis was performed using an in-house database containing proteins from Arabidopsis (TAIR 11) plus the edited version of the organellar proteins. Default Maxquant parameters were used, iBaq were selected, log fit was not selected.

### Publication Abstract
All present-day mitochondria originate from a single endosymbiotic event that gave rise to the last eukaryotic common ancestor more than a billion years ago. However, to date, many aspects of mitochondrial evolution have remained unresolved. Comparative genomics and proteomics have revealed a complex evolutionary origin for many mitochondrial components. To understand the evolution of the respiratory chain, we have examined both the components and the mechanisms of the assembly pathway of complex I. Complex I represents the first enzyme in the respiratory chain, and complex I deficiencies have dramatic consequences in both animals and plants. The complex is located in the mitochondrial inner membrane and possesses two arms: one embedded in the inner membrane and one protruding in the matrix. Here, we describe the assembly pathway of complex I in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Using a proteomics approach called complexome profiling, we have resolved the different steps in the assembly process in plants. We propose a model for the stepwise assembly of complex I, including every subunit. We then compare this pathway with the corresponding pathway in humans and find that complex I assembly in plants follows a different, and likely ancestral, pathway compared with the one in humans. We show that the main evolutionary changes in complex I structure and assembly in humans occurred at the level of the membrane arm, whereas the matrix arm remained rather conserved.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Complexome profiling, Arabidopsis, Oxphos, Biogenesis

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology/Cell Physiology Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg  Weinbergweg 10  06120, Halle(Saale) Germany

Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Etienne Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Etienne H. Meyer
Institute of Biology/Cell Physiology Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg  Weinbergweg 10  06120, Halle(Saale) Germany


