### Accession
PXD027120

### Title
Deciphering the cellular roles and dissecting functional regions of UPF3A and UPF3B in human NMD

### Description
The paralogous proteins UPF3A and UPF3B are involved in recognizing defective mRNAs that are degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). While UPF3B has been demonstrated to support NMD, UPF3A was reported to act either an NMD activator or an NMD inhibitor. Here, we present a comprehensive functional analysis of UPF3A and UPF3B in human cells using overexpression, knockdowns, knockouts (KO) and rescue experiments. Overexpression or knockout of UPF3A did not result in detectable changes in global NMD activity or other specific transcriptome alterations . NMD activity was also virtually unchanged in UPF3B KO cells. In contrast, the co-depletion or co-knockout of UPF3A and UPF3B resulted in a marked NMD inhibition and a global upregulation of PTC-containing transcripts. In rescue experiments UPF3B was fully functional when either UPF2- or EJC binding was impaired . However, the deletion of both interaction sites or one interaction site and a central region of UPF3B impaired its NMD function. Altogether, our work identifies critical functional domains of UPF3B and establishes redundant roles of UPF3A and UPF3B during NMD.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic protein digestion was performed by the proteomics core facility cologne and  achieved by following a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). In brief, paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the reduced and alkylated protein samples and then mixed 1:1 with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Protein-beads-complexes form during the 8 min incubation step, followed by capture using an in-house build magnetic rack. After two washing steps with 70% EtOH, the samples were washed once with 100% ACN. Then they were air-dried, resuspended in 5 μl 50 mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate supplemented with trypsin and LysC in an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated for 16 h at 37°C. The next day the beads were again resuspended in 200 μl ACN and after 8 min incubation placed on the magnetic rack. Tryptic peptides were washed with 100% ACN and air-dried before dissolved in 4% DMSO and transfer into 96-well PCR tubes. The last step was the acidification with 1 μl of 10% formic acid, then the samples were ready for mass spec analysis. Proteomics analysis was performed by the proteomics core facility cologne at CECAD via data-dependent acquisition using an Easy nLC1200 ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system connected via nano electrospray ionization to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (all Thermo Scientific) running in DDA Top10 mode. Based on their hydrophobicity the tryptic peptides were separated using a chromatographic gradient of 60 min with a binary system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) with a total flow of 250 nl/min. For the separation in-house made analytical columns (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 μm) containing 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell EC120 beads (Agilent) that were heated to 50 °C in a column oven (Sonation) were used. Over a time period of 41 min Buffer B was linearly increased from 3% to 27% and then more rapidly up to 50% in 8 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 1 min followed by 10 min at 95% to wash the analytical column. Full MS spectra (300-1,750 m/z) were accomplished with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. In each full MS spectrum, the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE:27) with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.8 m/z and 10 s dynamic exclusion. The MS/MS spectra were then measured with a 35,000 resolution, an injection time of maximum 110 ms and an AGC target of 5e5. For label-free measurements, MS analysis was performed as described above with a slightly adjusted gradient as followed: 3 – 30% B in 41 min, 30 – 50% B in 8 min, 50-95% B in 1 min, followed by 10 min washing at 95%.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW files were then analyzed with MaxQuant suite (version 1.5.3.8) on standard settings with the before mentioned SILAC labels {Cox, 2008 #247}. By matching against the human UniProt database the peptides were then identified using the Andromeda scoring algorithm {Cox, 2011 #248}. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. The digestion protein was Trypsin/P. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used to identify peptide-spectrum matches and to quantify the proteins. Data processing and statistical analysis was performed in the Perseus software (version 1.6.1.15.5.3) {Tyanova, 2016 #249}. Using the One-sample t-test the significantly changed proteins were identified (H0 = 0, fudge factor S0 = 0.12). Visualization  was performed with RStudio (version 1.2.5033). For label-free analyses, LFQ values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm (10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) in MaxQuant. Significantly changed proteins were identified by two-sample t-testing (fudge factor S0 = 0.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upf3, Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Gene paralogs, Mrna turnover

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Institute for Genetics, UzK, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics, UzK, Cologne, Germany


