### Accession
PXD028280

### Title
Human milk dynamics: Inter-individual variation in milk proteome

### Description
The aim of this study was to map inter-individual variation in the human milk proteome and to investigate relationships between these data and possible explanations for observed variation.

### Sample Protocol
Human milk samples were thawed at 4°C and centrifuged at 1500g for 10 minutes at 10°C. From this, skimmed milk was centrifuged at 100,000g for 30 minutes at 30°C. Milk serum was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a bicinchonic acid (BCA) assay. Milk serum samples were diluted in 100 mM Tris to 1 µg/µL protein. To 100 µL diluted milk sample, a final concentration of 15 mM dithiothreitol was added and subsequently incubated at 45°C for 30 minutes. The sample was transferred into 8 M urea giving a final urea concentration of 6M and of 20 mM acrylamide was added after which incubation took place for 10 min at room temperature. From this alkylated protein sample, 180 µL, containing 36 µg protein, was transferred to a Pall 3K omega filter (10–20 kDa cutoff, OD003C34; Pall, Washington, NY, USA) and the samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 min. The filter was washed with a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. 100 µL 5 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin was added and digestion took place overnight while mildly shaking at room temperature. The filter with the tryptic peptides was centrifuged and washed with 100 µL of 1 mL/L HCOOH solution. The pH of the final peptide solution was set to around 3 using a 10% trifluoroacetic acid solution. The resulting tryptic peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Human milk is a dynamic biofluid, and its detailed composition receives increasing attention. While most studies focus on changes over time or differences between maternal characteristics, interindividual variation receives little attention. Nevertheless, a comprehensive insight into this can help interpret human milk studies and help human milk banks provide targeted milk for recipients. This study aimed to map interindividual variation in the human milk proteome, peptidome, and metabolome and to investigate possible explanations for this variation. A set of 286 milk samples was collected from 29 mothers in the third month postpartum. Samples were pooled per mother, and proteins, peptides, and metabolites were analyzed. A substantial coefficient of variation (&gt;100%) was observed for 4.6% and 36.2% of the proteins and peptides, respectively. In addition, using weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA), 5 protein and 11 peptide clusters were obtained, showing distinct characteristics. With this, several associations were found between the different data sets and with specific sample characteristics. This study provides insight into the dynamics of human milk protein, peptide, and metabolite composition. In addition, it will support future studies that evaluate the effect size of a parameter of interest by enabling a comparison with natural variability.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens; breast milk; proteomics; proteins; variability

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


