### Accession
PXD033694

### Title
Characterization of the SF3B1 interactome

### Description
CDK9 is a critical kinase required for the productive transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II (pol II). As part of P-TEFb, CDK9 phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of pol II and elongation factors, including SPT5, which allows pol II to elongate past the early elongation checkpoint (EEC) encountered soon after initiation. We show that, in addition to halting pol II at the EEC, loss of CDK9 activity causes premature termination of transcription across the last exon, loss of polyadenylation factors from chromatin, and loss of polyadenylation of nascent transcripts. Inhibition of the phosphatase PP2A abrogates the premature termination and loss of polyadenylation caused by CDK9 inhibition, indicating that this kinase/phosphatase pair regulates transcription elongation and RNA processing at the end of protein-coding genes. Our phosphoproteomic analyses after CDK9 inhibition, using either DRB or an analog-sensitive CDK9 cell line, confirm the splicing factor SF3B1 as an additional key target of this kinase. These results emphasize the important roles that CDK9 plays in coupling transcription elongation and termination to RNA maturation downstream of the EEC. As part of this project, we characterized the interactome of SF3B1 in HeLa cells in duplicate.

### Sample Protocol
SF3B1 duplicate pull-down samples were either digested in-solution after glycine elution at pH 2.3 and neutralization, or digested on-beads. On-beads and in-solution protein samples were respectively denaturated with 8M or 4M urea in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM) for 10 minutes at room temperature. After denaturation, cysteines were reduced with of TCEP (10 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 2-Chloroacetamide (50 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then pre-digested with LysC (1 ug/100 ug of sample) for 2 hrs at 37°C. Before overnight digestion with trypsin (1 ug/40 ug of sample) at 37°C, urea was diluted down to 2M in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM) and calcium chloride was added at 2mM final.  The next day, tryptic digestion was stopped with the addition of formic acid (5%). Digested peptides were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,200rpm at 4°C to remove undigested material. Supernatant was loaded onto handmade C18 stage tip, pre-activated with 100% acetonitrile, by centrifugation at 4,000rpm at room temperature. Peptides were washed twice in TFA 0.1%, eluted in 50% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA and speed-vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended into 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000) coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 60 minutes linear gradient (15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)) at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 100ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120ms with fixed mass at 180m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome discoverer software version 1.4 against a protein sequence database containing 20,405 protein entries, including 20,122 Homo sapiens proteins (Uniprot database release of 2020-04) and 283 common contaminants. During database searching cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), all N-terminal residues to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50ppm on the precursor and 0.6 Da on the fragment ions. Data was filtered at FDR below 1% at PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
CDK9 is a kinase critical for the productive transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II (pol II). As part of P-TEFb, CDK9 phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of pol II and elongation factors, which allows pol II to elongate past the early elongation checkpoint (EEC) encountered soon after initiation. We show that, in addition to halting pol II at the EEC, loss of CDK9 activity causes premature termination of transcription across the last exon, loss of polyadenylation factors from chromatin, and loss of polyadenylation of nascent transcripts. Inhibition of the phosphatase PP2A abrogates the premature termination and loss of polyadenylation caused by CDK9 inhibition, indicating that this kinase/phosphatase pair regulates transcription elongation and RNA processing at the end of protein-coding genes. We also confirm the splicing factor SF3B1 as a target of CDK9 and show that SF3B1 in complex with polyadenylation factors is lost from chromatin after CDK9 inhibition. These results emphasize the important roles that CDK9 plays in coupling transcription elongation and termination to RNA maturation downstream of the EEC.

### Keywords
Transcription, Splicing, Interactome, Sf3b1

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie  Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Shona Murphy
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford


