### Accession
PXD022030

### Title
N2O-reducing population in anaerobic digestate for next-generation biorest

### Description
Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a core technology in management of urban organic wastes, converting a fraction of the organic carbon to methane and the residual digestate, the biorest, have a great potential to become a major organic fertilizer for agricultural soils in the future. At the same time, mitigation of N2O-emissions from the agricultural soils is needed to reduce the climate forcing by food production. Our goal was therefore to enrich for N2O reducing bacteria in AD digestates prior to fertilization, and in this way provide an avenue for large-scale and low-cost cultivation of strongly N2O reducing bacteria which can be directly introduced to agricultural soils in large enough volumes to alter the fate of nitrogen in the soils. Gas kinetics and meta-omics (metagenomics and metaproteomics) analyses of the N2O enriched digestates identified populations of N2O respiring organisms that grew by harvesting fermentation intermediates of the methanogenic consortium.

### Sample Protocol
Digestate from a mesophilic anaerobic digester (wastewater treatment plant) was incubated at 20°C with addition of N2O. Samples for metagenomic and metaproteomic analysis were taken at taken at three timepoints 0 (M1), 115 (M2) and 325 (M3) hours. Important: please note that these samples may be referred to as respectively M0, M115 and M325 in related publications. The metagenomes were assembled and binned and the operating reading frames (ORFs) from the recovered metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) were used as a protein sequence database for metaproteomic analysis. For the protein extraction, cells were prepared by an initial centrifugation of the mesophilic digestate samples in replicates (filename: Mx_n_*; n=3 for M1 and M3, n=2 for M2) to separate the fiber fraction from the secretome (filename: Mx_n_sec_*). The secretome was filtered with a 0.22 sterile filter to remove cells and treated with TCA (10% final concentration) to precipitate the secreted proteins. The fiber fraction was resuspended with dissociation buffer (1 % MeOH, 1 % tert-butanol, 0.1 % Tween-80, pH 2) and cells collected by transfer of the cell-containing supernatant after a gentle spin (100 × g, 30 sec). This procedure was repeated three times to increase the amount of collected cells. Lysates were prepared by bead-beating in 4 % SDS, using glass beads (diameter ≤ 106 μm), followed by centrifugation (16.000 × g, 15 minutes) to spin down beads and cellular debris. The proteins in the collected lysate were precipitated using TCA as above and analyzed on an SDS-PAGE gel (270V, 4 minutes) together with the proteins from the secretome. Each sample was excised from the gels in four fractions (filename: *_F1 to *_F4), reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 °C, carbamidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature, and further digested into peptides using 300 ng trypsin sample-1 at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merch Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), according to manufacturer’s instructions, and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Peptides were separated using an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. × 50 cm, nanoViper) with a 90-minutes gradient from 3.2 to 44 % [v/v] acetonitrile in 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) at flow rate 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring one full scan (400-1500 m/z) at R=70000 followed by (up to) 10 dependent MS/MS scans at R=35000.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 against a database consisting of the proteome of 149 MAGs recovered from metagenomics data from the same samples (description of the MAGs and accession numbers to metagenomics data can be found in the related publication). Common contaminants such as human keratins, trypsin and bovine serum albumin were concatenated to the sample specific database as well as reversed sequences of all protein entries for estimation of false discovery rates. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant. Protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Tolerance levels for peptide identifications were 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for MS and MS/MS, respectively, and two missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed. In the downstream analysis, additional quality filtering and interpretation was performed in the software platform Perseus version 1.6.0.7. This included removal of contaminations, reverse hits and hits only identified by site. Furthermore, all identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy strategy. For a protein to be considered valid, we required the protein to be both identified and quantified in at least 2/3 replicates for samples taken at 0 and 325 hours. Although the sample taken after 115 hours only occurred in duplicates due to limited digestate material, we also required proteins to be identified in both replicates (2/2) to preserve a high confidence. Finally, at least one unique peptide per protein was required for a protein to be considered as valid.

### Publication Abstract
Inoculating agricultural soils with nitrous oxide respiring bacteria (NRB) can reduce N<sub>2</sub>O-emission, but would be impractical as a standalone operation. Here we demonstrate that digestates obtained after biogas production are suitable substrates and vectors for NRB. We show that indigenous NRB in digestates grew to high abundance during anaerobic enrichment under N<sub>2</sub>O. Gas-kinetics and meta-omic analyses showed that these NRB's, recovered as metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), grew by harvesting fermentation intermediates of the methanogenic consortium. Three NRB's were isolated, one of which matched the recovered MAG of a Dechloromonas, deemed by proteomics to be the dominant producer of N<sub>2</sub>O-reductase in the enrichment. While the isolates harbored genes required for a full denitrification pathway and could thus both produce and sequester N<sub>2</sub>O, their regulatory traits predicted that they act as N<sub>2</sub>O sinks in soil, which was confirmed experimentally. The isolates were grown by aerobic respiration in digestates, and fertilization with these NRB-enriched digestates reduced N<sub>2</sub>O emissions from soil. Our use of digestates for low-cost and large-scale inoculation with NRB in soil can be taken as a blueprint for future applications of this powerful instrument to engineer the soil microbiome, be it for enhancing plant growth, bioremediation, or any other desirable function.

### Keywords
N2o-reduction, Lc-msms, Biorest, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biosciences, NMBU-Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway
Faculty of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway

### Submitter
Live Hagen

### Lab Head
Dr Phillip B. Pope
Faculty of Biosciences, NMBU-Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


