### Accession
PXD012743

### Title
Pptc7 is an essential phosphatase for promoting mammalian mitochondrial metabolism and biogenesis

### Description
Mitochondrial proteins are replete with phosphorylation; however, the origin, abundance, and functional relevance of these modifications are largely unclear. Nonetheless, mitochondria possess multiple resident phosphatases, suggesting that protein dephosphorylation may be broadly important for mitochondrial activities. To explore this, we deleted the poorly characterized matrix phosphatase Pptc7 from mice using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Strikingly, Pptc7-/- mice exhibited marked hypoketotic hypoglycemia, elevated acylcarnitines, and lactic acidosis, and died soon after birth. Pptc7-/- tissues had significantly diminished mitochondrial size and protein content despite normal transcript levels, but consistently elevated phosphorylation on select mitochondrial proteins. These putative Pptc7 substrates include the protein translocase complex subunit Timm50, whose phosphorylation reduced import activity. We further find that phosphorylation in or near the mitochondrial targeting sequences of multiple proteins can disrupt their import rates and matrix processing. Overall, our data define Pptc7 as a protein phosphatase essential for proper mitochondrial function and biogenesis during the extrauterine transition.  Natalie M Niemi, Gary M Wilson, Katherine A Overmyer, F.-Nora Vogtle, Danielle C Lohman, Kathryn L Schueler, Alan D Attie, Chris Meisinger, Joshua J Coon, David J Pagliarini. (2018) “Pptc7 is an essential phosphatase for promoting mammalian mitochondrial metabolism and biogenesis.” biorx: https://doi.org/10.1101/426247

### Sample Protocol
Protein from lysed, homogenized mouse tissues was digested into tryptic peptides following previously reported protocols.(1) This yielded sufficient material to label 0.35 mg of each heart sample and 0.5 mg of each liver sample with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Labeling was performed following manufacturer recommended protocols except for the peptide:label ratio, which was changed to 0.5:0.8::mg:mg. Equal amounts of sample were combined for each 10-plex experiment following validation of labelling efficiency (> 95% labelling of N-terminal amines). Phosphopeptide enrichment with titanium chelation (Ti-IMAC, ReSyn Biosciences, Edenvale, South Africa) was performed on pooled samples using previously reported methods.(2) The depleted sample was saved for protein quantitation. 500 µg of each depleted sample and the entirety of each phosphopeptide enrichment were separated over an Acquity BEH C18 reverse phase column (130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle size, 2.1 x 100 mm, Waters Corp) held at 60 °C using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC (600 µL/min flow rate, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) running with basic mobile phases. Resulting fractions were analyzed on a q-LTQ-OT hybrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) operated under data dependent acquisition following nano-LC separation and electrospray ionization. MS1 survey scans were performed in the orbitrap (60K resolution, AGC – 1e6, 50 ms max injection time). Product ion scans following HCD fragmentation (35% NCE) were also performed in the orbitrap (60K resolution, AGC – 2e5, 118 ms max injection time). Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion (60 s) were enabled.   (1) Hebert, A. S., Richards, A. L., Bailey, D. J., Ulbrich, A., Coughlin, E. E., Westphall, M. S., and Coon, J. J. (2014) The One Hour Yeast Proteome. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 339–347. (2) Riley, N. M., Hebert, A. S., Dürnberger, G., Stanek, F., Mechtler, K., Westphall, M. S., and Coon, J. J. (2017) Phosphoproteomics with Activated Ion Electron Transfer Dissociation. Anal. Chem. 89, 6367–6376.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were searched with the Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm (OMSSA) within the Coon OMSSA Proteomic Analysis Software Suite (COMPASS) against a database of canonical proteins and isoforms (Uniprot, Mus musculus).(1,2) TMT labelling was imposed as a fixed modification at lysines and N-termini and variable at tyrosines. Additionally, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, as well as accompanying neutral losses, were set as variable modifications for enriched samples. Search results were filtered to a false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide and protein levels. Sites of phosphorylation were considered localized if given a localization score >0.75 by the PhosphoRS module within COMPASS.(3) Phosphopeptide intensities were normalized to the total reporter ion intensity at the protein level, as well as, protein mean-normalized fold change. An associated P value was calculated using Student’s t test assuming equal variance. Multiple hypothesis testing was performed by Benjimini-Hochberg correction.  (1) Geer, L. Y., Markey, S. P., Kowalak, J. A., Wagner, L., Xu, M., Maynard, D. M., Yang, X., Shi, W., and Bryant, S. H. Open mass spectrometry search algorithm. J. Proteome Res. 3, 958–64. (2) Wenger, C. D., Phanstiel, D. H., Lee, M. V., Bailey, D. J., and Coon, J. J. (2011) COMPASS: A suite of pre- and post-search proteomics software tools for OMSSA. Proteomics 11, 1064–1074. (3) Taus, T., Köcher, T., Pichler, P., Paschke, C., Schmidt, A., Henrich, C., and Mechtler, K. (2011) Universal and confident phosphorylation site localization using phosphoRS. J. Proteome Res. 10, 5354–5362.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial proteins are replete with phosphorylation, yet its functional relevance remains largely unclear. The presence of multiple resident mitochondrial phosphatases, however, suggests that protein dephosphorylation may be broadly important for calibrating mitochondrial activities. To explore this, we deleted the poorly characterized matrix phosphatase Pptc7 from mice using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Strikingly, Pptc7<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibit hypoketotic hypoglycemia, elevated acylcarnitines and serum lactate, and die soon after birth. Pptc7<sup>-/-</sup> tissues have markedly diminished mitochondrial size and protein content despite normal transcript levels, and aberrantly elevated phosphorylation on select mitochondrial proteins. Among these, we identify the protein translocase complex subunit Timm50 as a putative Pptc7 substrate whose phosphorylation reduces import activity. We further find that phosphorylation within or near the mitochondrial targeting sequences of multiple proteins could disrupt their import rates and matrix processing. Overall, our data define Pptc7 as a protein phosphatase essential for proper mitochondrial function and biogenesis during the extrauterine transition.

### Keywords
Pptc7, Phosphoproteome, Mitochondia

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Gary Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J. Coon
University of Wisconsin-Madison


