### Accession
PXD012068

### Title
Cyclin dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) regulates the circadian clock

### Description
We show that the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) regulates the mammalian circadian clock via phosphorylation of PER2. CDK5 phosphorylated PER2 at serine residue 394 (S394) as shown by an in vitro kinase assay.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided in vitro kinase assays and mass spectrometry analyses were performed essentially as described (doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.10.040). Briefly, recombinant Cdk5/p35 (Millipore) was incubated with the GST-fused PER2 protein fragment. On 10 kDa MW-cutoff filters (PALL) samples were incubated in kinase buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.625 mM DTT, Phostop tablets (Roche), 6.25 mM MgCl2, and 1.8 mM ATP (at 30°C for 1 h). Samples without ATP were used as negative control. Assays were quenched by 8 M urea and 1 mM DTT. Protein digestion for MS analysis was performed overnight (PMID: 19377485). Phosphopeptides were enriched by metal oxide affinity enrichment using titanium dioxide (GL Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan) (PMID: 26633130).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analysed using MaxQuant Software version 1.4.1.2 (PMID: 19029910) for peak detection, quantification and peptide identification using a full length Uniprot Mouse database (April, 2016) and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for digestion as reference.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian oscillations emerge from transcriptional and post-translational feedback loops. An important step in generating rhythmicity is the translocation of clock components into the nucleus, which is regulated in many cases by kinases. In mammals, the kinase promoting the nuclear import of the key clock component Period 2 (PER2) is unknown. Here, we show that the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) regulates the mammalian circadian clock involving phosphorylation of PER2. Knock-down of <i>Cdk5</i> in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the main coordinator site of the mammalian circadian system, shortened the free-running period in mice. CDK5 phosphorylated PER2 at serine residue 394 (S394) in a diurnal fashion. This phosphorylation facilitated interaction with Cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) and nuclear entry of the PER2-CRY1 complex. Taken together, we found that CDK5 drives nuclear entry of PER2, which is critical for establishing an adequate circadian period of the molecular circadian cycle. Of note is that CDK5 may not exclusively phosphorylate PER2, but in addition may regulate other proteins that are involved in the clock mechanism. Taken together, it appears that CDK5 is critically involved in the regulation of the circadian clock and may represent a link to various diseases affected by a derailed circadian clock.

### Keywords
Per2, Phosphorylation, Mouse, In vitro kinase assay

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741


