### Accession
PXD037406

### Title
An oncogene addiction phosphorylation signature and its derived scores inform tumor responsiveness to targeted therapies

### Description
Oncogene addiction provides important therapeutic opportunities for precision oncology treatment strategies. To date the cellular circuitries associated with driving oncoproteins, which eventually establish the phenotypic manifestation of oncogene addiction remain largely unexplored. We employed a targeted mass spectrometry approach to systematically explore alterations in 116 phosphosites related to oncogene signaling and its intersection with the DDR following inhibition of the addicting oncogene alone or in combination with irradiation in MET-, EGFR-, ALK- or BRAF (V600)-positive cancer models and ex vivo non-small cell lung cancer patient organotypic cultures. We identified an ‘oncogene addiction phosphorylation signature’ (OAPS) consisting of 8 protein phosphorylations (ACLY S455, IF4B S422, IF4G1 S1231, LIMA1 S490, MYCN S62, NCBP1 S22, P3C2A S259 and TERF2 S365) that are significantly suppressed upon targeted oncogene inhibition solely in addicted cell line models and patient tissues. We show that the OAPS is present in patient tissues and the OAPS-derived score strongly correlates with the ex vivo responses to targeted treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Development and validation of SRM assays was performed using unpurified synthetic versions of the target peptides labelled with heavy isotopes at the C-terminal Lys (+8 Da) or Arg (+10 Da). To extract their SRM coordinates, we first performed shotgun analysis on synthetic peptides mixtures. For each target peptide, the ten most intense SRM transitions were selected using Skyline. For assay refinement, the five most intense transitions for each peptide were selected and the peptide retention time for scheduled SRM acquisition was annotated. Light and the corresponding heavy transitions were measured by scheduled SRM to assess co-elution of endogenous (light) peptides and their spiked-in (heavy) surrogates. Samples were measured on a triple quadrupole/ion trap mass spectrometer (5500 QTrap, ABSciex) connected with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved with an Eksigent Nano LC system (Eksigent Technologies, SCIEX) connected to a 15-cm fused-silica emitter with 75-µm inner diameter (MSwil, Switzerland) packed in-house with a Magic C18 AQ 3-µm resin (WICOM International GmbH, Switzerland). Peptide mixtures were loaded on the column and analyzed by LC-MS/MS upon separation with a linear gradient of acetonitrile/water from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 55 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Scheduled SRM mode was applied at a unit resolution (0.7 m/z half-maximum peak width) for both Q1 and Q3 analyzers. Collision energy (CE) was calculated according to the following formula: CE=0.044 × m/z precursor + 5.5 for doubly charged ions and CE=0.051 × m/z precursor + 0.55 for triply charged ions. SRM peaks were manually inspected with Skyline.

### Data Protocol
For targeted data analysis, Skyline was employed. Internal standards were used for confident peptide identification by comparison of fragmentation and chromatographic properties with synthetic peptides (rdotp > 0.9). Peptides peak integration was verified manually. Statistical analysis was performed using MSstats.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphosignature, Selected reaction monitoring, Oncogene addiction

### Affiliations
University of Bern, Inselspital Bern
University of Bern, Inselspital

### Submitter
Michaela Medova

### Lab Head
Dr Yitzhak Zimmer
University of Bern, Inselspital


