### Accession
PXD004418

### Title
Across intra-mammalian stages of the liver fluke Fasciola hepatica: a proteomic study

### Description
Fasciola hepatica is the agent of fasciolosis, a foodborne zoonosis that affects livestock production and human health. Although flukicidal drugs are available, re-infection and expanding resistance to triclabendazole demand new control strategies. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the complex interaction with the mammalian host could provide relevant clues, aiding the search for novel targets in diagnosis and control of fasciolosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested in solution with trypsin. Samples were diluted in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoaceamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin at a final ratio of 1:20 (w/w) (enzyme: substrate). Digestion reactions, at a final protein concentration of 0.15 µg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5 % final concentration) and centrifuged at 17,000 g for 5 min at 4 ºC for removal of debris.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS using an Easy NanoLC II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Solutions A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Protein samples (1.5 µg per injection) were separated in 155-min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1-10 % B in 10 min, 10-40 % B in 100 min, 40-50 % B in 10 min, and 50-90 % B in 10 min. The column was held at 90 % B for 10 min, then brought to 1 % B and re-equilibrated prior to the next injection. Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1,200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and AGC target of 1 x 106. The 10 most abundant ions in each scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution, with AGC target of 2 x 105, and an underfill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 ms and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2, and searched with ProLuCID against a non-redundant database containing coding sequences from Fasciola hepatica genome (33,454 entries), concatenated with a Bos taurus Uniprot reference database (23,804 entries), in addition to reverse sequences of all entries. Searches were done using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2, http://www.integratedproteomics.com). The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. Data were searched with 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20-ppm fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform. ProLuCID XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaMass, Z-score, number of matched peaks, and secondary rank values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminating function. A cut-off score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % based on the number of decoys. A minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with precursor mass error < 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica is the agent of fasciolosis, a foodborne zoonosis that affects livestock production and human health. Although flukicidal drugs are available, re-infection and expanding resistance to triclabendazole demand new control strategies. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the complex interaction with the mammalian host could provide relevant clues, aiding the search for novel targets in diagnosis and control of fasciolosis. Parasite survival in the mammalian host is mediated by parasite compounds released during infection, known as excretory/secretory (E/S) products. E/S products are thought to protect parasites from host responses, allowing them to survive for a long period in the vertebrate host. This work provides in-depth proteomic analysis of F. hepatica intra-mammalian stages, and represents the largest number of proteins identified to date for this species. Functional classification revealed the presence of proteins involved in different biological processes, many of which represent original findings for this organism and are important for parasite survival within the host. These results could lead to a better comprehension of host-parasite relationships, and contribute to the development of drugs or vaccines against this parasite.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Parasite-host interaction

### Affiliations
Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul

### Submitter
Itabajara Vaz Jr.

### Lab Head
Dr Itabajara da Silva Vaz Jr
Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil


