### Accession
PXD026645

### Title
Targeting DDR1 and DDR2 overcomes matrix-mediated melanoma cell adaptation to BRAF-targeted therapy

### Description
To investigate the contribution of fibroblast-derived extracellular matrices (ECMs) to the resistance to targeted therapies in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells, we generated native-like 3D ECMs from human primary fibroblasts obtained from healthy individuals or melanoma patients. Cell-derived matrices from human dermal fibroblasts (HDF), skin melanoma associated fibroblasts (MAF) and two different lymph node fibroblast reticular cells (FRC) were denuded of cells and their composition was analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of de-cellularized matrices was performed as described in Gopal et al. (Gopal et al., Nat Commun 2017). The Cell-derived matrices used in this study were prepared from human dermal fibroblasts (HDF, sample HSF2), skin melanoma associated fibroblasts (MAF, sample Garlau) and two different lymph node fibroblast reticular cells (FRC, samples HLF2 and HLF5). Samples were prepared in triplicates and further inject thrice on mass spectrometer. Briefly, ECM proteins were solubilized in urea, reduced and alkylated and proteins were thereafter digested with first PNGase F (New England BioLabs), endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega) and high-sequencing-grade trypsin. Peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), dried under speed vacuum and were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile for LC-MSMS analysis.  Mass spectrometer used in this study was a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA).  For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 25 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The iBAQ intensity were processed using the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.2.1. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the human database subset of the SwissProt database (date 180919, 20394 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants. The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine, proline oxidation (+15.99491), asparagine deamination  (+0.984016) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20 min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rule. The iBAQ intensity were uploaded from the ProteinGroups.txt file in the Perseus program (version 1.6.1.3) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The iBAQ intensities are roughly proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins and was used for relative quantitation. Proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Targeted therapies, Ddr, Lc-msms, Melanoma, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
C3M – Inserm U1065 Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire Team: Microenvironment, signaling and cancer  Bâtiment Universitaire ARCHIMED 151 route Saint Antoine de Ginestière BP 2 3194 06204 NICE CEDEX 3

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Deckert Marcel
C3M – Inserm U1065 Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire Team: Microenvironment, signaling and cancer  Bâtiment Universitaire ARCHIMED 151 route Saint Antoine de Ginestière BP 2 3194 06204 NICE CEDEX 3


