### Accession
PXD028141

### Title
Truncation of the TPR domain of OGT alters substrate and glycosite selection

### Description
Nucleocytoplasmic O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is an essential post-translational modification that is installed to thousands of protein substrates by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Substrate selection by OGT and its isoforms is primarily mediated by the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain, yet the impact of truncations to the TPR domain on substrate and glycosite selection remains unresolved. Here, we report the effects of TPR truncations on the substrate and glycosite selection of OGT against the model protein GFP-JunB and the surrounding O-GlcNAc proteome in U2OS cells. Truncation of the TPR domain of OGT maintains glycosyltransferase activity but alters subcellular localization in cells. Examination of the glycoproteome across the TPR truncations revealed the broadest substrate activity from the canonical nucleocytoplasmic OGT, with the greatest changes in O-GlcNAc occurring on proteins associated with mRNA splicing processes. Glycosite analysis revealed alterations to the O-GlcNAc consensus sequence globally and differential glycosite selectivity on GFP-JunB as a function of the OGT TPR isoform. This dataset provides a foundation to analyze how perturbations to the TPR domain and expression of OGT isoforms affects the glycosylation of substrates, which will be critical for future protein engineering of OGT, the biology of OGT isoforms, and diseases associated with the TPR domain of OGT.

### Sample Protocol
A BCA protein assay (Pierce) was performed on cell lysates for MS experiments and protein concentration was adjusted to 5 μg/μL with lysis buffer. Protein lysate (2 mg, 400 μL) was mixed with water (490 μL), GalT1 labeling buffer (800 μL, final concentrations: 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 2% NP-40, pH 7.9), and 100 mM MnCl2 (110 μL) were added in order. The sample was vortexed and transferred to ice. Then, 500 μM UDP-GalNAz (100 μL) and 2 mg/mL GalT1 enzyme (100 μL) were added to the sample. Subsequently, the sample reaction was rotated for 16 h at 4 °C. The GalT reaction was quenched by a methanol-chloroform protein precipitation [aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform = 4:4:1 (v/v/v)]. Sample was allowed to air dry before resuspension in 2% SDS + 1× PBS (400 μL). Sample was treated with a pre-mixed solution of the click chemistry reagents [100 μL; final concentration of 200 μM IsoTaG silane probe (3:1 heavy:light mixture), 500 μM CuSO4, 100 μM THPTA, 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate] and the reaction was incubated for 3.5 h at 24°C. The click reaction was quenched by a methanol-chloroform protein precipitation. The protein pellet was allowed to air dry for 5 min at 24 °C. The dried pellet was resuspended in 1 × PBS + 1% SDS (400 μL) by probe tip sonication and then diluted in PBS (1.6 mL) to a final concentration of 0.2% SDS. Streptavidin-agarose resin [400 μL, washed with PBS (3 × 1 mL)] were added to the protein solution and the resulting mixture was incubated for 12 h at 24°C with rotation. The beads were washed using spin columns with 8 M urea (5 × 1 mL), and PBS (5 × 1 mL). The washed beads were resuspended in 500 μL PBS containing 10 mM DTT and incubated at 37°C for 30 min, followed by addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. The reduced and alkylated beads were collected by centrifugation (1,500 × g) and resuspended in 520 μL PBS. Urea (8 M, 32 μL) and trypsin (1.5 μg) was added to the resuspended beads and digestion was performed for 16 h at 37 °C with rotation. Supernatant was collected and the beads were washed three times with PBS (200 μL) and distilled water (2 × 200 μL). Washes were combined with the supernatant digest to form the trypsin fractions for protein identification. The IsoTaG silane probe was cleaved with 2% formic acid/water (2 × 200 μL) for 30 min at 24 °C with rotation and the eluent was collected. The beads were washed with 50% acetonitrile-water + 1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL), and the washes were combined with the eluent to form the cleavage fraction for site level identification. The trypsin and cleavage fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted using C18 tips following the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin fractions were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB (20 μL) and the corresponding amine-based TMT 16-plex (5 μL) was added to the samples and reacted for 1 h at 24 °C. The reactions were quenched with 2 µl of a 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated and fractionated into six samples using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were stored at –20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid with a nano-electrospray ion source. Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid and acetonitrile with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, respectively. For the trypsin fractions, peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 4% to 32% B within 50 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 10 min and further to 98% B within 10 min and re-equilibration. The following instrument parameters were used as previously described.36 For the cleavage fractions, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5 to 30% B within 95 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 15 min and further to 98% B within 10 min, and re-equilibration. The instrument parameters were set as previously described with minor modifications.35,38 Briefly, MS1 spectra were recorded from m/z 400-2,000 Da. If oxonium product ions (138.0545, 204.0867, 345.1400, 347.1530 m/z) were observed in the HCD spectra, ETD (250 ms) with supplemental activation (35%) was performed in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. Other relevant parameters of EThcD include: isolation window (3 m/z), use calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters (True), Orbitrap resolution (50k), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True). The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the trypsin fraction, the data were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (20,355 proteins, downloaded on Feb. 21, 2019) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. The database was adjusted by removing the OGT and JunB entries and replacing with RFP-OGT and GFP-JunB. Searches were performed as previously described.36 For the cleavage fraction, both HCD and EThcD spectra were searched against the proteome identified in the trypsin fraction using Byonic algorithms. The searches were performed with the following guidelines: trypsin as enzyme, 3 missed cleavages allowed; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions; 0.02 Da mass error tolerance on fragment ions. Intact glycopeptide searches allowed for tagged HexNAc modifications (HexNAc +203.0794 on cysteine, serine, threonine). Methionine oxidation and cysteine carbaminomethylation were set as variable modifications. Glycopeptide spectral assignments passing a FDR of 1% at the peptide spectrum match level based on a target decoy database were kept. Singly modified glycopeptides assigned from EThCD spectra passing a 1% FDR and possessing a delta modification score of greater than or equal to ten from >2 PSMs were considered unambiguous glycosites. The label-free quantification of unambiguous glycosite was performed as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-glcnac, Tetratricopeptide repeats (tprs), Ogt

### Affiliations
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY  HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY  HARVARD UNIVERSITY


