### Accession
PXD012235

### Title
Efficient checkpoint signaling depends on the integrated activities of Bub1 and the RZZ complex

### Description
Kinetochore localized Mad1 is essential for generating a “wait anaphase” signal during mitosis hereby ensuring accurate chromosome segregation. Inconsistent models for the function and quantitative contribution of the two mammalian Mad1 kinetochore receptors: Bub1 and the Rod-Zwilch-ZW10 (RZZ) complex exist. By combining genome editing and RNAi we achieve penetrant removal of Bub1 and Rod in human cells, which reveals that efficient checkpoint signaling depends on the integrated activities of these proteins. Rod removal reduces the proximity of Bub1 and Mad1 and we can bypass the requirement for Rod by tethering Mad1 to kinetochores or increasing the strength of the Bub1-Mad1 interaction. We find that Bub1 has checkpoint functions independent of Mad1 localization that are supported by low levels of Bub1 suggesting a catalytic function. In conclusion, our results support an integrated model for the Mad1 receptors in which the primary role of RZZ is to localize Mad1 at kinetochores to generate the Mad1-Bub1 complex.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) Elution from beads was carried out by a partial on-bead digest. Briefly, 100ul of elution buffer (2M urea, 2mM DTT, 20 ug/ml Trypsin, 50mM Tris [pH 7.5]) was added and incubated at 37°C for 30min at 1,400rpm. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes, alkylated with 25mM CAA and further digested over night at room temperature (1,400rpm). Digestion was stopped the next day by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were desalted and purified with styrenedivinylbenzene- reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) StageTips. Briefly, StageTips with 2 layers of SDB-RPS were prepared with 100ul of wash buffer (0.2% TFA in H2O). Peptides were directly loaded on top and centrifuged for 5min at 500xg. After one further wash with 150ul wash buffer, peptides were eluted with 50ul elution buffer (80% ACN and 1% ammonia) and vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were finally reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA in water and kept at -20°C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Nanoflow LC–MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer  (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) (Kelstrup et al., 2017) coupled to an EASYnLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source. About 0.5 µg of peptides were loaded on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75-μm inner diameter, New Objective, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 20% B in 55 min and stepped up to 40% in 40 min followed by a 5 min wash at 98% B at 350 nl per min where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The total duration of the run was 100 min. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C by an in-house-developed oven. The mass spectrometer was operated in “top-15” data-dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300–1650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 15 ms. The most intense ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.5 m/z. Following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 5E4 and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 s.  Raw file processing and bioinformatic analyses MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.5.0.38). The integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of less than 1%. The human UniProtKB database (October 2017) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. ‘Trypsin’ was set as the enzyme specificity. We required a minimum number of 7 amino acids for the peptide identification process. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group (Cox and Mann, 2008). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) algorithm. Protein ratios were determined based on median peptide ratios and only common peptides were used for pair-wise ratio calculations. The ‘match-between-runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across runs based on high mass accuracy and normalized retention times. Prior to data analysis, proteins, which were found as reverse hits or only identified by site-modification, were filtered out. All statistical and bioinformatic analyses were performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) or the R framework (https://www.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Kinetochore localized Mad1 is essential for generating a "wait anaphase" signal during mitosis, hereby ensuring accurate chromosome segregation. Inconsistent models for the function and quantitative contribution of the two mammalian Mad1 kinetochore receptors: Bub1 and the Rod-Zw10-Zwilch (RZZ) complex exist. By combining genome editing and RNAi, we achieve penetrant removal of Bub1 and Rod in human cells, which reveals that efficient checkpoint signaling depends on the integrated activities of these proteins. Rod removal reduces the proximity of Bub1 and Mad1, and we can bypass the requirement for Rod by tethering Mad1 to kinetochores or increasing the strength of the Bub1-Mad1 interaction. We find that Bub1 has checkpoint functions independent of Mad1 localization that are supported by low levels of Bub1 suggesting a catalytic function. In conclusion, our results support an integrated model for the Mad1 receptors in which the primary role of RZZ is to localize Mad1 at kinetochores to generate the Mad1-Bub1 complex.

### Keywords
Mitosis proteomics bub1

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Jakob Nilsson
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


