### Accession
PXD022189

### Title
Label-Free LC-MS/MS Proteomic Analysis of Urinary Identification in Diabetic Vascular Dementia

### Description
Objective: The aim of this study was to identify novel diagnostic biomarkers of diabetic vascular dementia (DVD) and unraveling the underlying mechanisms using mass spectrometry (MS). Methods: Label-Free LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis was applied to urine samples from four groups including 14 vascular dementia CC(VD), 22 type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), 12 DVD, 21 Normal Control (NC). Searching the MS data by Proteome Discoverer software, protein abundances were analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively and compared between these groups. Combining bioinformatics analysis using GO, pathway crosstalk analysis using KEGG, PPI network analysis using STRING and literature searching, the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) of DVD can be comprehensively judged and were further quantified by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve methods. Results: The proteomic findings showed quantitative changes in DVD was compared to NC, T2DM, and VD groups; among 7,527 identified urine proteins, 1222, 1152, and 1180 of the proteins displayed quantitative changes unique to DVD vs NC, T2DM, and VD, respectively, including 481 overlapped common DEPs. Then 9 unique proteins and 2 composite markers (CM) were confirmed by a ROC curve method.  Conclusion: This study provided a novel insight into the potential pathogenesis of DVD and elucidated a method for the earlier detection.

### Sample Protocol
2.4 urinary samples collection and processing Midstream of the first-morning urinary samples were collected 10-20ml to establish the standard operation procedure (SOP). After centrifugation at 2000r/min for 10 min, the cells and cell debris were removed and the supernatant was retained, separated and stored at -80℃.urinary proteome data were analyzed by using LC-MS/MS52,53. [1,2] 2.5 Protein precipitation, quantification and in-solution trypsin digestion 1 milliliter of urinary sample reheated at 37℃ was centrifuged at 4℃, 176,000 g for 70 min to discard the supernatant and retain the precipitation. Next, 40 μl of resuspension buffer (50 mM Tris, 250 mM sucrose, pH 8.5) was added and the urinary protein was resuspended in the solution after standing for 10 minutes. Then 2.5ul 1mol/L dithiotheitol (DTT) was added and heated at 65℃for 30min to decompose the protein into polypeptide. A second ultracentrifugation was processed for 40 min after adding the wash buffer (10 mM TEA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.4). 30UL prepared digestion buffer (50mM NH4CO3) was added and heated at 95℃ for 3min to cool it to room temperature. 10UL 100ng/ UL trypsin (Promega, USA) grade was added and the protein was digested overnight at 37℃. Finally, 100ul acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma, USA) was added, oscillated for 5min, centrifuged at 10000g for 5min, and the supernatant was aspirated, vacuum dried for mass spectrometer detection. 2.6 Mass Spectrometry Analysis and Protein Identification A total of 69 samples from four groups (NC, T2DM, VD, VD+T2DM groups) were analyzed by using a mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to High Performance liquid chromatography System Ultimate 3000(UHPLC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each digested-peptide sample (5 µL) was re-dissolved for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis and loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 self-packed capillary LC column(150 µm × 12 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) with two solvent buffer ( A: 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid; B: 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) for 98 min linea

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrum Data were acquired through primary and secondary mass spectrometry and proteins were identified and quantified against the complete human proteins in Uniprot database (2020.07.04) using Proteome Discover 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST and Mascot search engine (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters were set as follows: A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed; Carbamido methylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were classified as variable modifications; Peptide spectra matching was determined based on the p value false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. We retained only one unique strict peptide and two strict peptides (Ion Score > 20), similar to 1 % FDR at the protein level. Then SEQUEST Sorcerer algorithm was used for protein quantification, intensity54. All missing values of protein in the sample were substituted with zero. According to the 50% rule, if 50% of the samples in certain group have a protein expression of zero, then the protein in this treatment group is determined to be unexpressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Vascular dementia,  proteomics, Biomarkers, Diabetes, Protein

### Affiliations
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University
second xiangya hospital central south university

### Submitter
Yi Zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Zeng
second xiangya hospital central south university


