### Accession
PXD006742

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa LC-MS/MS

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The P. aeruginosa CF isolate PASS4 has reduced ability to catabolise various carbon sources however can grow on DNA as a sole carbon source but, with a higher biomass production than P. aeruginosa burns wound, laboratory strain PAO1. Therefore, proteomic profiling of PASS4 and PAO1 was conducted following growth on DNA as a sole carbon source. To compare the protein expression of P. aeruginosa strains PAO1 and PASS4 following growth in DNA, the amino acid, asparagine was used a control condition, as asparagine was one of the amino acids PASS4 could utilise.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa strains PAO1 and PASS4 were inoculated into M9 Minimal salts media with 100µM calcium chloride (CaCl2) and 2mM magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) containing either L-Asparagine (20mM) as a control condition or DNA (1.5 mg/ml) as an experimental condition. Cultures were grown aerobically (n=3) at 37°C with constant shaking at 200 rpm. Overnight cultures were subcultured into the same respective medium, once, prior to harvesting cells in logarithmic phase (OD600 = 0.6). Proteins were extracted by lysing cell pellets with sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) lysis buffer. 30 µg of each samples were diluted with sample loading buffer, denatured by boiling and separated using SDS-PAGE. Gel pieces were trypsin digested and proteolytic peptides were reconstituted to 10 μL with 2% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analysed using Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a high pressure liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated on a 60-min reverse phase gradient of 1-50% solvent B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) gradient. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (350-2000 m/z) was recorded in the Orbitrap. Subsequently, MS2 analysis was conducted for top 10 most intense ions and were fragmented by HCD with following settings; normalized collision energy of 30%, isolation window 3.0 m/z, maximum ion accumulation time 60 ms with a dynamic exclusion for 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed on Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Mascot search engine (Perkins et al., 1999). P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 protein sequence database retrieved from GenBank (January 2013) and Pseudomonas Genome Database (www.pseudomonas.com) and in-silico translated genome databases of PASS4 were used as the search databases. Database searching against the decoy database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification. All searches were performed using a static modification for cysteine alkylation and methionine oxidation, acetylation (protein N-term) as dynamic modifications, precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da were used. Peptide matches were filtered with peptide and protein FDR<1%. Then for each identified peptide, its abundance (peak area) was estimated by calculating the area under the extracted XIC curve.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia
Macquarie University 

### Submitter
Sheemal Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Thomas Paulsen
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia


