### Accession
PXD007124

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of barrier-deficient mouse epidermis in response to environmental humidity

### Description
Low environmental humidity aggravates symptoms of inflammatory skin diseases, e.g. of Atopic Dermatitis (AD). Using mice that develop AD-like symptoms, we show that an increase in environmental humidity rapidly rescues their cutaneous inflammation and associated epidermal abnormalities. Quantitative proteomics analysis of epidermal lysates of mice kept at low or high humidity identified novel humidity-regulated proteins, including Clca2/Clca3a2, a protein with previously unknown function in the skin.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of epidermal lysates for proteomics analysis  Frozen epidermal samples were homogenized in cold cell lysis buffer (T-Per; Pierce, Rockford, IL, including 10 µg/µl aprotinin, 50 µg/µl leupeptin, 100 µg/µl pepstatin, 0.525 mM AEBSF, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na4VO3, 20 µM PAO, 50 mM NaF, and 10 mM Na4P2O7) using an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (Janke and Kunkel, Staufen, Germany). Afterwards, samples were sonicated by applying 20 bursts with a U 200 S control sonicator (Janke and Kunkel). After centrifugation (5 min, 840 × g, 4°C), the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the sample was centrifuged again (30 min, 3345 × g, 4°C). The supernatant (containing soluble proteins) without lipids was transferred to a new tube and the centrifugation was repeated 4-5 times (15 min, 3345 × g, 4°C) until no lipid layer was visible in the sample. The pellet, containing membrane-bound proteins, was washed once with the cell lysis buffer and resuspended in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride. The supernatant and the pellet were combined, and the protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Thermo Scientific, Allschwil, Switzerland).  iTRAQ labeling  Samples of 50μg protein were precipitated by addition of six volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubation for 4 h at -80°C. Following centrifugation at 3345 × g for 30 min, the protein pellet was dissolved in 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB), pH 8.5, incl. 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Proteins were reduced by adding tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to a final concentration of 4.3 mM and incubation at 60°C for 1 h. Free cysteines were blocked with 8.3 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Finally, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with MS-grade trypsin (TrypsinGold, Promega, Madison, WA) at a protease-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Resulting peptides were labeled by adding 1 U of 8plex iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex Ltd, Framingham, MA) and samples were adjusted to ~65% isopropanol.  Peptide fractionation  iTRAQ-labeled peptides were pooled and organic solvents were evaporated in a speedvac. Next, peptides were adjusted to 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using C18 SPE columns (Wicom, TR-F034000/10) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted peptides were again dried, resuspended in 100 μl of HILIC Buffer A (75% ACN, 8 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5), and loaded onto a HILIC column (YMC-Pack Polyamine II, 250x4 mm I.D., S-5 μm, 12 nm, PB12S05-2504QT) connected to a HPLC system (1260 Infinity, Agilent). Bound peptides were eluted in 27 fractions over a 60 min gradient from 3 - 60% Buffer B (5% ACN, 100 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Resulting peptide fractions were dried in a speedvac, cleaned and pooled using 100 μl C18 OMIX tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluents were again dried, and peptides were finally resuspended in 20 μl of MS sample buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% FA).  LC-MS/MS  Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an ultra high-pressure nano-LC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Four µl of each peptide pool were loaded onto custom-made, fused silica columns (150 mm × 75 μm inner diameter) packed with C18 reverse-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, bead size: 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH), connected to a PicoTip emitter (FS360-20-10-N-20-C12, New Objective). Bound peptides were eluted using a bipartite gradient from 0-20% B in 81 min, and 20-35% B in 27 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Precursor ion scans (MS1) from 400 to 2000 m/z were performed at a resolution of 70’000, an AGC target value of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 15 most intense precursor signals (charge state 2+ to 5+) were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 2 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 35. Fragment ion spectra (MS2) starting from 100 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 17’500, an AGC target value of 2e5, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s after first occurrence.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were analyzed with Proteome Discover (v2.1, Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT to search MS2 spectra against a Mus musculus reference proteome (obtained from UniProt) and the following search parameters: tryptic enzyme specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages; methylthio(C), iTRAQ8plex(K) as static modifications; iTRAQ8plex(N-term), oxidation(M) as dynamic modifications; parent mass error at 10 ppm, fragment mass error at 0.02 Da. Search results were secondary validated using Percolator applying a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (Strict) and 0.05 (Relaxed) and validation based on q-value. iTRAQ reporter ions were quantified with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm using the most confident centroid as integration method and relative protein abundances determined by averaging values from top 3 peptides, normalization to total peptide amount and scaling on control channels average.

### Publication Abstract
Low environmental humidity aggravates symptoms of the inflammatory skin disease atopic dermatitis (AD). Using mice that develop AD-like signs, we show that an increase in environmental humidity rescues their cutaneous inflammation and associated epidermal abnormalities. Quantitative proteomics analysis of epidermal lysates of mice kept at low or high humidity identified humidity-regulated proteins, including chloride channel accessory 3A2 (CLCA3A2), a protein with previously unknown function in the skin. The epidermis of patients with AD, organotypic skin cultures under dry conditions, and cultured keratinocytes exposed to hyperosmotic stress showed up-regulation of the nonorthologous human homolog CLCA2. Hyperosmolarity-induced <i>CLCA2</i> expression occurred via p38/c-Jun N-terminal kinase-activating transcription factor 2 signaling. CLCA2 knockdown promoted keratinocyte apoptosis induced by hyperosmotic stress through impairment of cell-cell adhesion. These findings provide a mechanistic explanation for the beneficial effect of high environmental humidity for AD patients and identify CLCA3A2/CLCA2 up-regulation as a mechanism to protect keratinocytes from damage induced by low humidity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Humidity, Osmoregulation, Epidermis, Skin, Barrier defect

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Werner
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences


