### Accession
PXD021233

### Title
CD4+ T cell specific proteomic pathways identified in progression of hypertension across postmenopausal transition

### Description
Menopause is associated with an increase in the prevalence and severity of hypertension in women. Although premenopausal females are protected against T cell-dependent immune activation and development of angiotensin II (Ang II) hypertension, this protection is lost in postmenopausal females. Therefore, the current study hypothesized that specific CD4+ T cell pathways are regulated by sex hormones and Ang II to mediate progression from premenopausal protection to postmenopausal hypertension. Menopause was induced in C57BL/6 mice via repeated 4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide (VCD) injections, while premenopausal females received sesame oil vehicle. A subset of premenopausal mice and all menopausal mice were infused with Ang II for 14 days (Control, Ang II, Meno/Ang II). Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of CD4+ T cells isolated from spleens were examined.Ang II markedly increased CD4+ T cell protein abundance and phosphorylation associated with DNA and histone methylation in both premenopausal and postmenopausal females. Compared to premenopausal T cells, Ang II infusion in menopausal mice increased T cell phosphorylation of MP2K2, an upstream regulator of ERK, and was associated with upregulated phosphorylation at ERK targeted sites. Additionally, Ang II infusion in menopausal mice decreased T cell phosphorylation of TLN1, a key regulator of IL-2R and FOXP3 expression. These findings identify novel, distinct intracellular T cell pathways that influence T cell-mediated inflammation during postmenopausal hypertension.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from isolated CD4+ cells were processed in triplicate batches with one sample from each group in each batch. Total protein, (50 µg) per sample, was denatured in 10 µL of SDS sample loading buffer (4% SDS, 0.0625 M Tris-HCl, 10% glycerol, 0.02% bromophenol blue, 8 M Urea) at 95°C prior to protein separation by SDS-PAGE and staining with BioRad Bio-Safe Coomassie Stain (cat. # 1610786). Each lane was cut into eight sections, de-stained, and dehydrated for in-gel trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides were extracted and washed on a solid phase C18 ZipTip as previously described (PMID 28550165 and 31018989)

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur RAW files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were then searched against the mouse SwissProt_2016_10 database (16,838 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search   results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made through the use of Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Progenesis QI proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification. In brief, in an automated format, RAW files were imported and converted into two- dimensional maps (y-axis = time, x-axis =m/z) followed by selection of a reference run for alignment purposes. An aggregate data set containing all peak information from all samples was created from the aligned runs, which was further narrowed down by selecting only +2, +3, and +4 charged ions for further analysis. The samples were grouped as Control, Ang II, or Meno/Ang II. A peak list of fragment ion spectra from the top eight most intense precursors of a feature was exported in Mascot generic file (.mgf) format and searched against the murine SwissProt_2016_10 database (16,838 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6). The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; 13C=1. The resulting Mascot .xml file was then imported into Progenesis, allowing for peptide/protein assignment, while peptides with a Mascot Ion Score of <25 were not considered for further analysis. Protein quantification and logarithmic   transformation was performed using only non-conflicting peptides and precursor ion- abundance values were normalized in a run to those in a reference run (not necessarily the same as the alignment reference run).

### Publication Abstract
Background Menopause is associated with an increase in the prevalence and severity of hypertension in women. Although premenopausal females are protected against T cell-dependent immune activation and development of angiotensin II (Ang II) hypertension, this protection is lost in postmenopausal females. Therefore, the current study hypothesized that specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell pathways are regulated by sex hormones and Ang II to mediate progression from premenopausal protection to postmenopausal hypertension. Methods and Results Menopause was induced in C57BL/6 mice via repeated 4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide injections, while premenopausal females received sesame oil vehicle. A subset of premenopausal mice and all menopausal mice were infused with Ang II for 14&#xa0;days (Control, Ang II, Meno/Ang II). Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells isolated from spleens were examined. Ang II markedly increased CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell protein abundance and phosphorylation associated with DNA and histone methylation in both premenopausal and postmenopausal females. Compared with premenopausal T cells, Ang II infusion in menopausal mice increased T cell phosphorylation of MP2K2, an upstream regulator of ERK, and was associated with upregulated phosphorylation at ERK targeted sites. Additionally, Ang II infusion in menopausal mice decreased T cell phosphorylation of TLN1, a key regulator of IL-2R&#x3b1; and FOXP3 expression. Conclusions These findings identify novel, distinct T cell pathways that influence T cell-mediated inflammation during postmenopausal hypertension.

### Keywords
Postmenopausal hypertension cd4+ t cell

### Affiliations
University of Arizona
Professor, Depts of Physiology, Pharmacology, Nephrology/Medicine, Member, BIO5/Arizona Center on Aging/Sarver Heart Center, University of Arizona College of Medicine

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Heddwen Brooks
Professor, Depts of Physiology, Pharmacology, Nephrology/Medicine, Member, BIO5/Arizona Center on Aging/Sarver Heart Center, University of Arizona College of Medicine


