### Accession
PXD003710

### Title
Peli1 knock-out and wild type mouse brain proteomes during the disease course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis

### Description
The ubiquitin ligase Peli1 has previously been suggested as a potential treatment target in multiple sclerosis since the knock-out induced less activated microglia and less inflammation in the CNS of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice. In the present study the brain proteomes of Peli1 knock-out mice and wild-type mice were analyzed and compared before disease induction and after 10 and 20 days of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis using quantitative proteomics. The brain samples were analyzed using TMT labeling of small pools of samples and verified using label-free of individual mice.

### Sample Protocol
Induction of EAE in Peli1 KO and WT mice (C57/BL/6 x 129/Sv) was performed by injection of MOG35-55. The frontal part of the right cerebral hemisphere was excised 0, 10 and 20 days after induction of EAE. Lysis buffer (4%SDS (v/v), 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT) was added to the brain samples (4 µl/mg) and the samples were homogenized by sonication. The lysates were incubated at 95°C for 3 min, and centrifuged for 5 min at 16000xg. 50 µg in the TMT-experiment and 20 µg in the label-free (LF) was dissolved in 200 µl 8 M urea in 0.1 M tris/HCl pH 8.5 for 5 min at RT before it was added to Microcon YM-30 filter units. The brain lysates were digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) and desalted using OASIS. One TMT 10-plex label reagent set was divided in two 10-plex experiments that were to be combined in the data analysis. The two 10-plexes were fractionated into 58 fractions; A volume corresponding to 120 µg from each of the 10-plex samples were fractionated separately on a mixed-mode Promix MPcolumn using a 1260 Infinity Mixed mode LC-system. Each fraction was analysed on a 120 min  LC-MS gradient.  About 0.5 µg tryptic peptides dissolved in 5% aqueous FA were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite equipped with a nanospray Flex ion source. Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 280 nl/min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm x 75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 2 µm C18 beads). Solvent A was 0.1% FA with 2% ACN and solvent B was 90% ACN. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS. Instrument control was through Tune 2.7 and Xcalibur 2.2. Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 120000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target value of 1E6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 300 ms). The 10 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold of 5000 counts and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated in the high-pressure linear ion trap to a target value of 5E5 at a maximum allowed accumulation time of 300 ms, and isolation width maintained at 2.5 Da. Fragmentation in the HCD (Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation) cell was performed with a normalized collision energy of 40%, and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 30000 with first mass fixed at m/z 100. The fractions were separated according to hydrophobicity, using 3 different gradients depending on their elution from the mixed-mode fractionation.  All individual samples (n=38) used in the TMT experiment were analyzed by label-free proteomics. 20 µg of each individual sample, and 4 20 µl aliquots of a pool containing all the samples were digested by FASP and desalted by OASIS clean-up as described for the TMT experiment. The reference samples were injected 4-7 times each for LC-MS analysis. Each run contained a survey full scan covering the 300 to 2000 m/z range to acquire all MS1 features within that range, and one of 12 different precursor mass range fragmentation windows of overlapping segments. This was repeated twice, i.e a total of 24 runs. For the individual brain lysate samples the precursor fragmentation window was 300-2000 m/z. All individual samples were randomized prior to LC-MS/MS. The label free samples were analyzed using the same LC-MS system as for the TMT 10-plex analysis, with the following exceptions: The peptides were separated over a 195 min gradient. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired for 170 min in the Orbitrap with a resolution R = 240000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target value of 1E6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 300 ms). The 10 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold of 3000 counts, and charge states of plus 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1E4 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy CID (collision-induced-dissociation) with normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled. The maximum allowed accumulation time for CID was 150 ms, the isolation width maintained at 2 Da, activation q = 0.25, and activation time of 10 ms. The resulting fragment ions were scanned out in the low-pressure ion trap at normal scan rate, and recorded with the secondary electron multipliers. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 18s. Lock-mass internal calibration was not enabled.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation of TMT data in proteome discoverer LC-MS data from the two TMT-10 plex experiments were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest and MS Amanda (version 1.4.4.2822) with the SwissProt Mus musculus database ver 27.03.14 (canonical sequence, no isoforms). Trypsin was set as enzyme, and maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. TMT tagging of N-teminal and lysines were set as a fixed modification, in addition to carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.005 Da, and the identification deviance was set to 10 ppm for MS1 precursors. The PSM validation from both search engines was performed by Percolator, with a strict and relaxed target FDR of 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. The quantification method was TMT 10-plex with the integration tolerance of 20 ppm and the integration method was set to “most confident centroid”. The mass analyser was FTMS, and the activation type was HCD. The minimum and maximum collision energies were 0 and 100, respectively. All samples were divided by the reference sample within each TMT 10-plex using Proteome Discoverer. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, and no co-isolation threshold was set. The results were filtered such that only the quantitative data from proteins identified with high confidence peptides (FDR<1%) and 5-20 amino acids were exported. In Microsoft Excel the protein abundances were log2 transformed and each condition were normalized within the condition by subtracting the respective median value before further analyses. Following normalization, the two TMT datasets were combined using the vlookup function. The TMT labeling strategy of small pools resulted in quantification of 5264 and 5261 proteins (≥3 peptide spectrum matches, PSMs) in TMT 10-plex experiment one and two, respectively. Of these, 4875 proteins were quantified in both experiments. A two tailed t-test was used for pairwise comparisons of the protein levels between conditions. Label-free Quantification in Progenesis QI The LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed in Progenesis QI, ensuring an MS1 alignment score of >75% for all runs. Reruns of reference samples were included if the alignment of the MS1 features was high. Only unique peptides with charges from + 2 to +7 were used for quantitation. The results were exported from Progenesis QI as an mgf file. The mgf file was identified in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 as for the TMT 10-plex analysis, with the following exceptions: the database used was the Swissprot Mus musculus downloaded 15.10.2015 (canonical sequence, no isoforms) including the cRAP database contaminant sequences (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/). The fragment mass error was set to 0.7 Da. The modifications included were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable. The identification results were exported from Proteome discoverer as a pep.xml file. Following import of identifications into Progenesis QI and assignment to the MS1 features, the protein quantification data was exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. The normalized protein intensities for each of the individual samples were divided by the median intensity of the reference samples, and these ratios were log2 transformed prior to statistical analyses and fold change calculations.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin ligase <i>Peli1</i> has previously been suggested as a potential treatment target in multiple sclerosis. In the multiple sclerosis disease model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, <i>Peli1</i> knock-out led to less activated microglia and less inflammation in the central nervous system. Despite being important in microglia, <i>Peli1</i> expression has also been detected in glial and neuronal cells. In the present study the overall brain proteomes of <i>Peli1</i> knock-out mice and wild-type mice were compared prior to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis induction, at onset of the disease and at disease peak. Brain samples from the frontal hemisphere, peripheral from the extensive inflammatory foci, were analyzed using TMT-labeling of sample pools, and the discovered proteins were verified in individual mice using label-free proteomics. The greatest proteomic differences between <i>Peli1</i> knock-out and wild-type mice were observed at the disease peak. In <i>Peli1</i> knock-out a higher degree of antigen presentation, increased activity of adaptive and innate immune cells and alterations to proteins involved in iron metabolism were observed during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. These results unravel global effects to the brain proteome when abrogating <i>Peli1</i> expression, underlining the importance of <i>Peli1</i> as a regulator of the immune response also peripheral to inflammatory foci during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. The proteomics data is available in PRIDE with accession PXD003710.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Quantitative proteomics, Eae, Cns, Peli1, Tmt, Label-free

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit at University of Bergen (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway.
Institute of Marine Research

### Submitter
Eystein Oveland

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Berven
Proteomics Unit at University of Bergen (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway.


