### Accession
PXD037101

### Title
Amino Acids Downregulate SIRT4 to Detoxify Ammonia through the Urea Cycle

### Description
Ammonia production via glutamate dehydrogenase is inhibited by SIRT4, a sirtuin that displays both amidase and non-amidase activities. The processes underlying the regulation of ammonia removal by amino acids remain unclear. Here, we report that SIRT4 acts as a decarbamylase that responds to amino acid sufficiency and regulates ammonia removal. Amino acids promote lysine 307 carbamylation (OTCCP-K307) of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), which activates OTC and the urea cycle. Proteomic and interactome screening identified OTC as a substrate of SIRT4. SIRT4 decarbamylates OTCCP-K307 and inactivates OTC in a NAD+-dependent manner. SIRT4 expression was transcriptionally upregulated by the amino acid insufficiency-activated GCN2–eIF2a–ATF4 axis. SIRT4 knockout in cultured cells caused higher OTCCP-K307 levels, activated OTC, elevated urea cycle intermediates, and urea production via amino acid catabolism. Sirt4 ablation decreased mouse blood ammonia levels and ameliorated CCl4-induced hepatic encephalopathy phenotypes. We reveal that SIRT4 safeguards cellular ammonia toxicity during amino acid catabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion The procedures for protein digestion were performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) technique with slight modifications. Briefly, FASP digestion was adapted for the following procedures in Microcon PL-10 filters. Following a three-time buffer displacement with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, proteins were reduced using 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 45 min in the dark. Digestion was carried out with trypsin (enzyme:protein = 1:50) at 37 °C overnight after washing with 20% acetone nitrile and digestion buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). After digestion, the solution was filtrated out, the filter was washed with 15% ACN, and all filtrates were pooled, vacuum-dried, and kept at –80 °C until use. Carbamyl peptide enrichment Carbamyl peptide enrichment was performed using pan-anti-carbamyl lysine antibody (Abcam, Cat# ab175132) conjugated with protein A beads (Sigma, Cat# 16-156). Peptides were mixed with antibody-conjugated beads at 4 °C for 6–8 h under rotary shaking. The mixture was briefly centrifuged at 1,000 × g (<10 s), and the supernatant was carefully removed. Antibody-conjugated beads were subsequently washed thrice with PBS buffer. Finally, the bound carbamyl peptides were eluted with 30% ACN/0.1% TFA and concentrated in a SpeedVac. Before MS analysis, all carbamyl peptides were desalted. LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASYnLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A one-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were analyzed on a C18 analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 25 cm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) constructed in-house. The mobile phases consisted of Solution A (0.1% formic acid) and Solution B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The derivative peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2–5% B in 2 min, 5–35% B in 100 min, 35–44% B in 6 min, 44–100% B in 3 min, 100% B for 10 min, at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the time between master scan was 3 s, and fragmented in HCD mode, normalized collision energy was 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were searched using Protein Discoverer (version 2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) with Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science). Data were processed using the UniProt mouse protein database (55,462 entries). The carbamyl peptides were determined by a mass shift of 43.0247 Da on lysine residues. The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The search engine set protein N-acetylation, pyroglutamate on peptide N termini, oxidation on methionine, and carbamylation on Lys as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein were at 0.05 and peptide were at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonia production via glutamate dehydrogenase is inhibited by SIRT4, a sirtuin that displays both amidase and non-amidase activities. The processes underlying the regulation of ammonia removal by amino acids remain unclear. Here, we report that SIRT4 acts as a decarbamylase that responds to amino acid sufficiency and regulates ammonia removal. Amino acids promote lysine 307 carbamylation (OTC<sup>CP-K307</sup>) of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), which activates OTC and the urea cycle. Proteomic and interactome screening identified OTC as a substrate of SIRT4. SIRT4 decarbamylates OTC<sup>CP-K307</sup> and inactivates OTC in an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent manner. SIRT4 expression was transcriptionally upregulated by the amino acid insufficiency-activated GCN2-eIF2&#x3b1;-ATF4 axis. SIRT4 knockout in cultured cells caused higher OTC<sup>CP-K307</sup> levels, activated OTC, elevated urea cycle intermediates and urea production via amino acid catabolism. Sirt4 ablation decreased male mouse blood ammonia levels and ameliorated CCl<sub>4</sub>-induced hepatic encephalopathy phenotypes. We reveal that SIRT4 safeguards cellular ammonia toxicity during amino acid catabolism.

### Keywords
Carbamylation, Liver, Mice

### Affiliations
The Obstetrics & Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, china
Fudan University

### Submitter
Songhua Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Shimin Zhao
The Obstetrics & Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, china


