### Accession
PXD003744

### Title
MicroRNA-124 and -137 cooperativity controls caspase-3 activity through BCL2L13 in hippocampal neural stem cells.

### Description
Adult neurogenesis continuously contributes new neurons to hippocampal circuits and the programmed death of a subset of immature cells provides a primary mechanism controlling this contribution. Epileptic seizures induce strong structural changes in the hippocampus, including the induction of adult neurogenesis, changes in gene expression and mitochondrial dysfunction, which may all contribute to epileptogenesis. However, a possible interplay between this factors remains largely unexplored. Here, we investigated gene expression changes in the hippocampal dentate gyrus shortly after prolonged seizures induced by kainic acid, focusing on mitochondrial functions. Using comparative proteomics, we identified networks of proteins differentially expressed shortly after seizure induction, including members of the BCL2 family and other mitochondrial proteins. Within these networks, we report for the first time that the atypical BCL2 protein BCL2L13 controls caspase-3 activity and cytochrome C release in neural stem/progenitor cells. This work has been published in Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 24;5:12448. doi: 10.1038/srep12448.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fractionation  Proteins were resolved using 1D SDS-PAGE. For each sample, 50 μg of protein was loaded onto a pre-cast 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris 1.5mm mini gel (Invitrogen). Electrophoresis was carried out at 200V in NuPAGE MES SDS running buffer (50mM Tris base, 50mM MES, pH 7.3, 0.1% w/v SDS, and 1mM EDTA, Invitrogen) until the dye front reached the end of the gel. The gel was stained  with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).  In-gel digestion, nano-LC-MS/MS and database searching Proteomics analysis based on 1D gel-nanoLC-MS/MS was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19., Piersma et al Proteome Science 2013, 11-17). Shortly, the gel lanes were sliced into 10 pieces and subsequently digested in-gel with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel bands, separated on a C18 column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Peptides were measured on a LTQ-FTMS instrument (ThermoFisher).   LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 µm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 µm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 µl/minute in 1.6% acetonitrile + 0.05% formic acid on a 1 cm × 100 µm ID precolumn packed with 5 µm ReproSil Pur C18 aqua. Peptides were separated in a 60 minutes gradient (8-32% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid) at 300 nl/min. followed by washing (72% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid) and equilibration (4% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid). The inject-to-inject time was 90 minutes. Intact peptide MS spectra and MS/MS spectra were acquired on a LTQ-FT hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at 50.000 resolution in the ICR cell. In parallel, following an FT pre-scan, the top5 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the linear ion trap (3 amu isolation width, 30 ms activation, 35% normalized activation energy, Q value of 0.25 and a threshold of 5000 counts). Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed as described previously (Piersma et al Proteome Science 2013, 11-17). Shortly, MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse International Protein Index (IPI) 3.31 database (56555 entries) using Sequest (version 27, revision 12) - a part of the BioWorks 3.3 data analysis package (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). Next, the DTA and OUT files were imported into Scaffold version 2.06.01  (Proteome software, Portland, OR, USA), used to organize the gel band data and to validate peptide identifications using the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications with a probability of >99% were retained if at least two peptides were identified (at 95% confidence) in minimally one sample. For each protein identified, the total number of MS/MS spectra detected (spectral counts) was exported to Excel 2003 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA).  Data mining Normalization was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19). A one-sided paired β-binomial test was applied to find proteins with statistically significant differences in spectral count numbers between Kainate and Saline treated mice (Pham et al Bioinformatics 2010;26:363–9). Proteins associated with a p value below 0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Adult neurogenesis continuously contributes new neurons to hippocampal circuits and the programmed death of a subset of immature cells provides a primary mechanism controlling this contribution. Epileptic seizures induce strong structural changes in the hippocampus, including the induction of adult neurogenesis, changes in gene expression and mitochondrial dysfunction, which may all contribute to epileptogenesis. However, a possible interplay between this factors remains largely unexplored. Here, we investigated gene expression changes in the hippocampal dentate gyrus shortly after prolonged seizures induced by kainic acid, focusing on mitochondrial functions. Using comparative proteomics, we identified networks of proteins differentially expressed shortly after seizure induction, including members of the BCL2 family and other mitochondrial proteins. Within these networks, we report for the first time that the atypical BCL2 protein BCL2L13 controls caspase-3 activity and cytochrome C release in neural stem/progenitor cells. Furthermore, we identify BCL2L13 as a novel target of the cooperative action of microRNA-124 and microRNA-137, both upregulated shortly after seizure induction. This cooperative microRNA-mediated fine-tuning of BCL2L13 expression controls casp3 activity, favoring non-apoptotic caspase-3 functions in NSPC exposed to KA and thereby may contribute to the early neurogenic response to epileptic seizures in the dentate gyrus.

### Keywords
Expression profiling, Kainate, Epileptic seizures, Mouse model, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


