### Accession
PXD018290

### Title
Human melanoma MeWo cell phosphopeptide enriched Orbitrap MS

### Description
Our newly developed high-throughput screening assay of bioactive compounds discovered a cellular phosphatase, calcineurin, was critical in the regulation of Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV) glycoprotein complex gB/gH-gL mediated cell fusion. To better understand how calcineurin regulates fusion, the potential substrates for calcineurin phosphatase were investigated in human melanoma MeWo cells upon treatment with specific calcineurin phosphatase inhibitor, pimecrolimus. Phosphopeptide enrichment and Orbitrap mass spectrometry analysis identified seven proteins that were exclusively phosphorylated in MeWo cells treated with pimecrolimus compared to DMSO vehicle control, including two known calcineurin substrates. The other five proteins were novel targets for calcineurin dephosphorylation. These data implicated that one or more of these seven proteins in the calcineurin mediated regulation of VZV gB/gH-gL mediated cell fusion.

### Sample Protocol
MeWo cells were treated with vehicle control DMSO or 10 µM pimecrolimus for 2 hrs before total cellular proteins were extracted by 2 % SDS, Tris buffer, pH 7.6, in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors. For each of the three biological replicates per condition, proteins were precipitated from the cleared cell lysates using cold acetone, followed by reconstitution, reduction/alkylation and overnight digestion with Trypsin/LysC protease. Phosphopeptide enrichment was done using MagReSyn Zr-IMAC standard magnetic particles with either 400 µg of the digested peptides to test enrichment performance. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Byonic (Protein Metrics) at 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ms, Melanoma, Phosphopeptide

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University

### Submitter
Momei Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Ann Arvin
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University


