### Accession
PXD017006

### Title
TSC-Insensitive Rheb Mutations Induce Oncogenic Transformation Through a Combination of Hyperactive mTORC1 Signalling and Metabolic Reprogramming

### Description
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is an important regulator of cellular metabolism that is commonly hyperactivated in cancer. Recent cancer genome screens have identified multiple mutations in Ras-homolog enriched in brain (Rheb), the primary activator of mTORC1, that might act as driver oncogenes through aberrant hyperactivation of mTORC1. Here, we show that a number of recurrently occurring Rheb mutants drive hyperactive mTORC1 signalling through differing levels of insensitivity to the primary inactivator of Rheb, Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.  We show that two activated mutants, Rheb-T23M and E40K, strongly drive increased cell growth and proliferation and anchorage-independent growth resulting in enhanced tumour growth in vivo. Proteomic analysis of cells expressing the mutations revealed, surprisingly, that these two mutants promote distinct oncogenic pathways with Rheb-T23M driving metabolic reprogramming and an increased reliance of glycolysis, while Rheb-E40K interacts with AMPK to regulate eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) and autophagy.  Our findings suggest that unique ‘bespoke’ combination therapies may be utilised to treat cancers according to which Rheb mutant they harbour.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed with an SDC-based buffer, digested in solution with Trypsin and LysC, and peptides purified using SDB-RPS StageTips. Peptides were analysed by LC-MSMS using a benchtop Orbitrap system (Q Exactive HFX). Detailed sample processing protocols and MS instrument parameters can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0), searched against the mouse UniProt sequence database (June 2019 release). Complete MaxQuant settings can be found in the "mqpar.xml" file provided.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is an important regulator of cellular metabolism that is commonly hyperactivated in cancer. Recent cancer genome screens have identified multiple mutations in Ras-homolog enriched in brain (Rheb), the primary activator of mTORC1 that might act as driver oncogenes by causing hyperactivation of mTORC1. Here, we show that a number of recurrently occurring Rheb mutants drive hyperactive mTORC1 signalling through differing levels of insensitivity to the primary inactivator of Rheb, tuberous sclerosis complex. We show that two activated mutants, Rheb-T23M and E40K, strongly drive increased cell growth, proliferation and anchorage-independent growth resulting in enhanced tumour growth in vivo. Proteomic analysis of cells expressing the mutations revealed, surprisingly, that these two mutants promote distinct oncogenic pathways with Rheb-T23M driving an increased rate of anaerobic glycolysis, while Rheb-E40K regulates the translation factor eEF2 and autophagy, likely through differential interactions with 5' AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) which modulate its activity. Our findings suggest that unique, personalized, combination therapies may be utilised to treat cancers according to which Rheb mutant they harbour.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rheb, Proteomes, Mtor

### Affiliations
School of Life and Environmental Sciences & The Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia
Murdoch Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr Sean J Humphrey
School of Life and Environmental Sciences & The Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia


