### Accession
PXD030509

### Title
A peptide-derived strategy for specifically targeting the mitochondrial-ER network of cancer cells: a new paradigm in fighting cancer

### Description
An effective anti-cancer therapy should exclusively target cancer cells and trigger in them a broad spectrum of cell death pathways that will prevent avoidance. Here, we present a novel paradigm in cancer therapy that specifically targets the mitochondria and ER of cancer cells. We developed a peptide derived from the flexible and transmembrane domains of the human protein NAF-1/CISD2. This peptide (NAF-1) specifically permeated through the plasma membranes of human epithelial breast cancer cells, abolished their mitochondrial-ER network, and triggered cell death with characteristics of apoptosis, ferroptosis and necroptosis. In vivo analysis revealed that the peptide significantly decreased tumor growth in mice carrying xenograft human tumors. Computational simulations of cancer vs. normal cells membranes revealed that the specificity of the peptide to cancer cells is due to its selective recognition of their membrane composition. NAF-1 represents therefore a promising anti-cancer lead compound that acts via a unique mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis was conducted on heart tissues (left ventricle) obtained from 6 different animals (3 different males and 3 different females) from each group (Control, CISD2-KO and Old mice). Tissues were subjected to protein extraction using 0.175 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 5% SDS, 15% glycerol, 0.3M DTT, as described in [39]. Protein samples were precipitated with 100% of Acetone, washed, resuspended in urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) and subjected to protein quantification using EZQ™ Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific TM, Cat. No. R33200). Equal amounts of protein (25 µg) from each sample were digested with trypsin, and resulted peptides were cleaned up using C18 100 µL tips (Pierce), lyophilized, resuspended in 25µL of 5% ACN, 0.1% FA and quantified as described in [39]. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LCMS) using a Bruker nanoElute system attached to a Bruker timsTOF-PRO mass spectrometer via a Bruker CaptiveSpray source (timsToF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA). One µL injections were made directly onto a 20 cm long x 75 µm inner diameter pulled-needle analytical column packed with Waters BEH-C18, 1.7 µm reversed phase resin, and peptides were separated and eluted from the analytical column with a gradient of acetonitrile at 300 nL/min. Total run time was 90 min.  MS data were collected in positive-ion data-dependent PASEF mode over an m/z range of 100 to 1700, and an ion-mobility range of 0.6 to 1.6 1/k0.  PASEF and TIMS were set to “on”.  One MS and ten PASEF frames were acquired per cycle of 1.16sec (~1MS and 120 MS/MS).  Target MS intensity for MS was set at 10,000 counts/sec with a minimum threshold of 2000 counts/s.  An ion-mobility-based rolling collision energy was used: 20 to 59 eV (1/k0 0.6 to 1.6).  An active exclusion/reconsider precursor method with release after 0.4min was used.  If the precursor (within mass width error of 0.015 m/z) was >4X signal intensity in subsequent scans, a second MSMS spectrum was collected. Isolation width was set to 2 m/z (<700m/z) or 3 (800-1500 m/z). DIA-PASEF: PASEF and TIMS were set to “on”.  MS data were collected in positive-ion data-independent PASEF mode over an m/z range of 400 to 1200 and an ion-mobility (IM) range of 0.57 to 1.47 1/k0. A total of 64 DIA_PASEF windows were used (25 m/z steps and 0.18 IM steps) with two collision energies based on IM.

### Data Protocol
For spectral library generation, 4 ug of purified peptides from each sample were combined and fractionated by high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermofisher, Waltham, MA). Each of 8 high pH fractions was acquired by 60min DDA-PASEF (suggest just cite one of your earlier pubs) and searched against the Uniprot-Human database (UP000005640, 20381 entries) with the Pulsar algorithm in Spectronaut using the following criteria: spectrum, peptide and protein FDR 1%, min 3 and max 6 best fragments per peptide. A total 97,495 precursors, 78,084 peptides and 8,246 protein groups were included in the library. For dia-pasef data analysis: precursor Qvalue (precursor FDR), protein Qvalue (protein FDR) 1%. MS2 area quantification were filtered based on Qvalue and final PG. quantity was cut-off by 30 (1% quantile). A protein was identified in at least 2 samples per group. On average, >6,400 proteins were identified in each sample. A total 7,431 proteins were identified in all samples. The global sum normalization method was applied

### Publication Abstract
An effective anti-cancer therapy should exclusively target cancer cells and trigger in them a broad spectrum of cell death pathways that will prevent avoidance. Here, we present a new approach in cancer therapy that specifically targets the mitochondria and ER of cancer cells. We developed a peptide derived from the flexible and transmembrane domains of the human protein NAF-1/CISD2. This peptide (NAF-1<sup>44-67</sup>) specifically permeates through the plasma membranes of human epithelial breast cancer cells, abolishes their mitochondria and ER, and triggers cell death with characteristics of apoptosis, ferroptosis and necroptosis. <i>In vivo</i> analysis revealed that the peptide significantly decreases tumor growth in mice carrying xenograft human tumors. Computational simulations of cancer <i>vs.</i> normal cell membranes reveal that the specificity of the peptide to cancer cells is due to its selective recognition of their membrane composition. NAF-1<sup>44-67</sup> represents a promising anti-cancer lead compound that acts <i>via</i> a unique mechanism.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Peptides, Cell death, Cisd2, Er, Cancer, Naf-1

### Affiliations
Department of Surgery, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center University of Missouri. 1201 Rollins St, Columbia, MO 65201, USA The Division of Plant Sciences and Interdisciplinary Plant Group, College of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center University of Missouri. 1201 Rollins St, Columbia, MO, 65201, USA.
University of Missouri, columbia

### Submitter
Pei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ron Mittler
Department of Surgery, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center University of Missouri. 1201 Rollins St, Columbia, MO 65201, USA The Division of Plant Sciences and Interdisciplinary Plant Group, College of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center University of Missouri. 1201 Rollins St, Columbia, MO, 65201, USA.


