### Accession
PXD014351

### Title
Biogenesis and DNA cargo of Dinoroseobacter shibae outer membrane vesicles suggests vesicle formation is coupled to replication

### Description
The Gram-negative photoheterotrophic bacterium Dinoroseobacter shibae is a member of the high abundant marine Roseobacter group. In the ocean, OMVs have about the same abundance as bacteria, a distinct depth distribution, and contain DNA from a variety of marine bacterial taxa. In the present study, we determined the abundance, size, and ultrastructure of membrane vesicles of D. shibae and analysed the protein inventory of the soluble and membrane fractions of cells and vesicles in order to study the origin of OMV membranes and content. The proteomic analyses were complemented by fatty acid analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Vesicles were concentrated by filtration and centrifugation. Cell disruption was performed mechanically using a FastPrep whereas vesicles were disrupted by sonication. Membrane fractions were separated from soluble fractions by ultracentrifugation.  Aliquotes of each sample (10 µg for membrane proteins and 20 µg for soluble proteins) were separated via one dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In gel digestion of proteins was carried out by dividing each lane into eight fractions with similar protein amounts which were densitometrically determined using AIDA software (Raytest Isotopenmeßgeräte GmbH).  For liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses a nanoAQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was combined with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). Peptides from each fraction were solved in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid, centrifuged for 20 min at 109,000 x g and loaded onto a BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm at a flow rate of 0.35 μl min-1 (Waters Corporation). Elution of peptides from the column was performed using a 222 min nonlinear gradient or a 205 min nonlinear gradient (membranes) starting with 3.7% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and 96.3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Ultra-LC-MS-water. MS scans were performed in the Fourier transformation mode scanning an m/z of 400-2000 (350 -1900 for membrane samples) with a resolution (full width at half maximum at m/z 400) of 60,000 and a lock mass of 445.12003. Primary ions were fragmented in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation mode for the 20 most abundant precursor ions with an exclusion time of 13 s and analyzed by the LTQ ion trap. The following ionization parameters were applied: normalized collision energy: 35, activation Q: 0.25, activation time: 10 ms, isolation width: 2 m/z, charge state: > +2. The signal to noise threshold was set to 2000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.2.8) and the following parameters: peptide tolerance 5 ppm; a tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da; variable modification: methionine oxidation, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation; a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed; a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein; fixed false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % for proteins, peptides and site decoy fraction.  All samples were searched against a database containing all protein sequences of D. shibae DFL 12 (DSM 16493) extracted from NCBI at September 2016 with a decoy mode of reverted sequences and common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant. Relative Quantification was done using the labelfree IBAQ modus based on unique peptides only. Contaminants and reverse identifications were removed from the dataset.  A protein was considerably reliably identified when it was detected in two biological replicates/samples with two unique peptides and when two MS/MS scans have been performed. For protein quantification, the obtained raw intensities of each protein for three biological replicates were added and in case they were lower ≤ 500.000 the relative IBAQ were zeroised.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Outer membrane vesicles (omvs), Gelc-ms/ms, Dinoroseobacter shibae

### Affiliations
TU Braunschweig
Institut für Mikrobiologie
Spielmannstr. 7
Germany
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität  Braunschweig, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kucklick

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Engelmann
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität  Braunschweig, Germany


