### Accession
PXD012975

### Title
Endothelial PKA targets ATG16L1 to regulate angiogenesis by limiting autophagy

### Description
The cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) regulates a plethora of cellular functions in health and disease. During angiogenesis, PKA activity in endothelial cells controls the transition from sprouting to vessel maturation and limits tip cell formation independently of Notch signaling. The molecular PKA targets mediating these effects remain unknown. We report a chemical genetics screen identifying endothelial-specific substrates of PKA in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). We identified ATG16L1, a regulator of autophagy, as novel target of PKA. Biochemical validation, mass spectrometry and peptide spot arrays revealed that PKA phosphorylates ATG16L1α at Ser268 and ATG16L1β at Ser269. The phosphorylations drive degradation of ATG16L1 protein. Knocking down PKA or inhibiting its activity increased ATG16L1 protein levels and endothelial autophagy. In vivo genetics and pharmacological experiments demonstrated that autophagy inhibition partially rescues vascular hypersprouting caused by PKA deficiency. We propose that endothelial PKA activity restricts active sprouting by reducing endothelial autophagy through phosphorylation of ATG16L1.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs (6 10cm-dishes each containing 1x106 cells) were infected with lentivirus encoding either flag-PKACa WT (as negative control) or flag-PKACa M120G. 48 hours after infection, cells were stimulated with Sp-8-CPT-cAMPS (Biolog) for 10 minutes, then lysed in kinase lysis buffer (1% NP40, 142 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM -glycerophosphate, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM MgCl2) with protease inhibitor cocktail on ice for 20 minutes and spun (16,000g x 10min) to remove cell debries. 3.5 mM GTP and 350 M 6-cHe-ATPγS (Biolog) were added to the lysates. After 30 min incubation at 30C, 2.5 mM p-Nitrobenzyl mesylate (PNBM, Abcam) was added and the reaction was incubated for additional 2 hours at room temperature. PNBM was removed by ZebaTM Spin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO (Thermo Fisher) and samples were washed with IP buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate). The protein fractions were precleared by incubation with Recombinant Protein G Agarose for one hour at 4C. The precleared samples were then incubated with anti-thiophosphate ester antibody (51-8; Abcam) coupled to Recombinant Protein G Agarose coupled gently rocking overnight at 4C. The agarose beads were washed 4 times with IP buffer. 1/30 of the washed beads was boiled in SDS sample loading buffer for western blot detection or silver staining. The rest samples were used for mass spectrometry analyze. For validation of the identified substrates, 293T cells (1.5x106 on a 6cm dish) were transfected with 0.5g pRRL PKACa WT or pRRL PKACaM120G and 1.5 g of indicated candidate substrate using X-tremeGENE HP DNA transfection reagent (Roche). 30 hours after transfection, cells were stimulated with Sp-8-CPT-cAMPS (Biolog) for 10 minutes, lysated and treated as described above.  For mass spectrometric analysis to identify new PKA substrates, samples were prepared by chemical genetical approach as described above, each sample was run on a stacking SDS-PAGE collecting all proteins in a single band. After coomassie blue staining, the minced gel pieces were digested with trypsin based on Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havliš, Olsen, & Mann, 2007) in an automated fashion using a PAL robot (Axel Semrau / CTC Analytics). Samples were measured on an LTQ Orbitrap VELOS mass spectrometer (Thermo) connected to a Proxeon nano-LC system (Thermo). Five microliters of the sample was loaded on a nano-LC column (0.074 x 250 mm, 3 mm Reprosil C18; Dr. Maisch) and separated on a 155 min gradient (4%–76% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min and ionized using a Proxeon ion source. Mass spectrometric acquisition was done at a resolution of 60,000 with a scan range of 200-1,700 m/z in FTMS mode selecting the top 20 peaks for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation. Tandem mass spectrometric scans were measured in ion-trap mode with an isolation width of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 40. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis to identify new PKA substrates, samples were prepared by chemical genetical approach as described above, each sample was run on a stacking SDS-PAGE collecting all proteins in a single band. After coomassie blue staining, the minced gel pieces were digested with trypsin based on Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havliš, Olsen, & Mann, 2007) in an automated fashion using a PAL robot (Axel Semrau / CTC Analytics). Samples were measured on an LTQ Orbitrap VELOS mass spectrometer (Thermo) connected to a Proxeon nano-LC system (Thermo). Five microliters of the sample was loaded on a nano-LC column (0.074 x 250 mm, 3 mm Reprosil C18; Dr. Maisch) and separated on a 155 min gradient (4%–76% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min and ionized using a Proxeon ion source. Mass spectrometric acquisition was done at a resolution of 60,000 with a scan range of 200-1,700 m/z in FTMS mode selecting the top 20 peaks for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation. Tandem mass spectrometric scans were measured in ion-trap mode with an isolation width of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 40. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pka, Atg16l1, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück Center for molecular medicine Robert-Rössle Strasse 10 13125 Berlin
LIH

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Gerhardt
Max-Delbrück Center for molecular medicine Robert-Rössle Strasse 10 13125 Berlin


