### Accession
PXD020381

### Title
A multipass membrane protein interacts with the cGMP-dependent protein kinase to regulate critical calcium signals in malaria parasites

### Description
In malaria parasites, all cGMP-dependent signalling is mediated through a single cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG). A major function of PKG is to control calcium signals essential for the parasite to exit red blood cells or for transmission to the mosquito vector. However, how PKG controls these signals in the absence of known second messenger-dependent calcium channels or scaffolding proteins remains a mystery. Here we identify a tightly-associated PKG partner protein in both Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages and P. berghei gametocytes. Named ICM1, the partner is a polytopic membrane protein with homology to transporters and calcium channels, raising the possibility of a direct functional link between PKG and calcium homeostasis. Phosphoproteomic analyses in both Plasmodium species highlight a densely phosphorylated region of ICM1 with multiple phosphorylation events dependent upon PKG activity. Stage-specific depletion of ICM1 in P. berghei blocks gametogenesis due to the inability of mutant parasites to mobilise intracellular calcium upon PKG activation, whilst conditional disruption of P. falciparum ICM1 results in reduced cGMP-dependent calcium mobilisation associated with defective egress and invasion. Our findings provide new insights into the atypical calcium homeostasis in malaria parasites essential for pathology and disease transmission.

### Sample Protocol
Schizont pellets were resuspended in 1 mL 8M urea in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 100 U/mL benzonase (Sigma). Proteins were extracted from the pellets by sonication. Samples were incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 rpm at 4˚C. Protein content was estimated by a BCA protein assay and 200 μg of each sample were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 56˚C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were digested initially with LysC (WAKO) at 37˚C for 2.5 h and subsequently with 10 μg trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. After acidification, C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) were used to clean up the digested peptide solutions and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 0.8 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted TMT-labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptide enrichment was subsequently carried out using the sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) strategy with High Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific). Eluates were combined prior to fractionation with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). The dried TMT-labelled phosphopeptide fractions generated were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50-cm, 75-μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a three hours gradient run at 40°C, eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was run in data-dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Two replicate injections were made for each fraction with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.10) and searched against UniProt Homo Sapiens complete proteome canonical sequences (September 2019) and PlasmoDB. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file. Other parameters were used as preset in the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium berghei, Phosphoproteomics, Cgmp-dependent protein kinase (pkg), Transporter, Calcium regulation

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT  UK

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT  UK


