### Accession
PXD008313

### Title
Absolute quantification of selected photosynthetic electron transfer proteins in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in the presence and absence of oxygen

### Description
The absolute amount of plastocyanin (PC), ferredoxin-NADP+-oxidoreductase (FNR), hydrogenase (HYDA1) and ferredoxin 5 (FDX5) were quantified in aerobic and anaerobic Chlamydomonas reinhardtii whole cells using purified (recombinant) proteins as internal standard in a mass spectrometric approach. Quantified protein amounts were related to the estimated amount of PSI. The ratios of PC to FNR to HYDA1 to FDX5 in aerobic cells were determined to be 2.1 : 1.8 : 0.005 : 0. In anaerobic cells, the ratios changed to 1.6 : 1.8 : 0.026 : 0.04 (PC : FNR : HYDA1 : Fdx5).  Employing sodium dithionite and methyl viologen as electron donors the specific activity of hydrogenase in whole cells was calculated to be 382 ±96.5 μmolH2/min/mg. Importantly, these data demonstrate for competition of electrons from FDX1, HYDA1 is about 70-fold less abundant than its competitor FNR. Effective in vivo hydrogen production points to a channeling mechanism for FDX to HYDA1 electron transfer.

### Sample Protocol
Three AR and three AN sample from the same culture (technical replicates) were thawed right before use and kept on ice. Chlorophyll concentration was measured and volume corresponding to 10 µg total chlorophyll was taken from each sample and supplemented with the recombinant proteins and loading buffer. The samples were then denaturated at 65°C for 15 min and loaded on a discontinuous 13% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gel according to (Laemmli 1970), followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining overnight as described previously (Candiano et al. 2004). Besides the protein ladder, 3 µg of the recombinant proteins were loaded on separate lanes, which served as running marker.  Three bands per sample (hydrogenase (band width 1 cm), FNR (band width 0.5 cm), plastocyanin + ferredoxin 5 (band width 1 cm)) were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin as described in (Hippler et al. 2001) and (Terashima et al. 2010) with acetonitrile as the organic phase. The HYDA1-containing bands were furthermore reduced (10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using the Ultimate 3000 Nanoflow HPLC system (Dionex). The mobile phases were composed of 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (B). The sample (1 µl) was loaded on a trap column (C18 5UMx0.3x5MM; 100-Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 4 min using eluent A at a flow rate of 20 µl min-1. Then chromatographic separation was carried out on an RP18 capillary column (PepMap C18 3UM 75UMx150MM, 100-Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 with the following gradient:  1) for the fisrt biological replicate: 0% to 35% B (0–90 min), 35% to 100% B (90–97 min), and 100% B (97–107 min) and 2) for the second and third biological replicate: 0% to 40% B (0–35 min), 40% to 60% B (35-42 min), 60% to 100% B (42-45 min) and 100% B (45–55 min). The column was re-equilibrated with 100% A for 12 min (1st biological replicate) and for 20 min (2nd – 3rd biological replicates). The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan).MS full scans (mass-to-charge ratio 375– 1,600) were acquired by Fourier transform-MS in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (full width at half maximum) with internal lock mass calibration on mass-to-charge ratio 445.12003. The twelve most intense ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation (35% normalized collision energy). Automatic gain control was enabled with target values of 5e6 and 2e5 (1st biological replicate) or 5e6 and 3e4 (2nd – 3rd biological replicate) for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively.  Each sample was analyzed twice, with 500-ms (one microscan) and 100-ms (one microscan) maximum ion trap fill time for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 90s (1st biological replicate) or 30s (2nd – 3rd biological replicate), repeat count of one, list size of 500, and exclusion mass width of 10 ppm. Unassigned charge states and charged state 1 were rejected. Peak lists were generated from raw files using msconvert 3.0.5047, developed by the ProteoWizard project (Chambers et al. 2012). For the identification of peptides, multistage activation spectra were matched against the JGI4.3 Augustus 10.2 protein sequence database using OMSSA 2.1.9 (Geer et al. 2004) and X! Tandem (version 2013.09.01;(Craig and Beavis 2004)). The maximum number of missed cleavages allowed was two. Mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm for MS1 precursor ions and 0.8D for product ions. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification for the HYDA1-containing samples. Protein quantification was performed using qTrace (Terashima et al. 2010). Peptide ratios were calculated using all MS1 scans that contained both sister peptides, i.e. the light (14N) and heavy (15N) peptide. The peptide ratio was calculated by dividing the sum of all light by the sum of all heavy amounts. Considered were only protein ratios with at least two spectral counts and a relative standard deviation ≤ 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ferredoxin-nadp+-oxidoreductase, Hydrogenase, Plastocyanin, Ferredoxin 5, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Absolute quantification

### Affiliations
University Münster, Institute for Biology and Biotechnology of Plants
University of Münster

### Submitter
Denitsa Nikolova

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
University Münster, Institute for Biology and Biotechnology of Plants


