### Accession
PXD012129

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Mammalian COPI Vesicles

### Description
By combining in vitro COPI vesicle reconstitutions and SILAC-based mass spectrometric analysis this study aims to identify the core proteome of mammalian COPI vesicles. Furthermore proteomes generated from vesicles with γ- and ζ-COP as well as Arf isoforms have been investigated with the same approach to identify isoform-dependent cargo proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Light and heavy SILAC labeled, purified COPI1 vesicels have been mixed in a 1:1 ratio and briefly run (approximately 1cm) into a 10% Tris-Glycine gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), stained with Roti®-Blue colloidal coomassie (Roth GmbH, Germany). 2 gel pieces per sample have been reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin using the DigestPro MS platform (Intavis AG, Germany) following the protocol described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 2006;1(6):2856-2860.). Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LCMS) using an UltiMate 3000 LC (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to either an Orbitrap Elite or a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides analyzed by the Orbitrap Elite were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a flow rate of 30µl/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75µm x 250mm) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a 2h gradient of 3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 1 % acetonitrile) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 30 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Peptides analyzed on the Q-Exactive were directly injected to an analytical column (75µm x 300mm), which was self-packed with 3µm Reprosil Pur-AQ C18 material (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany) and separated using the same gradient as described before. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using standard settings for each instrument type and searched against a human specific database extracted from UniProt (UniProt Consortium). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification; Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine and acetylation of protein N-termini was set as variable modification. ‘Requantify’ as well as ‘Match Between Runs’ options were both enabled. Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Copi vesicels, Silac

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) - Heidelberg
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Centre (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Bernd Hessling

### Lab Head
Dr Felix T Wieland
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Centre (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


