### Accession
PXD033165

### Title
An rRNA fragment in extracellular vesicles secreted by human airway epithelial cells increases the fluoroquinolone sensitivity of P. aeruginosa

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by human airway epithelial cells contain small RNAs that are transferred to P. aeruginosa upon EV exposure. The purpose of this experiment was to characterize the effect of a 27-nucleotide long human 18S rRNA external transcribed spacer fragment on P. aeruginosa protein levels.

### Sample Protocol
Pseudomonas aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14 strains expressing either the 18S rRNA spacer fragment under the control of an Arabinose-inducible promoter or the empty vector control were produced by transforming P. aeruginosa with a pMQ70 expression vector (Shanks et al. 2006) containing either the rRNA fragment sequence (GCGGCGTCCGGTGAGCTCTCGCTGGCC) as an insert, or no insert (control). Following overnight cultures with 300 ug/ml carbenicillin to select for bacteria containing the plasmid, 3 different clones of the P. aeruginosa strains expressing either the rRNA fragment or the empty vector control were cultured with 100 mM Arabinose for 15 h at 37 C and 225 rpm to induce expression of the rRNA fragment. Cell pellets were washed with PBS, lysed and proteins (200 ug of each sample) were purified by acetone/trichloroacetic acid precipitation overnight at -20 C. After washing the pellet with ice-cold acetone, the resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 50 ul of 8M urea in 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol at 50 C for 30 minutes, and cysteines were alkylated with 18 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes. The solution was then diluted to <2 M urea and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a final trypsin/protein ratio of 1:100 prior to overnight incubation at 37 C. The resulting peptides were desalted using solid-phase extraction on a C18 Spin column and eluted in 240 uL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Technical duplicates of all samples were run on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Billerica, MA). Two hundred nanogram of each peptide digest sample was loaded on a capillary C18 column (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.6 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size; IonOpticks, Fitzroy, VIC, AUS). The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode.Mass scan range was 100 ~ 1700 m/z and 1/K0 was set to 0.60−1.60 V·s/cm2 over a ramp time of 100 ms. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle with a near 100% duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
The resulting protein tandem MS data was queried for protein identification and label-free quantification against the Uniprot Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain UCBPP-PA14 database (proteome ID UP000000653, retrieved on Feb 2, 2022) using MaxQuant v2.0.3.1. The following modifications were set as search parameters: peptide mass tolerance at 20 ppm, trypsin digestion cleavage after K or R (except when followed by P), 2 allowed missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylated cysteine (static modification), and oxidized methionine, deaminated asparagine/glutamine, and protein N-term acetylation (variable modification). Search results were validated with peptide and protein FDR both at 0.01. LFQ intensities were averaged across technical replicates, filtered to retain 1911 proteins detected in at least two replicate samples, and normalized prior to QPROT analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Lung infections caused by antibiotic-resistant strains of <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> are difficult to eradicate in immunocompromised hosts such as those with cystic fibrosis. We previously demonstrated that extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by primary human airway epithelial cells (AECs) deliver microRNA let-7b-5p to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to suppress biofilm formation and increase sensitivity to beta-lactam antibiotics. In this study, we show that EVs secreted by AECs transfer multiple distinct short RNA fragments to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> that are predicted to target the three subunits of the fluoroquinolone efflux pump MexHI-OpmD, thus increasing antibiotic sensitivity. Exposure of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to EVs resulted in a significant reduction in the protein levels of MexH (-48%), MexI (-50%), and OpmD (-35%). Moreover, EVs reduced planktonic growth of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in the presence of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ciprofloxacin by 20%. A <i>mexGHI-opmD</i> deletion mutant of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> phenocopied this increased sensitivity to ciprofloxacin. Finally, we found that a fragment of an 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) external transcribed spacer that was transferred to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> by EVs reduced planktonic growth of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in the presence of ciprofloxacin, reduced the minimum inhibitory concentration of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> for ciprofloxacin by over 50%, and significantly reduced protein levels of both MexH and OpmD. In conclusion, an rRNA fragment secreted by AECs in EVs that targets the fluoroquinolone efflux pump MexHI-OpmD downregulated these proteins and increased the ciprofloxacin sensitivity of <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. A combination of rRNA fragments and ciprofloxacin packaged in nanoparticles or EVs may benefit patients with ciprofloxacin-resistant <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infections.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Human RNA fragments transported in extracellular vesicles interfere with <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> drug efflux pumps. A combination of rRNA fragments and ciprofloxacin packaged in nanoparticles or EVs may benefit patients with antibiotic-resistant <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infections.

### Keywords
Evs, Airway cells, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Host-pathogen communication

### Affiliations
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Byoung-Kyu Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Stanton
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth


