### Accession
PXD044571

### Title
Microbiome adaptations and the role of abundant metagenomically assembled genomes (MAGs) from a production-scale biogas plant consisting of three independent digesters as revealed by MAG-centric metagenomics and metaproteomics

### Description
Current developments have led to a reconsidering of energy policy in many countries with the aim of increasing the share of renewable energies in the energy supply, where the anaerobic digestion (AD) of biomass to produce methane also plays an important role. To improve biomass digestion while ensuring overall process stability, microbiome-based management strategies became more important. By applying combined metagenome and metaproteome, as well as metagenomically assembled genome (MAG)-centric analyses, it is possible to determine not only the functional potential but also the expressed functions of the entire microbial community and also individual MAGs. This approach was used in this study for the production-scale biogas plant 35 (BP35) consisting of three digesters which were operated differently regarding process temperatures, feedstocks and other process parameters. Different process conditions were hypothesized to result in specific microbiome adaptations and differentially abundant metabolic functions in the digesters. Based on metagenomic single-read analyses, several taxa residing in the three digesters of BP35 were shown to correlate with the corresponding substrates and temperatures. In particular, the genus Defluviitoga showed the strongest correlation to the process temperature and the genus Acetomicrobium featured a direct correlation to the concentartions of different acids including acetic acid. Analysis of the functional potential and expressed functions of the entire microbial community of the three digesters revealed that the genes and key enzymes relevant for the biogas process were present and also expressed. Differences between the abundances of certain genes and expressed enzymes could be related to the specific parameters of the corresponding digesters. Regarding the biogas related metabolic pathways, MAG-centric metagenomics and metaproteomics indicated the functional potential and the actual expressed metabolic functions of certain MAGs that are differentially abundant in the three digesters. These MAGs, belonging to the phylum Firmicutes, the class Bacilli and the orders Caldicoprobacterales and Bacteroidales showed a specific metabolic activity within the three digesters and have important roles in the hydrolysis, acidogenesis or acetogenesis of the anaerobic digestion process. An archaeal MAG assigned to the species Methanothermobacter wolfeii was the most abundant and highly active hydrogenotrophic methanogen in digester 3 featuring an operation temperature of 54 °C. Beside the MAGs that were differentially abundant in the three digesters, also MAGs which were more evenly distributed were analyzed. The most abundant and highly active MAG in all digesters belongs to the class Limnochordia and was shown to be ubiquitous in all three digesters and exhibit activity in a variety of pathways representing hydrolysis as well as the acido- and acetogenesis steps of the biogas process. Other MAGs assigned to the phylum Firmicutes, genus Acetomicrobium and the hydrogenotrophic species Methanoculleus thermohydrogenotrophicum were also shown to be more evenly distributed and active in the three digesters. Corresponding taxa appeared to be more resilient to the different process parameters of the three digesters, and therefore, may support a stable biogas process. Overall, the combined metagenome and metaproteome analysis of biogas digesters helps to gain deeper insights into the composition of the whole microbial community, biogas related pathways and their expression, which could contribute to an improved microbiome-based process management in the future.

### Sample Protocol
The BP35 sample preparation for metaproteome analysis was carried out according to the protocol published by Heyer et al. (2019). Briefly, protein extraction and purification were performed three times for each sample of the three digesters using liquid phenol in a ball mill. After solubilisation in urea and protein quantification using an amido black, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE into ten fractions. Subsequently, proteins were digested with in-gel digest and analyzed via nano liquid tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) measurements. The result files of the timsTOF™ MS/MS measurement were processed (Compass DataAnalysis 5.1 software, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen) to create generic files for the subsequent protein identification (Mascot 2.5; Perkins et al. 1999).

### Data Protocol
The assembled and annotated contigs of the BP35 metagenome were used for the metaproteomic assignment. Hereby also the contig to MAG allocations were considered. Homologous, redundant protein identifications were grouped into metaproteins (protein groups) if they share the same peptide set. Spectral counts of proteins which were not unique for a specific MAG were excluded. Finally, a result matrix of all unique proteins for the three different digesters was exported. Spectral counts in each sample were total-count-normalized so that the sum of all spectral counts in each sample is equal (78,119 spectral counts). For each digester median spectral counts were calculated for genes and KEGG orthologies, and the results underwent a second round of total count normalization.

### Publication Abstract
The current focus on renewable energy in global policy highlights the importance of methane production from biomass through anaerobic digestion (AD). To improve biomass digestion while ensuring overall process stability, microbiome-based management strategies become more important. In this study, metagenomes and metaproteomes were used for metagenomically assembled genome (MAG)-centric analyses to investigate a full-scale biogas plant consisting of three differentially operated digesters. Microbial communities were analyzed regarding their taxonomic composition, functional potential, as well as functions expressed on the proteome level. Different abundances of genes and enzymes related to the biogas process could be mostly attributed to different process parameters. Individual MAGs exhibiting different abundances in the digesters were studied in detail, and their roles in the hydrolysis, acidogenesis and acetogenesis steps of anaerobic digestion could be assigned. <i>Methanoculleus thermohydrogenotrophicum</i> was an active hydrogenotrophic methanogen in all three digesters, whereas <i>Methanothermobacter wolfeii</i> was more prevalent at higher process temperatures. Further analysis focused on MAGs, which were abundant in all digesters, indicating their potential to ensure biogas process stability. The most prevalent MAG belonged to the class <i>Limnochordia</i>; this MAG was ubiquitous in all three digesters and exhibited activity in numerous pathways related to different steps of AD.

### Keywords
Biogas microbiome, Biogas process chain, Metagenome analyses, Metagenomic binning, Metaproteome analyses, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Otto-von-Guericke-University
Universitätsplatz 2
39106 Magdeburg
Germany
ISAS Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 44139 Dortmund Germany

### Submitter
Patrick Hellwig

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Heyer
ISAS Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 44139 Dortmund Germany


