### Accession
PXD039222

### Title
α-catenin interacts with YAP/FoxM1/TEAD-induced CEP55 and fosters liver cancer cell migration

### Description
Aberrant expression of adherens junction (AJ) proteins is frequently observed in human cancers. However, how these factors contribute to tumorigenesis is poorly understood and for some factors such as α‐catenin contradicting data has been described. Systematic analysis of TCGA expression data derived from 23 human tumor types revealed that α‐catenin was significantly reduced in some malignancies (e.g., colon adenocarcinoma), while elevated α‐catenin expression in other entities was associated with poor clinical outcome (e.g., hepatocellular carcinoma; HCC). In HCC cells, α‐catenin was detectable at the membrane as well as cytoplasm where it supported tumor cell proliferation and migration. Additionally, in vivo experiments illustrated moderate oncogenic potential of α‐catenin. To identify functionally relevant binding partners of α‐catenin, BioID combined with mass spectrometry was performed. This led to the identification of cytokinesis regulator centrosomal protein 55 (CEP55) as novel α‐catenin interacting protein in the cytoplasm that was stabilized by α‐catenin. Interestingly, CEP55 was highly expressed in human HCC tissues and its overexpression was transcriptionally controlled by a complex consisting of TEA domain transcription factors (TEADs), forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), and yes-associated protein (YAP). Surprisingly, CEP55 did not significantly affect HCC cell proliferation but supported migration in conjunction with α‐catenin.   Together, the enrichment of pro-migratory CEP55 in HCC cells is mediated by two mechanisms: transcriptional activation via the FoxM1/TEAD/YAP as well as the cytoplasmic stabilization through interaction with the AJ protein α‐catenin.

### Sample Protocol
A stable cell lines with inducible overexpression of N-terminal tagged BirA CTNNA1 and the empty vector alone as control was used. Proteins were incubated with Streptavidin magnetic beads (Dynabeads® MyOne™ Streptavidin C1, Thermo Fisher) under rotation at 4°C overnight. The bead/protein complexes were collected using a magnetic separator. Then, biotinylated proteins were eluted from beads with Laemmli buffer saturated with biotin at 95°C for 10 min, separated by SDS-page electrophoresis and stained with colloidal Coomassie.  Proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubating gel pieces with dithiothreitol (40 mM) at 57°C for 30 min followed by incubation with iodoacetamide (59mM) at 25°C for 20 min in the dark. After dehydration with 60 µL 100% acetonitrile (ACN), 30 µL of trypsin (8 ng/µL in 50 mM TEAB) was added and incubated at 37°C overnight. After adding 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, peptides were extracted by dehydration two times in 20 µL ACN and 30 µL 50 mM TEAB for 20 min. Collected supernatants were dried by vacuum. For HPLC-MS analysis (Ultimate 3000 coupled to an Orbitrap QE HF, Thermo Fischer Scientific), samples were dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA and loaded to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS-Chromatographie Service GmbH) with a flow rate of 550 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient (3-40% of solvent B) for 60 min at 300 nl/min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA)/1% ACN) and solvent B (0.1% FA, 10% water, 89.9% ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution. Fragmentation in HCD cell was performed for up to 15 precursors and MS2 spectra were acquired at 15,000 (m/z 400) resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.12.0 [28]. MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (UP000005640_9606.fasta downloaded Nov 2019) and the contaminants database provided together with software using the following parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term), oxidation (M) and deamidation (Q,N) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was set to 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. All other parameters were default parameters of MaxQuant. Quantitative normalized ratios were calculated by MaxQuant and used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cell&#x2013;cell contact in epithelial cells is important for cell polarity, cellular compartmentalisation, as well as tissue architecture during development, homeostasis, and regeneration of adult tissues in metazoans. In this context, adherens junctions (AJs) mechanically sense cell contact information with direct impact on cytoskeletal remodelling, the regulation of signalling pathways, and eventually cell biology. Indeed, the loss of cell&#x2013;cell contact and cellular polarity are key features in human carcinogenesis and important pathological parameters for the identification of many epithelial tumors.We demonstrate in this study, that overexpression of the AJ constituent &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin is frequently observed in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin supports HCC cell proliferation and migration. Together with the oncogene AKT, &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin moderately facilitates tumor initiation in mouse livers. Using mass spectrometry, we identified several new &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin interaction partners in the cytosol of liver cancer cells, including the cytokinesis regulator centrosomal protein 55 (CEP55). CEP55 mediates pro-migratory effects and its overexpression in HCC cells is controlled by two molecular mechanisms: &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin-dependent protein stabilization and transcriptional induction by the TEA domain transcription factors (TEADs)/forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)/yes-associated protein (YAP) complex.In summary, we here describe a new mechanism how changes in cell&#x2013;cell contact support liver cancer formation and progression. This study demonstrates that dysregulation of the AJ component &#x3b1;&#x2010;catenin contributes to liver carcinogenesis via distinct molecular mechanisms. Video Abstract.

### Keywords
Yes-associated protein, Hippo pathway, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Adherens junctions, Forkhead box m1

### Affiliations
Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics, ZMBH, University Heidelberg, IM Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics, ZMBH, University Heidelberg, IM Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


