### Accession
PXD009620

### Title
Bovine hypothalamic LC-MS/MS

### Description
The objective of the current study is to identifiy abundant proteins in the hypothalamus between pre- and post-pubertal Brahman heifers using LC-ESI-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
6 pre- and 6 post-pubertal hypothalamus were processed separately for protein identification and quantification. Briefly, proteins were diluted, alkylated, precipitated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 Ziptips (Millipore) and analyzed by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometric (LC-ESI-MS/MS) with a TripleTOF 5600 instrument (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (AB SCIEX), searching UniProt database of Bos taurus reference was utilized to identify peptides. The search in ProteinPilot was done using 4 IDA libraries prepared from 2 randomly chosen pre-pubertal sample and 2 randomly chosen post-pubertal sample with the following parameters: : (1) Sample type: identification; (2) Cysteine alkylation: acrylamide; (3) Digestion: (4) Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (5) Special Factors: None; (6) Species: Bos taurus; (7) ID focus: biological modifications; (8) Database: Bos taurus database; (9) Search effort: thorough; (10) the false discovery rate (FDR) analysis: Yes; and (11) User modified parameter files: No. The ProteinPilot data (false discovery rate < 1%) were then used as ion libraries for sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) analysis using PeakView v2.1 (SCIEX). Statistical analyses were performed using MSstats (v2.6) in R

### Publication Abstract
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland are directly involved in the complex systemic changes that drive the onset of puberty in cattle. Here, we applied integrated bioinformatics to elucidate the critical proteins underlying puberty and uncover potential molecular mechanisms from the hypothalamus and pituitary gland of prepubertal (<i>n</i> = 6) and postpubertal (<i>n</i> = 6) cattle. Proteomic analysis in the hypothalamus and pituitary gland revealed 275 and 186 differentially abundant (DA) proteins, respectively (adjusted <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.01). The proteome profiles found herein were integrated with previously acquired transcriptome profiles. These transcriptomic studies used the same tissues harvested from the same heifers at pre- and post-puberty. This comparison detected a small number of matched transcripts and protein changes at puberty in each tissue, suggesting the need for multiple omics analyses for interpreting complex biological systems. In the hypothalamus, upregulated DA proteins at post-puberty were enriched in pathways related to puberty, including <i>GnRH, calcium and oxytocin signalling pathways</i>, whereas downregulated proteins were observed in the <i>estrogen signalling pathway, axon guidance and GABAergic synapse</i>. Additionally, this study revealed that ribosomal pathway proteins in the pituitary were involved in the pubertal development of mammals. The reported molecules and derived protein-protein networks are a starting point for future experimental approaches that might dissect with more detail the role of each molecule to provide new insights into the mechanisms of puberty onset in cattle.

### Keywords
The hypothalamus, Puberty, Brahman, Heifer, Bos indicus

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Livestock Genomic Group, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 4072

### Submitter
Loan Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Fortes
Livestock Genomic Group, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 4072


