### Accession
PXD039025

### Title
Cleavage of rTLP and rCHI by Peptidases from Drosophila suzukii Larval (Peptdomics Analysis)

### Description
We produced recombinant TLP and CHI as model thermolabile wine haze proteins and applied a peptidomics strategy to investigate whether D. suzukii larval peptidases were able to digest them under acidic conditions (pH 3.5) typically found in winemaking practices.

### Sample Protocol
Purified rTLP and rCHI were dissolved in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 3.5) to a concentration of 0.25 mg/mL and were incubated with the purified peptidases at 37 °C for 18 h. The cleaved peptides were collected by filtration by using Amicon filters with a MWCO of 10 kDa. Native peptides produced by the digestion of rTLP and rCHI with D. suzukii larval peptidases were identified by LC-MS/MS (peptidomics)(Albuquerque et al. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130437). Raw MS data were analyzed using Peaks Studio vX+ (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) based on de novo sequencing.

### Data Protocol
The recorded raw files were searched against the UniProt database, taxonomically set to Drosophila suzukii, using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany. For the peptidomics analysis, MS data was searched against Vitis vinifera database downloaded from UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Thermolabile grape berry proteins such as thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) and chitinases (CHIs) promote haze formation in bottled wines if not properly fined. As a natural grapevine pest, the spotted-wing fly <i>Drosophila suzukii</i> is a promising source of peptidases that break down grape berry proteins because the larvae develop and feed inside mature berries. Therefore, we produced recombinant TLP and CHI as model thermolabile wine haze proteins and applied a peptidomics strategy to investigate whether <i>D. suzukii</i> larval peptidases were able to digest them under acidic conditions (pH 3.5), which are typically found in winemaking practices. The activity of the novel peptidases was confirmed by mass spectrometry, and cleavage sites within the wine haze proteins were visualized in 3D protein models. The combination of recombinant haze proteins and peptidomics provides a valuable screening tool to identify optimal peptidases suitable for clarification processes in the winemaking industry.

### Keywords
Chitinase, Wine, Peptidases, Suzukii, Haze, Drosophila, Tlp

### Affiliations
Institute of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology
Justus Liebig University

### Submitter
Wendell Albuquerque

### Lab Head
Dr Wendell Albuquerque
Institute of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology


