### Accession
PXD025534

### Title
Insights into autotrophic activities and carbon flow in iron-rich pelagic aggregates (iron snow)

### Description
Pelagic aggregates function as hotspots for microbial activity and biological carbon pumps for exporting OM fixed by photoautotrophs to sediments in lakes and oceans. In iron-rich (ferruginous) lakes, photoferrotrophic or chemolithoautotrophic bacteria appear to contribute to CO2 fixation by oxidizing reduced iron which leads to the formation of iron-rich pelagic aggregates called iron-snow. In acidic lakes, iron snow is colonized mainly by acidophilic iron-cycling microbes that can trigger interspecies aggregation mechanisms. However, the significance of iron oxidizers in carbon fixation, their general role in iron snow functioning, and the flow of carbon within iron snow is still unclear. Here, we combined a two-year metatranscriptome analysis with a 13CO2 metabolic labeling approach to determine general metabolic activities. Protein-based stable isotope probing (protein-SIP) was used to trace the 13CO2 incorporation in iron snow microcosms over time under both oxic and anoxic conditions. Analysis of our mRNA-derived metatranscriptome data identified four key players (Leptospirillum, Ferrovum, Acidithrix, Acidiphilium) with relative abundances (59.6%-85.7%) in iron snow encoding a variety of ecologically relevant pathways, including carbon fixation, polysaccharide biosynthesis, and flagellar-based motility. We did not detect transcriptional activity for carbon fixation from archaea or eukaryotes. The largest numbers of expressed genes (3008, 2991, 2936) matched to the genomes of our previously obtained iron snow isolates (Acidithrix sp. C25, Acidiphilium sp. C61, Acidocella sp. C78) separately. 13CO2 incorporation studies identified Leptospirillum and Ferrovum, as the main active chemolithoautotrophs under oxic conditions, and Ferrovum was the main active organism under anoxic conditions as well. Small amounts of labeled 13C (Relative isotope abundance: 1.0%-5.3%) were found in the heterotrophic Acidiphilium and Acidocella. Overall, our data show that iron oxidizers play an important role in the formation of iron minerals and CO2 fixation, but the majority of fixed C apparently did not reach other iron snow microbes. This finding suggests that most of the fixed C will be directly exported to the sediment without feeding heterotrophs in the water column in acidic ferruginous lakes.

### Sample Protocol
Lake characteristics and iron snow sampling      Lignite lake 77 is an acidic coal mining lake located in the Lusatian mining area in eastern Germany. Iron snow sampling was conducted in both August 2017 and August 2018 at the central basin (CB, 51o50’20”N, 14o19’17”E) during lake stratification or at the very beginning of the ‘mixing’ period (Reiche et al., 2011). For lake samples used for Fe(II) and sulfate measurements, 1 mL of 5 M HCl was added to each 5 ml water sample collected from 0–6.5 m depth to prevent abiotic iron oxidation. Iron snow was collected directly onto glass fiber filters  (0.9 µm; Infiltec, Speyer, Germany) using an electronic water pump installed between 5 to 6 m depth just below the redoxcline. 150 L water was collected in 2017 and 50 L water was collected in 2018. Glass filters with iron snow were immediately stored on dry ice, transported to the laboratory, and stored at -80°C. Sets of triplicate microcosms from 12C and 13C incubations both from the oxic and anoxic iron snow were harvested after incubation for 7, 14, and 28 days. The content of the microcosms was centrifuged at 1,500 × g for 5 min to separate iron snow from lake water. After that, iron snow pellets were washed with an oxalate buffer and incubated for 5-10 min until the brownish ferric iron minerals were completely dissolved. Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation at 22,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, followed by transfer into 2.6 mL SET buffer (0.75 M sucrose, 40 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris base pH 9) in 15 mL conical tubes. Cell lysis was done by adding 350 μL 10% SDS and 20 μL 100 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) in 2-propanol, and subsequent incubation for 2 h at 60 °C, 800 rpm (HTA-BioTec, Bovenden, Germany). The obtained solution was extracted twice with 2 ml phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1 v/v/v, AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) and twice with 2 ml chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (24:1 v/v, AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany), centrifuging for 5 min at 3,220 × g. The obtained aqueous phase was subjected to overnight precipitation at -20°C with 5 μL glycogen (20 mg mL-1, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), 1 mL NH4OAc and 8 mL pure ethanol. Total nucleic acids were collected by centrifugation at 3,220 × g and 4 °C for 30 min. The resulting pellets were washed with ice-cold ethanol (80% v/v), centrifuging at 16,260 × g at 4 °C for 20 min and suspended in 100 µL TE buffer.     The phenol phase kept from the above extraction procedure was collected in 15 mL falcon tubes and washed with 1 mL SET buffer, centrifuging at 3220 × g for 10 min. The bottom phenol phase was transferred to a 50 mL falcon tube and 20 ml 0.1 M NH4OAc (dissolved in MeOH) was used to precipitate overnight at -20°C following centrifugation at 3,220 × g at 4 °C for 1 h. The protein pellets were further washed twice with 0.1 M NH4OAc, twice with 80% acetone and once with 70% EtOH following incubation at -20°C for 20 min and centrifugation at 16,260 × g, 4°C for 10 min. Final protein pellets were air dried for 15 min. Protein extracts were subjected to one-dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by tryptic digestion using Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) as previously described (Taubert et al., 2018). The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted and enriched using ZipTip-μC18  (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).  The obtained peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate source (Advion Ltd., Ithaca, NY, USA) in LC chip coupling mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the Sequest HT search algorithm.  Protein identification was done using a self-built reference database based on microbial community composition of the microcosms determined by 16S rRNA gene and metatranscriptome analysis (see above). Protein sequences of respective microbial genera were downloaded from UniProt (release 2020_02) (Bateman, 2019), or from NCBI if no sequences from UniProt were available. Searches were conducted with the following parameters: Trypsin as enzyme specificity, and two missed cleavages allowed. A peptide ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da were used. As modifications, oxidation (methionine) and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) were selected. Peptides that scored a q-value > 1% based on a decoy database, and with a peptide rank of 1, were considered identified. Functional classification of identified proteins was done by mapping accession numbers from Uniprot to the KEGG Orthology (KO) database (Release 93.0) (Kanehisa, Sato, Kawashima, et al., 2016). For proteins without mapped KO, amino acid sequences were classified using BlastKoala (v.2.2) (Kanehisa, Sato, & Morishima, 2016).      The identification of 13C-labelled peptides and the calculation of their 13C relative incorporation abundance (RIA) were done by comparing theoretical and experimental isotopologue patterns, chromatographic retention times and fragmentation patterns as previously described (Taubert et al., 2012). The RIA was used to distinguish between active autotrophs assimilating 13CO2 (RIA above 90%), active heterotrophs potentially labeled by crossfeeding (RIA between 1.1% and 90%) and inactive microbes (RIA of 1.1%, i.e., natural abundance of 13C). Statistical analyses were done with the R software framework (v. 3.5.3) (R Core Team, 2020). Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was used to compare microbial communities between different years or different incubations. Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated to determine if oxygen and iron consumption were correlating.

### Publication Abstract
Pelagic aggregates function as biological carbon pumps for transporting fixed organic carbon to sediments. In iron-rich (ferruginous) lakes, photoferrotrophic and chemolithoautotrophic bacteria contribute to CO<sub>2</sub> fixation by oxidizing reduced iron, leading to the formation of iron-rich pelagic aggregates (iron snow). The significance of iron oxidizers in carbon fixation, their general role in iron snow functioning and the flow of carbon within iron snow is still unclear. Here, we combined a two-year metatranscriptome analysis of iron snow collected from an acidic lake with protein-based stable isotope probing to determine general metabolic activities and to trace <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> incorporation in iron snow over time under oxic and anoxic conditions. mRNA-derived metatranscriptome of iron snow identified four key players (<i>Leptospirillum</i>, <i>Ferrovum</i>, <i>Acidithrix</i>, <i>Acidiphilium</i>) with relative abundances (59.6-85.7%) encoding ecologically relevant pathways, including carbon fixation and polysaccharide biosynthesis. No transcriptional activity for carbon fixation from archaea or eukaryotes was detected. <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> incorporation studies identified active chemolithoautotroph <i>Ferrovum</i> under both conditions. Only 1.0-5.3% relative <sup>13</sup>C abundances were found in heterotrophic <i>Acidiphilium</i> and <i>Acidocella</i> under oxic conditions. These data show that iron oxidizers play an important role in CO<sub>2</sub> fixation, but the majority of fixed C will be directly transported to the sediment without feeding heterotrophs in the water column in acidic ferruginous lakes.

### Keywords
Iron snow, 13c isotope, Metaproteomics, Autotrophic iron oxidizing bacteria, Heterotrophic iron reducing bacteria

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


