### Accession
PXD009895

### Title
METTL13 modulates mRNA translation through methylation of eEF1A at Lys55 and the N-terminus

### Description
The experiment aimed at identifying lysine methylation dependent interactions for eEF1A.  FLAG-tagged wild type eEF1A and a methylation deficient mutant, carrying lysine-to-arginine mutations of the well-established methylation sites (Lys36, Lys55, Lys79, Lys165 and Lys318) were overexpressed in HEK-293 cells and co-purifying proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm.  FLAG-tagged

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion with trypsin, desalting C18 StageTip

### Data Protocol
Data searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.9i), protein quantification by MaxLFQ

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1A) delivers aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome and thereby plays a key role in protein synthesis. Human eEF1A is subject to extensive post-translational methylation, but several of the responsible enzymes remain unknown. Using a wide range of experimental approaches, we here show that human methyltransferase (MTase)-like protein 13 (METTL13) contains two distinct MTase domains targeting the N terminus and Lys55 of eEF1A, respectively. Our biochemical and structural analyses provide detailed mechanistic insights into recognition of the eEF1A N terminus by METTL13. Moreover, through ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that loss of METTL13 function alters translation dynamics and results in changed translation rates of specific codons. In summary, we here unravel the function of a human MTase, showing that it methylates eEF1A and modulates mRNA translation in a codon-specific manner.

### Keywords
Interactome, Methylation, Eef1a

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Magnus Jakobsson

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen, Denmark


