### Accession
PXD031847

### Title
Proteome profiling of enzalutamide-resistant cell lines and serum analysis identified ALCAM as marker of resistance in castration-resistant prostate cancer

### Description
Enzalutamide (ENZA) is a frequently used therapy in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Baseline or acquired resistance to ENZA have been observed, but the molecular mechanisms of resistance are poorly understood.  We aimed to identify proteins involved in ENZA resistance and to find therapy-predictive serum markers. We performed comparative proteome analyses on ENZA-sensitive parental (LAPC4, DUCAP) and -resistant prostate cancer cell lines (LAPC4-ENZA, DUCAP-ENZA) using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The most promising 4 marker candidates were selected using bioinformatic approaches. Serum concentrations of selected markers (ALCAM, AGR2, NDRG1, IDH1) were measured in 72 ENZA-treated mCRPC patients’ samples using ELISA. In addition, ALCAM serum levels were measured in 101 Abiraterone (ABI) and 100 Docetaxel (DOC)-treated mCRPC patients. Results were correlated with clinical and follow-up data. The functional role of ALCAM in ENZA resistance was assessed in vitro using siRNA.  Our proteome analyses revealed 731 significantly differentially abundant proteins between ENZA-sensitive and -resistant cells and our filtering methods identified 4 biomarker candidates. Serum analyses of these proteins revealed only ALCAM to be associated with poor patient survival. Furthermore, higher baseline ALCAM levels were associated with poor survival in ABI- but not in DOC-treated patients. In LAPC4-ENZA resistant cells, ALCAM silencing by siRNA knockdown resulted in significantly enhanced ENZA sensitivity.  Our analyses revealed that ALCAM serum levels may help to identify ENZA- and ABI-resistant patients and may thereby help to optimize future clinical decision-making. Our functional analyses suggest the possible involvement of ALCAM in ENZA resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Parental PC cell lines and their resistant subclones were harvested at about 70% confluence. The cell pellets were lysed in 30 μl 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate with 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). The cells were briefly vortexed and sonicated 2 times for 1 min on ice in an ultrasonic bath. Samples were centrifuged (10 min; 16100 x g) and supernatant concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Four μg proteins in 20 μl were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min and the disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mm DTT at 60 °C for 30 min. Thereafter, the samples were alkylated with 15 mm iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature and 50 ng trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) were added for enzymatic protein digestion. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h followed by 30 min incubation with 0.5% TFA at 37 °C for acidification. Precipitated RapiGest was removed by centrifugation before the samples were vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentrations were determined via amino acid analysis as described previously (Megger et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Jul;12(7):2006-20.). LC–MS/MS analysis was performed as described before (Megger et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Jul;12(7):2006-20.). Briefly, 300 ng tryptic peptides were applied to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite instrument (both Thermo Sientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μl/min with 0.1% TFA and then transferred to a Nano Viper C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5%–40% solvent B over 98 min at 400 nl/min and 60°C (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z within a mass range of 350–2000 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 5,400. For MS/MS measurements, the 20 most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID, NCE 35).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted with Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 2016_05; 70625 entries) using Mascot v.2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Taxonomy setting was Homo sapiens and mass tolerances were 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Dynamic and static modifications were considered for methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (carbamidomethyl), respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator and identifications with an FDR > 1% were rejected. Progenesis QI v.2.0.5387.52102 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, NC, USA) was used for label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Enzalutamide (ENZA) is a frequently used therapy in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Baseline or acquired resistance to ENZA have been observed, but the molecular mechanisms of resistance are poorly understood. We aimed to identify proteins involved in ENZA resistance and to find therapy-predictive serum markers. We performed comparative proteome analyses on ENZA-sensitive parental (LAPC4, DuCaP) and -resistant prostate cancer cell lines (LAPC4-ENZA, DuCaP-ENZA) using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The top four most promising candidate markers were selected using bioinformatic approaches. Serum concentrations of selected markers (ALCAM, AGR2, NDRG1, IDH1) were measured in pretreatment samples of 72 ENZA-treated mCRPC patients using ELISA. In addition, ALCAM serum levels were measured in 101 Abiraterone (ABI) and 100 Docetaxel (DOC)-treated mCRPC patients' baseline samples. Results were correlated with clinical and follow-up data. The functional role of ALCAM in ENZA resistance was assessed in vitro using siRNA. Our proteome analyses revealed 731 significantly differentially abundant proteins between ENZA-sensitive and -resistant cells and our filtering methods identified four biomarker candidates. Serum analyses of these proteins revealed only ALCAM to be associated with poor patient survival. Furthermore, higher baseline ALCAM levels were associated with poor survival in ABI- but not in DOC-treated patients. In LAPC4-ENZA resistant cells, ALCAM silencing by siRNA knockdown resulted in significantly enhanced ENZA sensitivity. Our analyses revealed that ALCAM serum levels may help to identify ENZA- and ABI-resistant patients and may thereby help to optimize future clinical decision-making. Our functional analyses suggest the possible involvement of ALCAM in ENZA resistance.

### Keywords
Secondary resistance, Enzalutamide, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Clinical Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Clinical Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum


