### Accession
PXD022392

### Title
Col4a3 mouse glomerular datasets

### Description
Glomeruli were isolated from Col4a3-/- and Ctrl mice. The extracellular matrix was enriched and both cellular and matrix fraction were analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Following SDS–PAGE, gel lanes were sliced and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (20) with modifications (21). Peptide samples were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) coupled online to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a Symmetry C18 preparative column (20 mm × 180 μm, 5-μm particle size; Waters) and separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, 1.7-μm particle size; Waters) using a 45-min linear gradient from 1% to 25% or 8%–33% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science). Peak list files were searched against a modified version of the Uniprot mouse database (April 2016 database selected for Mus musculus) for mouse datasets, or Uniprot human database (November 2015 database selected for Homo Sapiens) for human datasets. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and hydroxylation of proline and lysine were allowed as variable modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS datasets were validated using statistical algorithms at both the peptide and protein level (22),(23) implemented in Scaffold (version 4.4.3; Proteome Software). Protein identifications were accepted upon assignment of at least two unique validated peptides with ≥90% probability, resulting in ≥99% probability at the protein level. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of <0.1% for all datasets. Proteins meeting this criteria were then added to the respective matrix list if they were present in 2 out of 3 samples for human and 4 out of 6 for mouse.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Col4a3, Glomerulus, Extracellular matrix, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell-Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.

### Submitter
Franziska Lausecker

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell-Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.


