### Accession
PXD011988

### Title
Discovery and structure of the mitoribosomal SSU assemblosome in trypanosomes

### Description
Data-dependent LC-MS/MS was used to generate a protein inventory of an affinity-purified assembly intermediate of the small subunit (SSU) of the Trypanosoma brucei mitochondrial ribosome. The identified proteins (mitoribosomal proteins and putative maturation factors) were then used to assist in solving the structure of the SSU assemblosome by cryo-electron microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing involved standard handling steps: Reduction of disulfide bonds (TCEP); alkylation of free cysteine thiols (iodoacetamide); digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin; clean-up by solid-phase extraction (Waters Sep-Pak tC18).  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite instrument with precursor ion detection in the Orbitrap analyzer (120’000 resolution) and fragment ion detection in the linear ion trap. Additional details are provided in Ramrath et al., Science 362 (2018) eaau7735.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo .raw file was converted into .mzXML format by msconvert (part of the ProteoWizard suite). The .mzXML file was further converted to .mgf format by MzXML2Search (part of the TransProteomic Pipeline).  MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot, version 2.5.1, against the T. brucei TREU927 subset of the TriTrypDB, version 39 (August 2018).  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.6 Da, fixed modification = carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable modification = oxidation on Met, target/decoy search on. The peptide-level FDR as specified by Mascot was set to 1%. The mzIdentML 1.1 file was directly exported from Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial ribosomes (mitoribosomes) are large ribonucleoprotein complexes that synthesize proteins encoded by the mitochondrial genome. An extensive cellular machinery responsible for ribosome assembly has been described only for eukaryotic cytosolic ribosomes. Here we report that the assembly of the small mitoribosomal subunit in <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> involves a large number of factors and proceeds through the formation of assembly intermediates, which we analyzed by using cryo-electron microscopy. One of them is a 4-megadalton complex, referred to as the small subunit assemblosome, in which we identified 34 factors that interact with immature ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and recognize its functionally important regions. The assembly proceeds through large-scale conformational changes in rRNA coupled with successive incorporation of mitoribosomal proteins, providing an example for the complexity of the ribosomal assembly process in mitochondria.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mitochondrial ribosome, Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Nenad Ban
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics


