### Accession
PXD005437

### Title
Comparative (phospho)proteomic profiling of wheat shoots from different cultivars

### Description
Wheat is a cereal grain and one of the world’s major food crops. Recent advances in wheat genome sequencing are by now facilitating genomic and proteomic analyses of this crop. However, little is known about the protein levels of hexaploid versus tetraploid wheat cultivars, and knowledge on phosphorylated proteins still limited. Using our recently established (phospho)proteomic workflow, we performed a parallel analysis of the proteome and phosphoproteome on seedling leaves from two hexaploid wheat cultivars (Pavon 76 and USU-Apogee) and a tetraploid wheat (Senatore Cappelli). This revealed that a large portion of proteins and phosphosites can be quantified in all cultivars. Our shotgun proteomics data revealed a high similarity between hexaploid and tetraploid varieties with respect to protein abundance. However, we could identify a set of proteins that were differentially abundant between hexaploid and tetraploid cultivars. In addition, already at seedling stage, a small set of proteins were differential between the small (USU-Apogee) and larger hexaploid wheat cultivar (Pavon 76), which could potentially act as growth predictors. Finally, the phosphosites identified in this study can be retrieved from the in-house developed plant PTM-Viewer (bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/ptm_viewer/), making this the first repository for phosphorylated wheat proteins. This paves the way for further in depth, quantitative (phospho)proteome-wide differential analyses upon a specific trigger or environmental change.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed on three biological replicate samples per wheat cultivar. One gram of finely ground plant material was suspended in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT in Milli-Q water, to which the appropriate amount of the cOmplete™ protease inhibitor mixture (Roche) and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Roche) was added. The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min at 2,500×g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1 and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000×g and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes of methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2,500×g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and re-suspended in 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30°C in the dark. Before digestion, the samples were buffer-exchanged to 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8) using Illustra NAP-10 columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay. One mg of protein material was digested with the mass spectrometry grade trypsin/endoproteinase-Lys-C mix (Promega) overnight at 37°C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The desalted peptides were fully dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then re-suspended in 130 µl of loading solvent [80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 5 % (v/v) TFA]. For shotgun proteome analysis, 30 µl was vacuum dried and dissolved in 30 μl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  100 µl of the re-suspended peptides was incubated with 1 mg MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC microspheres for 20 min at room temperature. The microspheres were washed once with wash solvent 1 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and twice with wash solvent 2 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes (80 µl) of a 1% NH4OH solution, immediately followed by acidification to pH ≤ 3 using formic acid. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 50 μl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  Each sample was analyzed twice (i.e. in two technical replicates) via LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 3 μm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 5 min wash reaching 99% of solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400-2000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8  charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Triticum aestivum database (100641 entries, version 08.2015) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavages between lysine/arginine-proline residues and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues to methionine-sulfoxides was selected as a variable modification. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. The MaxLFQ algorithm allowing for label-free quantification (Cox et al. 2014) and the ‘matching between runs’ feature were enabled. More details can be consulted in parameters.txt file in the result folder. Next, the ‘ProteinGroups’ output file generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into the Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) data analysis software available in the MaxQuant package. Log2 protein ratios of the protein LFQ intensities were centered by subtracting the median of the entire set of protein ratios per sample. A one-way ANOVA, with permutation-based FDR<0.05 and 250 randomizations to correct for multiple-hypothesis testing, was carried out to test for differences between cultivars. The technical replicates were preserved in groups in randomization during the ANOVA test.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat is a cereal grain and one of the world's major food crops. Recent advances in wheat genome sequencing are by now facilitating its genomic and proteomic analyses. However, little is known about possible differences in total protein levels of hexaploid versus tetraploid wheat cultivars, and also knowledge of phosphorylated wheat proteins is still limited. Here, we performed a detailed analysis of the proteome of seedling leaves from two hexaploid wheat cultivars (<i>Triticum aestivum</i> L. Pavon 76 and USU-Apogee) and one tetraploid wheat (<i>T. turgidum</i> ssp. <i>durum</i> cv. Senatore Cappelli). Our shotgun proteomics data revealed that, whereas we observed some significant differences, overall a high similarity between hexaploid and tetraploid varieties with respect to protein abundance was observed. In addition, already at the seedling stage, a small set of proteins was differential between the small (USU-Apogee) and larger hexaploid wheat cultivars (Pavon 76), which could potentially act as growth predictors. Finally, the phosphosites identified in this study can be retrieved from the in-house developed plant PTM-Viewer (bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/ptm_viewer/), making this the first searchable repository for phosphorylated wheat proteins. This paves the way for further in depth, quantitative (phospho)proteome-wide differential analyses upon a specific trigger or environmental change.

### Keywords
Plant, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Wheat

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
VIB

### Submitter
Lam Dai Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


