### Accession
PXD016096

### Title
A  pilot  proteomic  study  reveals  different  protein  profiles  related  to  testosterone  and  gonadotropin changes in a short-term controlled healthy human cohort

### Description
Testosterone deficiency afflicts approximately 30% of men aged from 40-89 years. It is associated with type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease. However, the causality of the relationship between low testosterone and metabolic diseases is unclear.  We have analysed plasma samples from thirty healthy male volunteers (19-32 years of age) with pharmacologically-induced testosterone deficiency. Blood samples were collected under three conditions: normal testosterone (baseline), ‘zero’ testosterone and ‘restored’ testosterone. As a proof-of-concept, a sample pooling approach was used to obtain one pool per condition, with each pool consisting of 30 individual samples. The proteomic profiles identified significant functional differences, related to the innate immune system, the regulation of insuline-like growth factors, collagen degradation,  glycolysis/gluconeogenesis process, among others.

### Sample Protocol
The three pooled samples (30 samples in each one) were individually depleted with a MARS7 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) column following the instruction of the manufacturer.The buffer was exchanged to SDC 1.6%, 50 mM of Ambic using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter (0.5mL – 10 kDa, Millipore, Tullagreen, Ireland).  The disulfide bonds were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated 1 h at 37 °C. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 25 mM, and the reaction proceeded for an additional 30 min at room temperature in darkness (reduction and alkylation were done in the Amicon filter). The buffer was exchanged to Ambic 50 mM and the samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 50mM AmBic (30 µg of proteins after BCA quantification) and digested with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio of 1/30, for 16 h at 37 °C. The remaining SDC was precipitated by adding 20% of formic acid prior to filtering the samples through a polypropylene filter plate with hydrophilic PVDF membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm,Porvair Filtration Group).Samples for DDA were analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 pump (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA.

### Data Protocol
We used Proteome Discoverer v 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA) for peptide and protein identification. Peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProt human database (http://www.uniprot.org) integrated into Proteome Discoverer. The search was performed with the following parameters applied: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, 10 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance. Up to one missed cleavage for tryptic peptides was allowed. The filters we used were high and medium confidence at peptide and protein level respectively, according to the Proteome Discoverer software. Up to one missed cleavage site for tryptic peptides was allowed. According to the Proteome Discoverer software, the filters applied were high- (FDR<0.01) and medium confidence (FDR<0.05) at peptide- and protein levels, respectively. The peptide/protein quantification was based on the quantification of MS peptide signals (Label-free quantification). Label-free quantification used the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing workflow, and the Precursor Ions Quantifier node and the Feature Mapper in the consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testosterone, Proteomcis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lund University
Department of translation medicine.

### Submitter
Aniel Sanchez

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malm
Department of translation medicine.


