### Accession
PXD030847

### Title
Identification and characterization of β-ODAP synthase in grass pea

### Description
Grass pea seeds and seedlings protein extracts were chromatographically fractionated. To identify the β-ODAP synthase enzyme, active fractions, as determined by a colorimetric assay that detects the presence of a derivative of free L-α,β-diaminopropionic acid (L-DAPA), were subjected to tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS and searched against a database containing translated sequences from a long-read PacBio mRNA sequencing of grass pea seeds and seedlings.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Protein fractions were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using the suspension trapping (S-trap) as previously described [1]. Briefly, protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). Protein fractions were supplemented with SDS (5% final concentration) in 50mM Tris-HCl. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept at −80°C until further analysis.  Liquid chromatography  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Dry digested  samples were dissolved in 97:3% H2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated by chromatography using nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30%B in 50 min, 30% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions.  Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Sample BOS1: Q Excactive Plus, Samples BOS2-3: Fusion Lumos, BOS4: Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 20sec  and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with Proteome Discoverer  V2.2. The data was searched with the SequestHT and Mascot search engines against the translated Pac-BIO transcriptome as the protein database, appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation of glutamines and asparagines. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 10 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 0.02 Da. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Grass pea (Lathyrus sativus L.) is a grain legume commonly grown in Asia and Africa for food and forage. It is a highly nutritious and robust crop, capable of surviving both droughts and floods. However, it produces a neurotoxic compound, &#x3b2;-N-oxalyl-L-&#x3b1;,&#x3b2;-diaminopropionic acid (&#x3b2;-ODAP), which can cause a severe neurological disorder when consumed as a primary diet component. While the catalytic activity associated with &#x3b2;-ODAP formation was demonstrated more than 50&#xa0;years ago, the enzyme responsible for this activity has not been identified. Here, we report on the identity, activity, 3D structure, and phylogenesis of this enzyme-&#x3b2;-ODAP synthase (BOS). We show that BOS belongs to the benzylalcohol O-acetyltransferase, anthocyanin O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase, anthranilate N-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyltransferase, deacetylvindoline 4-O-acetyltransferase superfamily of acyltransferases and is structurally similar to hydroxycinnamoyl transferase. Using molecular docking, we propose a mechanism for its catalytic activity, and using heterologous expression in tobacco leaves (Nicotiana benthamiana), we demonstrate that expression of BOS in the presence of its substrates is sufficient for &#x3b2;-ODAP production in&#xa0;vivo. The identification of BOS may pave the way toward engineering &#x3b2;-ODAP-free grass pea cultivars, which are safe for human and animal consumption.

### Keywords
Toxin, Trascriptome, Lathyrus sativus, Proteomics, Beta-odap synthetase, Grass pea

### Affiliations
Department of Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Ziv Reich
Department of Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel


