### Accession
PXD002241

### Title
USSC secretome -  Characterization of regenerative phenotype of unrestricted somatic stem cells from human umbilical cord blood by functional secretome analysis

### Description
Stem cell transplantation is a promising therapeutic strategy to enhance axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury. Unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) isolated from human umbilical cord blood is an attractive stem cell population available at GMP grade without any ethical concerns. It has been shown that USSC transplantation into acute injured rat spinal cords leads to axonal regrowth and significant locomotor recovery, yet lacking cell replacement. Instead, USSC secrete trophic factors enhancing neurite growth of primary cortical neurons in vitro. Here, we applied a functional secretome approach characterizing proteins secreted by USSC for the first time and validate candidate neurite growth promoting factors using primary cortical neurons in vitro. By mass spectrometric analysis and exhaustive bioinformatic interrogation we identified 1156 proteins representing the secretome of USSC. Using Gene Ontology we revealed that USSC secretome contains proteins involved in a number of relevant biological processes of nerve regeneration such as cell adhesion, cell motion, blood vessel formation, cytoskeleton organization and extracellular matrix organization. We found for instance that 31 well-known neurite growth promoting factors like, e.g., neuronal growth regulator 1, NDNF, SPARC and PEDF spanning the whole abundance range of USSC secretome. By the means of primary cortical neurons in vitro assays we verified SPARC and PEDF as significantly involved in USSC mediated neurite growth and therewith underline their role in improved locomotor recovery after transplantation. From our data we are convinced that USSC are a valuable tool in regenerative medicine as USSC’s secretome contains a comprehensive network of trophic factors supporting nerve regeneration not only by a single process but also maintained its regenerative phenotype by a multitude of relevant biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Different strategies have been used to concentrate proteins from USSC conditioned medium. Proteins have been (A) precipitated using a modified method published by Chevallet et al., or (B) concentrated by lyophilisation. Briefly, for protein precipitation (method A) 20 ml of conditioned medium was mixed with 10 % sarkosyl NL (Sigma Aldrich). After adding trichloracetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 7.5 %, samples were incubated on ice for 2h with subsequent centrifugation at 10,000 x g and 4 °C for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended in 2 ml ice cooled tetrahydrofuran (THF, Fluka). Afterwards, samples were centrifuged again at 10,000 x g and 4 °C for 10 min. The pellet was washed carefully with 2 ml THF and dissolved in 100 µl SDS sample buffer consisting of 600 mM DTT, 30 % Glycerin, 12 % SDS, 150 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.0 (all Sigma Aldrich). After SDS-gel-electrophoresis (2 cm, 10 minutes) and silver staining according to Nesterenko et al., the resulting lane was cut out in one slice. The gel slice was decolorized with a 1:1 mix of 30 mM sodium thiosulfate and 100 mM potassium hexacyanoferrate (III) (both Sigma Aldrich), washed and the proteins were digested with 2 µg trypsin (Serva) overnight at 37 °C. Resulting peptides were extracted with 50 % acetonitrile (Biosolve) and 0.05 % TFA. For protein concentration by lyophilisation (method B) 20 ml of conditioned medium were lyophilized, reconstituted in 250 µl SDS sample buffer and 10 µl (2 µg/µl) was run into short SDS-gel, silver stained and subsequently digested and extracted as described above. Furthermore, a SDS-PAGE was performed and 12 lanes have been cut out for further analysis (method C).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific http://www.thermoscientific.com/en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html) including Mascot search engine (Version 2.4.1, Matrix Science).The UniProt database (version from 2014/09/03, total entries: 546.439) was searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm (MS-mode) and 0.4 Da (MS/MS mode), enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and two missed cleavage sites were considered during the search against human sub-database. Mass range setting was 350-5000 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was accepted as variable modification. Proteins were assembled by Proteome Discoverer with a Mascot threshold for protein identification set ≥ 50.0. For positive identification we considered a FDR of < 1 % on peptide level (high peptide confidence, default p < 0.01). For FDR calculation we applied a decoy approach based on reversed protein sequences using Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cell transplantation is a promising therapeutic strategy to enhance axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury. Unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) isolated from human umbilical cord blood is an attractive stem cell population available at GMP grade without any ethical concerns. It has been shown that USSC transplantation into acute injured rat spinal cords leads to axonal regrowth and significant locomotor recovery, yet lacking cell replacement. Instead, USSC secrete trophic factors enhancing neurite growth of primary cortical neurons in vitro. Here, we applied a functional secretome approach characterizing proteins secreted by USSC for the first time and validated candidate neurite growth promoting factors using primary cortical neurons in vitro. By mass spectrometric analysis and exhaustive bioinformatic interrogation we identified 1156 proteins representing the secretome of USSC. Using Gene Ontology we revealed that USSC secretome contains proteins involved in a number of relevant biological processes of nerve regeneration such as cell adhesion, cell motion, blood vessel formation, cytoskeleton organization and extracellular matrix organization. We found for instance that 31 well-known neurite growth promoting factors like, e.g. neuronal growth regulator 1, NDNF, SPARC, and PEDF span the whole abundance range of USSC secretome. By the means of primary cortical neurons in vitro assays we verified SPARC and PEDF as significantly involved in USSC mediated neurite growth and therewith underline their role in improved locomotor recovery after transplantation. From our data we are convinced that USSC are a valuable tool in regenerative medicine as USSC's secretome contains a comprehensive network of trophic factors supporting nerve regeneration not only by a single process but also maintained its regenerative phenotype by a multitude of relevant biological processes.

### Keywords
Spinal cord, Stem cell, Ussc, Absolute quantification, Secretome, Nerve regeneration

### Affiliations
MPL-BMFZ Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf
MPL-BMFZ

### Submitter
Jessica Schira

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Schira
MPL-BMFZ Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf


