### Accession
PXD011467

### Title
Human POP analysis -  Proteomics of Uterosacral Ligament Connective Tissue from Women With and Without Pelvic Organ Prolapse

### Description
Purpose:  Damage to the uterosacral ligaments is an important contributor to uterine and vaginal prolapse.  The aim of this study was to identify differentially expressed proteins in the uterosacral ligaments of women with and without pelvic organ prolapse and analyze their relationships to cellular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of pelvic organ prolapse.   Experimental Design:  Uterosacral ligament connective tissue from four patients with pelvic organ prolapse and four control women underwent iTRAQ analysis followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of differentially expressed proteins.  Differentially expressed proteins were valideated using western blot analysis.   Results:  A total of 1789 unique protein sequences were identified in the uterosacral ligament connective tissues.  88 proteins had expression levels that were significantly different between prolapse and control groups (≥1.2-fold). Ingenuity pathway analysis demonstrated 14 differentially expressed proteins that were associated with "Connective Tissue Function". Among them, fibromodulin(FMOD), Collagen alpha-1 (XIV) chain(COL14A1), Calponin-1 (CNN-1), Tenascin (TNC), and Galectin-1(LGALS1 appeared most likely to play a role in the etiology of pelvic organ prolapse.  Conclusions and clinical relevence:  We identified at least 6 proteins not previously associated with the pathogenesis of pelvic organ prolapse with biologic functions that suggest a plausible relationship to the disorder.  These results may be helpful for furthering our understanding of the  pathophysiological mechanisms of pelvic organ prolapse.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 0.1 mg of each ligament tissue sample was ground into a powder in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in extraction buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Protein extraction was performed by cell lysis buffer at 95℃ for 5 min, followed by sonication on ice. The crude extract was then incubated at 95℃ again and cleared by centrifugation at 14,000g for 30 min at 15℃. Thereafter, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured by the BCA protein assay reagent from Pierce (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.2.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA), searching against the Uniport database of human protein sequences (03-2013, 133549 entries, downloaded from: http://www.uniprot.org/) and the decoy database. Search parameters were set as follows: monoisotopic mass, peptide mass tolerance at ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.1 Da, trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were defined as oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8-plex labeled tyrosine while lysine and N-term of peptides labeled by iTRAQ 8-plex and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were specified as fixed modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) of both proteins and peptides identification as set to be less than 0.01. Protein identification was supported by at least one unique peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ingenuity pathway analysis; itraq analysis; pelvic organ prolapse; uterosacral ligament, Reproductive system

### Affiliations

Shaoxing Women and Children's Hospital, Shaoxing, China.
Hangzhou Women's Hospital, Hangzhou, China

### Submitter
Hai-Tao Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang-Juan Li
Hangzhou Women's Hospital, Hangzhou, China


