### Accession
PXD000959

### Title
N-linked glycoproteome of human seminal plasma

### Description
N-linked glycosylation is an important type of post-translational modification. This modification plays important roles in many cellular functions including cell-cell and receptor-ligand interactions, immune response, apoptosis, and pathogenesis of many diseases. Seminal plasma is a mixture of secretions from several male accessory glands. Glycoproteins in seminal plasma can reflect the states of reproductive organs or diseases. Using isotope labeling and high-resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 720 N-glycosylated sites on 372 N-glycosylated proteins, corresponding to 365 genes. Analysis of variations among five individuals revealed similar compositions of N-glycosylated proteins in seminal plasma. Consistent composition of N-linked glycoproteins in human seminal plasma provides evidences that seminal plasma glycoproteins are of significant value to be candidates of biomarkers. Bioinformatics annotation of the identified seminal plasma glycoproteins showed that more than 43.0% of these glycoproteins are known secreted proteins according to UniProt. Such a high proportion of secreted glycoproteins in seminal plasma may play important roles in seminal plasma function such as making sure for sperm nutrition and function.

### Sample Protocol
1. Samples preparation Fresh ejaculates were collected from five healthy adult males aged from 24 to 42 years old. The fresh ejaculates were collected by masturbation in sterile containers after at least 48 hours of abstinence. Each semen sample was liquefied for 15 to 30 minutes at 37 ℃, and subsequently centrifuged (2500rpm for 10 minutes) to eliminate cells and solid materials.  2. Protein Extraction and Digestion To ensure complete separation of cell debris or occasional spermatozoa from seminal plasma, the sample was centrifuged at 40,000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration was assessed by Bradford method. Each sample containing about 2.0mg protein sample were treated with 20μl 1M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56℃ for 1 hour, then with 100μl 1M iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 minutes. After that, 7 times of the total liquid volume of acetone solution buffer were added overnight at -20℃ to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 8000g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and the precipitates were dissolved with urea (8M urea, 75mM NaCl, 50mM Tris, pH8.2). For protein digestion, the sample was treated with DTT to 5mM for 25 minutes at 56°C, then with iodoacetamide to 14mM for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, and DTT was added to 5mM for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein mixture was diluted 1:6 in 25mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2. Subsequently, 10μg trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) and 1mM CaCl2 were added overnight at 37℃ in a shaker. The digestion was stopped by acidification with FA (formic acid) to 1% (vol/vol). 3. Lectin Enrichment and Deglycosylation Digested peptides were collected and added to the lectin mixture (ConA, WGA, and RCA120). Mixed samples were transferred to Vivacon500-PCR Grade (Sartorius Stedim, Aubagne, France). Samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature, and unbound peptides subsequently eluted by centrifugation at 14000g for 10 minutes. After washing five times with 200μl binding buffer (40mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 2mM MnCl2, 2mM CaCl2, 1M NaCl2) and twice with 50μl of 40mM NH4HCO3 in H2O(18), captured peptides were incubated with appropriate amount PNGase F (1U/ul H2O(18)) in 40μl of 40mM NH4HCO3 in H2O(18) in the filter unit for 3 h at 370C. Finally, deglycosylated peptides were eluted with 40mM NH4HCO3.  4. Mass Spectrometric Analysis Eluted peptides were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The trap column (100um×2cm, Acclaim®PepMap100 C18 column, 5μm, 100Å;) effluent was transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (0.075x150mm, Acclaim®PepMap100 C18 column, 2μm, 100Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA). Reverse-phase separation of peptides was performed using 2% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid (buffer B) under a 238 min gradient (4% to 30% buffer B for 208min, 30% to 45% buffer B for 20min, 45% to 100% buffer B for 1min, 100% buffer B for 8min, 100% to 4% buffer B for 1 min). Peptide analysis was performed using LTQ Orbitrap Velos coupled directly to an LC column. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 350-1800, and HCD MS/MS spectra acquired from the survey scan for the 10 most intense ions (as determined using Xcalibur mass spectrometer software in real time). Dynamic mass exclusion windows of 60s were used, and siloxane (m/z 445.120025) applied as a lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) and searched against the human protein sequence database form UniProt (version 201205), combined with the standard contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. The site, peptide and protein FDR were all set to 0.01. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleavage by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum peptide length required was six amino acids. Carbamidomethyl (C) set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Deamidation O(18) (N-linked glycosylation). The monoisotopic delta mass for Deamidation O(18) was 2.9883 Da (during the enzymatic reaction, the asparagine residue was converted to aspartate in O(18) water). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20ppm at the first search as applied in Maxquant for initial mass recalibration. For the main search, the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 6 ppm. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. For the identification of N-linked glycosylated sites, we only reported sites with the canonical sequence motif (N-!P−S/T/C) to obtain reliable result as applied in a previous study for human samples.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal plasma is a mixture of secretions from several male accessory glands. The seminal plasma contains many secreted proteins which are important for sperm function and male fertility. In this study, we employed N-linked glycosylated peptide enrichment, combined with LC-MS/MS analysis, and establish the first large scale N-linked glycoproteome of human seminal plasma. Combined with the results of five biological replicates, a total of 720 N-glycosylated sites on 372 proteins were identified. Analysis of variations among five individuals revealed similar compositions of N-glycosylated proteins in seminal plasma. The N-linked glycoproteome could help us understanding the biological functions of human seminal plasma. The data set could also be a resource for further screening of biomarkers for male diseases including cancer and infertility at the level of N-glycosylation. For example, N-glycosylated prostate-specific antigen is known to be an efficient biomarker that can distinguish benign prostate hyperplasia from prostate cancer. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000959 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000959).

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteome, Lc-ms/ms, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jiahao Sha
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University


