### Accession
PXD039085

### Title
AP-MS-based interactome analysis of three pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical protein

### Description
N-terminal proteoforms stem from the same gene but differ at their N-terminus, and most of these are found to be truncated, though some are N-terminally extended caused by ribosomes starting translation from codons in the annotated 5’UTR, and/or carry modified N-termini different from those of the canonical protein. Biological functions of N-terminal proteoforms are emerging, however, it remains unknown to what extend N-terminal proteoforms further expand the functional complexity. To address this in a more global manner, we mapped the interactomes of several pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical counterparts. For this, we first generated an in-depth catalogue of N-terminal proteoforms in the cytosol of HEK293T cells. From which 20 pairs of canonical protein and N-terminal proteoform(s) were selected. Protein-protein interaction profiling was done with Virotrap. Virotrap was selected as this methods avoids lysis before the isolation of the complexes and allows the detection of weak and cytosolic proteins as well. Our analysis of these pairs revealed that the overlap of the interactomes for both proteoforms is in general high, showing their functional relation. However, for all pairs tested we do report differences as well. We show that N-terminal proteoforms can be engaged in new/different interactions and as well can lose several interactions compared to the canonical protein. We used AP-MS to validate differences in the interaction networks reported for three of these 20 pairs of N-terminal proteoform and canonical counterpart.

### Sample Protocol
For AP-MS experiments, per experiment, 1.5 x 107 HEK293T cells were seeded the day before transfection in a 150 mm dish. 7.5 μg of bait-FLAG DNA or 7.5 μg of eDHFR-FLAG DNA were transfected using polyethylenemine (PEI) as described above. 40 h post-transfection, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and scraped in 1.5 ml of lysis buffer (containing 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM sodium orhovanadate, 20 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF and complete protease inhibitor cocktail). Cells were lysed on ice for 30 min and subsequently centrifuged 15 min at 4 °C at 20,000 x g. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml protein LoBind Eppendorf tube and the protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay. Sample volumes were adjusted with lysis buffer so that all samples were at the same protein concentration. For every experiment, 10 μl MyOne Protein G beads (Invitrogen) were preloaded with 1 μg anti-FLAG (Sigma-Aldrich, F1804) and added to 350 µl of the cleared supernatant. Protein complexes were allowed to bind for 2 h by end-over-end rotation at 4 °C. The beads were washed twice with lysis buffer and three times with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 2 mM CaCl2. Beads were re-suspended in 25 μl 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and overnight incubated with 1 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin at 37 °C. After removal of the beads, the samples were incubated for another 3 h with 250 ng trypsin. Samples were then acidified by 2% formic acid (f.c.) before LC-MS/MS analysis. 2 µg of peptide material was injected for LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter, kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 55% MS solvent B in 80 min, 97% MS solvent B in 90  minutes followed by a 5-minute wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.4.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release Jan 2021) modified to contain only the shortest sequence of the baits and coupled to FLAG and to include the sequence of eDHFR-FLAG. Match between runs was enabled with the standard settings. The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation and no fixed modifications were included. All other settings were kept as standard. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Minimum of 2 ratio counts and both unique and razor peptides were considered for protein quantification leading to the identification of 2,705 proteins across all samples.  Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) after uploading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. Replicate samples were grouped and proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed reducing the matrix to 1,903 protein identifications. Missing values were imputed using imputeLCMD (R package implemented in Perseus) with a truncated distribution with parameters estimated using quantile regression (QRILC). Pairwise contrasts of interest between differentially treated samples were retrieved at a significance level of alpha 0.05, corresponding to Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p value (FDR) cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Protein-protein interaction, N-terminal proteoform, Lc-ms/ms, Flag tagged

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, B9052, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, B9052, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, B9052, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, B9052, Belgium


