### Accession
PXD024759

### Title
Human chorionic villus proteome

### Description
We evaluated the effect of the different solubilization techniques on the reproducibility and width of the chorionic proteome characterized using bottom-up proteomics: SDS-based solubilization coupled with in-gel protein digestion after applying self-named 1DE gel-concentration procedure (SDS-PAGE without fractionating in the resolving gel for SDS removal) and in-solution protein digestion of urea-thiourea extracts. These results indicated that 1DE-concentration procedure coupled with in-gel digestion, LC-MS/MS and combinational usage of different bioinformatics tools provides in-depth analysis of a single protein band, including reliable identification and quantification of low-abundant proteins, e.g. FUCA1, PSG7.

### Sample Protocol
Abortive material at 8 - 11 week of gestation  were collected via transcervical approach, placed immediately on ice and within 40-50 min after termination used for further processing. Fetal-derived chorionic villi were obtained under binocular magnifying glasses, washed three times in 0.9% NaCl, dried with paper, and stored at −800C until used. After defrosting, a total of 100 mg of each CVS was picked out with tweezers, placed into the different extraction buffers: Buffers 1 and 2 – 500 µl of 2% SDS (buffer 1) or 4% SDS (buffer 2) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 1% PMSF. The samples manually homogenized in dounce glass tissue homogenizer. After sonication samples were incubated for 30 min at + 40C on an orbital shaker with platform rotation 1000 rpm. After heating at 950C for 4 min and centrifuged.  at 14 000g for 20 min (+ 40C). Lysate 1 was collected, and the procedure was repeated from sonication step. Lysate 1 and lysate 2 were combined and centrifuged at 14 000g for 60 min (+ 40C), the finished supernatant was collected. Buffer 3 – 180 µl of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% of protease inhibitor E64. After homogenization in Potter glass tissue homogenizer, the samples were incubated for 30 min at + 40C with shaking on Vortex every 10 min and sonicated. The urea-thiourea lysate was centrifuged at 15 000 rpm at room temperature for 15 min x 2 times to remove debris. For the removing the SDS, the proteins were concentrated by 1-DE in denaturation conditions using Protean II xi Cell (Bio-Rad, USA). Electrophoresis (50V, 45 min) was terminated before migration of the Bromophenol blue in the resolving gel (12%T). Protein line was visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. The protein line was completely cut out, destained and in-gel digested with trypsin, alkylation with IAA. The urea-thiourea extracts (175 µg of protein) were in-solution digested, alkylation with vinylpyridine. Separation and identification of the peptides were performed on the Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC (Dionex, USA) connected to Orbitrap Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG ion source (Thermo Scientific). 1 μL of peptide separation was carried out on a RP-HPLC column Zorbax 300SB-C18 (C18 particle size of 3.5 μm, inner diameter of 75 μm and length of 150 mm) using a linear 90-min gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (water, 0.1% formic acid, and 80% acetonitrile) to 60% solvent B over 95 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Mass spectra were measured in the positive ion mode. Data was acquired in the Orbitrap Exactive analyzer with resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) for MS and 15,000 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The initial .raw files were converted to MGF files with the ProteoWizard MSConvert program (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/). Files were imported into the SearchGUI (v. 3.3.17) platform and searched with X!Tandem and MS-GF+ search algorithms against the SwissProt human database (SP, version 1.4.2019, .fasta format) with the following search parameters: enzyme trypsin; deviation between theoretical and experimental masses for peptides ±5 ppm.; deviation between theoretical and experimental masses for fragment ions ±0.01 Da; maximum number of missed cleavages 1; fixed modification piridylethylation of C (in-solution tryptic digestion) or carbamidomethylation of C (in-gel digestion); variable modification oxidation methionine. The PeptideShaker integrator, which is included in the platform, was used to obtain an Excel file with the results. Records on protein identification and quantitation were processed and analyzed using R  and several packages for scientific computing and plotting. All the calculations were organized into the automated pipeline. The list of the packages, which were used in this study: Tidyverse collection of packages for data processing. DiagrammeR package allowing graph / network visualization. Dendextend  package for the visualization and comparison of hierarchical clustering results. Xlsx package for export of the results to excel sheets. ggupset package convenient realization of UpSetR methodology for visualization of the intersection between sets.

### Publication Abstract
An important step in the proteomic analysis of missing proteins is the use of a wide range of tissues, optimal extraction, and the processing of protein material in order to ensure the highest sensitivity in downstream protein detection. This work describes a purification protocol for identifying low-abundance proteins in human chorionic villi using the proposed "1DE-gel concentration" method. This involves the removal of SDS in a short electrophoresis run in a stacking gel without protein separation. Following the in-gel digestion of the obtained holistic single protein band, we used the peptide mixture for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Statistically significant results were derived from six datasets, containing three treatments, each from two tissue sources (elective or missed abortions). The 1DE-gel concentration increased the coverage of the chorionic villus proteome. Our approach allowed the identification of 15 low-abundance proteins, of which some had not been previously detected via the mass spectrometry of trophoblasts. In the post hoc data analysis, we found a dubious or uncertain protein (PSG7) encoded on human chromosome 19 according to neXtProt. A proteomic sample preparation workflow with the 1DE-gel concentration can be used as a prospective tool for uncovering the low-abundance part of the human proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Trophoblast, Chorionic villus

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry laboratory of microsomal oxidation
dr

### Submitter
Olesya Larina

### Lab Head
Dr Petushkova Natalia
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry laboratory of microsomal oxidation


