### Accession
PXD015175

### Title
Filter aided, single tip (FAST) method for high throughput, ultrasensitive proteomics sample preparation reveals proteome asymmetry in Xenopus embryos

### Description
We report a filter aided, single tip (FAST) method for ultrasensitive proteomic sample preparation. To minimize sample loss and contamination, the method reduces the surface area of the filter to ~0.1 mm2, the total volume of reagents to < 10 μL, and the number of sample transfer steps to two. 25,883 unique peptides and 3,069 protein groups were identified from 1,000 MCF-7 cells (~100 ng protein content). Single blastomeres from Xenopus laevis embryos at the 50-cell stage (~200 ng yolk free protein/blastomere) generated 20,943 unique peptides and 2,597 protein groups; the proteomic profile clearly differentiated left and right blastomeres, and provides strong support for models in which this asymmetry is established early in the embryo.

### Sample Protocol
The FAST microreactor is fabricated by fixing a small piece of membrane in a single 20-μL pipette tip,Sample processing minimizes reagent volumes and transfer steps. Cell lysate is reduced and alkylated in a small PCR tube, and aspirated into a pipette tip, which is mated with the FAST microreactor. Sample is transferred onto the filter via centrifugation. After briefly flushing with wash solution, trypsin solution is loaded, and the microreactor is then sealed and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After incubation, sample is eluted into autosampler vials by centrifugation, and subjected to liquid chromatographic separation and tandem mass spectrometric \detection for single shot analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of the raw files was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.61.0.).23 MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human protein database and Xenopus laevis proteins database using the default parameters. The databases with taxonomy as Homo sapiens was downloaded from Uniprot and used for analysis of data generated from K562 and MCF-7 cell line proteome digests. The Xenopus laevis database was downloaded from UniProt in March 2019 (Proteome ID: UP000186698) for single blastomere proteomics analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0215 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and Acetyl (N-terminus) (+42.011 Da) deamination were allowed. Matching between runs was enabled only in searches of samples of different cell numbers and single blastomeres with match and alignment time windows of 0.7 and 20 minutes, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by using a target-decoy search strategy. On the peptide level, the corresponding FDR on peptide level was less than 1%. On the protein level, protein grouping was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
We report a miniaturized filter aided sample preparation method (micro-FASP) for low-loss preparation of submicrogram proteomic samples. The method employs a filter with &#x223c;0.1 mm<sup>2</sup> surface area, reduces the total volume of reagents to &lt;10 &#x3bc;L, and requires only two sample transfer steps. The method was used to generate 25&#x202f;883 unique peptides and 3069 protein groups from 1000 MCF-7 cells (&#x223c;100 ng protein content), and 13&#x202f;367 peptides and 1895 protein groups were identified from 100 MCF-7 cells (&#x223c;10 ng protein content). Single blastomeres from <i>Xenopus laevis</i> embryos at the 50-cell stage (&#x223c;200 ng yolk free protein/blastomere) generated 20&#x202f;943 unique peptides and 2597 protein groups; the proteomic profile clearly differentiated left and right blastomeres and provides strong support for models in which this asymmetry is established early in the embryo. The parallel processing of 12 samples demonstrates reproducible label free quantitation of 1 &#x3bc;g protein homogenates.

### Keywords
Single blastomere, Sample preparation, Ultrasensitive proteomics

### Affiliations
Ningbo University
University of Notre Dame

### Submitter
Zhenbin Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenbin Zhang
University of Notre Dame


