### Accession
PXD020874

### Title
TMT-based proteomics analysis of mouse germ cells

### Description
The proteome changes were quantified in RibosomeRPL39L-/- spermatocytes and elongated spermatids using TMT 6-plex, and in spermatogonia, spermatocytes, round spermatids and elongated spermatids using TMT 10-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
TMT 6-plex was used to analyze the proteome changes in RibosomeRPL39L-/- and control spermatocytes, and RibosomeRPL39L-/- and control elongated spermatids. TMT 10-plex was used to analyze four stages of germ cells, including spermatogonia, spermatocytes, round spermatids and elongated spermatids. The proteins extracted from the germ cells were digested with trypsin, labeled by TMT 6-plex or TMT 10-plex labeling reagents.   The TMT 6-Plex labeled peptide mixtures were subjected to fractionation by high-pH reverse phase column using an XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (2.1×150mm, 3.5μm, Waters) with the UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 30 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme. For MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system.  For TMT 10-Plex labeling, labeled peptide mixtures were subjected to fractionation by high-pH reverse phase column using an XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (300μm×150mm, 1.7μm, Waters) with an M-class HPLC system (Waters), 35 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme. For MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database using MaxQuant software. FDR cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. Enzyme specificity was considered full cleavage by trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine fixed modifications, with TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications for TMT data. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term).

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are highly sophisticated translation machines that have been demonstrated to be heterogeneous in the regulation of protein synthesis<sup>1,2</sup>. Male germ cell development involves complex translational regulation during sperm formation<sup>3</sup>. However, it remains unclear whether translation during sperm formation is performed by a specific ribosome. Here we report a ribosome with a specialized nascent polypeptide exit tunnel, Ribosome<sup>ST</sup>, that is assembled with the male germ-cell-specific protein RPL39L, the paralogue of core ribosome (Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>) protein RPL39. Deletion of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> in mice causes defective sperm formation, resulting in substantially reduced fertility. Our comparison of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy structures of ribosomes from mouse kidneys and testes indicates that Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> features a ribosomal polypeptide exit tunnel of distinct size and charge states compared with Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> predominantly cotranslationally regulates the folding of a subset of male germ-cell-specific proteins that are essential for the formation of sperm. Moreover, we found that specialized functions of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> were not replaceable by Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Taken together, identification of this sperm-specific ribosome should greatly expand our understanding of ribosome function and tissue-specific regulation of protein expression pattern in mammals.

### Keywords
Germ cells, Mouse, Tmt

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China

### Submitter
Xuejiang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China


