### Accession
PXD036168

### Title
Presence of ceramidase activity in electronegative LDL

### Description
Electronegative LDL (LDL(-)) is a minor modified fraction of human plasma LDL with several atherogenic properties. Among them, LDL(-) has increased content of bioactive lipid mediators, such as lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA), ceramide (Cer), and sphingosine (Sph), which are related to the presence in LDL(-) of some phospholipolytic activities, including platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH), phospholipase C (PLC) and sphingomyelinase (SMase). However, the activity of these enzymes does not explain the increased content of Sph, which should derive from Cer degradation. In the present study we analyzed the putative presence of a ceramidase (CDase) activity that could explain the increased content of Sph. Thin layer chromatography (TLC) and lipidomic analysis showed that Cer, Sph and NEFA spon-taneously increased in LDL(-) incubated alone at 37ºC, in contrast with native LDL(+). An inhibitor of neutral CDase prevented the formation of Sph and, in contrast, increased the content of Cer in LDL(-). In addition, a fluorescently-labelled Cer (NBD-Cer) was efficiently degraded by LDL(-) to form Sph and NEFA. These observations point to the existence of a CDase activity associated to LDL(-). However, neither proteomic analysis nor western blot detected the presence of a known CDase enzyme. Further studies are warranted to define the origin of the CDase activity detected in LDL(-).

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from healthy normolipemic subjects (total cholesterol < 5.2 mmol/L, triglyceride < 1 mmol/L) were obtained in EDTA-containing Vacutainer tubes. All subjects gave their written informed consent and the study was conducted after approval from the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Hospital Sant Pau. All LDL preparations were performed in conditions that prevented oxidation and endotoxin contamination. LDL (1.019–1.050 kg/L) was isolated from plasma by sequential flotation ultracentrifugation at 4ºC, as described [13]. Total LDL was fractionated in LDL(+) and LDL(-) by preparative anion-exchange chromatography in an ÄKTA-FPLC system (GE Healthcare). Protein delipidation and solubilization: Due to the extensive hydrophobic domains of LDL proteins, especially apoB, methods for their solubilization must have high resolving power. The method of Karlsson et al, with minor modifications, was used. Briefly, 1 ml of LDL (1 g/L apoB) was delipidated by mixing with 14 mL of ice-cold tributyl phosphate:acetone:methanol (1:12:1), incubated for 2 hours at 4ºC and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 3000 g. Protein pellets were washed sequentially with 1 mL of tributyl phosphate, acetone and methanol. Nitrogen-dried pellets were stored at –80ºC until analysis (less than 1 month). Protein pellets were resuspended with 400 uL of cold-buffer Tris 10 mM, containing 6 M guanidinium chloride, by intense vortexing and repeated aspiration. The content of protein in the soluble material was measured by the BCA method (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Tryptic protein digestion: The delipidated protein sample (50 ug) in 20 uL of 6M guanidinium chloride, was adjusted to pH=8.0, by addition of NaOH, mixed with 20 uL of a 150 mM solution of DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Then, 20 uL of a 500 mM solution of iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and the mixture was further incubated for 1h at room temperature. The cysteine modified protein sample was then subjected to a modified TCA/acetone precipitation (CleanUp Kit, GE Healthcare, Fairfield, CT, USA). The protein pellet was dissolved in 30 uL of 1M Urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and 1 ug of modified porcine trypsin (Trypsin-Gold, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added. Digestion proceeded overnight at 37ºC, and then the mixture was acidified by addition of 0.1% formic acid, and frozen at -20ºC until analyzed. Proteomic analysis was performed by LC-ESI MS/MS using 5 ug of protein. LC-ESI MS/MS analysis was performed on an Esquire HCT ion trap mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany), coupled to a nanoHPLC system (Ultimate, LcPackings, Netherlands). Samples were first concentrated on a 300 µm i.d. 1mm PepMap nanotrapping column and then loaded onto a 75 µm i.d. 15 cm PepMap nanoseparation column (LC Packings, Netherlands). Peptides were then eluted by an acetonitrile gradient (Gradient: 0–60% B in  105 min, B = 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water; flow rate 300 nL/min) through a PicoTip emitter nano-spray needle (New Objective, Woburn, MA) onto the nanospray ionization source of the ion-trap mass spectrometer. MS/MS fragmentation (1.9 s, 100–2,800 m/z) was performed on two of the most intense ions, as determined from a 1.2 s MS survey scan (310–1,500 m/z) and using a dynamic exclusion time of 1.2 min for precursor selection. An automated optimization of MS/MS fragmentation amplitude, starting from of 0.60 V, was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, London UK) to search the UniProt-SwissProt human database. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 1.5 Da, fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Positive identification criterion was set as an individual Mascot score for each peptide MS/MS spectrum higher than the corresponding homology threshold score.

### Publication Abstract
Electronegative low-density lipoprotein (LDL(-)) is a minor modified fraction of human plasma LDL with several atherogenic properties. Among them is increased bioactive lipid mediator content, such as lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA), ceramide (Cer), and sphingosine (Sph), which are related to the presence of some phospholipolytic activities, including platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH), phospholipase C (PLC), and sphingomyelinase (SMase), in LDL(-). However, these enzymes' activities do not explain the increased Sph content, which typically derives from Cer degradation. In the present study, we analyzed the putative presence of ceramidase (CDase) activity, which could explain the increased Sph content. Thin layer chromatography (TLC) and lipidomic analysis showed that Cer, Sph, and NEFA spontaneously increased in LDL(-) incubated alone at 37 &#xb0;C, in contrast with native LDL(+). An inhibitor of neutral CDase prevented the formation of Sph and, in turn, increased Cer content in LDL(-). In addition, LDL(-) efficiently degraded fluorescently labeled Cer (NBD-Cer) to form Sph and NEFA. These observations defend the existence of the CDase-like activity's association with LDL(-). However, neither the proteomic analysis nor the Western blot detected the presence of an enzyme with known CDase activity. Further studies are thus warranted to define the origin of the CDase-like activity detected in LDL(-).

### Keywords
Electronegative ldl; ceramide; sphingosine; ceramidase; sphingomyelinase

### Affiliations
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology
Cardiovascular Biochemistry Group, Research Institute of the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau (IIB Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr José Luis Sánchez-Quesada
Cardiovascular Biochemistry Group, Research Institute of the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau (IIB Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain


