### Accession
PXD034958

### Title
Prognostic value of molecular intratumor heterogeneity in primary oral cancer and its lymph node metastases assessed by mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
Different aspects of intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH), which are associated with development of cancer and its response to treatment, have postulated prognostic value. Here we searched for the potential association between phenotypic ITH analyzed by mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and the prognosis of head and neck cancer. The study involved tissue specimens resected from 77 patients with locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinoma, including 37 patients where matched samples of primary tumor and synchronous lymph node metastases were analyzed. A 3-year follow-up was available for all patients that enabled their separation into two groups: with no evidence of disease (NED, n=41) and with progressive disease (PD, n=36). After the on-tissue trypsin digestion, peptide maps of all cancer regions were segmented using an unsupervised approach to reveal their intrinsic heterogeneity. We found that intra-tumor similarity of spectra was higher in the PD group and diversity of clusters identified during image segmentation was higher in the NED group, which indicated a higher level of ITH in patients with more favorable outcomes. Furthermore, signature of molecular components that correlated with long-term outcomes could be associated with proteins involved in the immune functions. Hence, we proposed that a higher level of ITH revealed by MSI in cancers with a better prognosis could reflect the presence of heterotypic components of tumor microenvironment such as infiltrating immune cells enhancing the response to the treatment. LC-MALDI-MS/MS data deposited in this repository originate from protein lysates obtained from FFPE sections consecutive to sections dedicated to MSI measurements. The hypothetical identity of the MSI components was established by assignment of a component location on the m/z scale for the measured masses of tryptic peptides identified by LC-MALDI-MS/MS allowing ±0.05% mass tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification was performed for protein lysates obtained from consecutive tissue sections collected during FFPE block sectioning. Five cases containing ca. 50% tumor cells were randomly selected both for primary tumor tissues and for lymph node tis-sues, and processed according to a modified procedure by Geoui et al. [Curr Protoc Mol Biol 2010, Chapter 10, (1), Unit 10 27 1-12, doi: 10.1002/0471142727.mb1027s90]. Purified protein extracts dissolved in 0.1% RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3 were subsequently merged within a group, i.e. primary tumor tissue extracts and lymph node tissue extracts were merged separately (a volume equivalent to 10 µg protein was used for each sample), and thus obtained protein mixtures were subjected to tryptic in-solution digestion. Tryptic peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 chromatographic bed (TopTips, Glygen).

### Data Protocol
Protein search was performed using ProteinScape 3.1 platform (Bruker) and Mascot Server 2.5.1.1 (Matrix Science Ltd). SwissProt database 2022_1 (566,996 sequences; 204,698,499 residues) was employed with the taxonomy set at homo sapiens (20,377 sequences). MS and MS/MS tolerance was set at 25 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Protein list compilation was realized by ProteinExtractor: ions score cut-off, peptide rank cut-off, and minimum peptide length were set at 15.0, 10 and 5, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Different aspects of intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH), which are associated with the development of cancer and its response to treatment, have postulated prognostic value. Here we searched for potential association between phenotypic ITH analyzed by mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and prognosis of head and neck cancer. The study involved tissue specimens resected from 77 patients with locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinoma, including 37 patients where matched samples of primary tumor and synchronous lymph node metastases were analyzed. A 3-year follow-up was available for all patients which enabled their separation into two groups: with no evidence of disease (NED, <i>n</i> = 41) and with progressive disease (PD, <i>n</i> = 36). After on-tissue trypsin digestion, peptide maps of all cancer regions were segmented using an unsupervised approach to reveal their intrinsic heterogeneity. We found that intra-tumor similarity of spectra was higher in the PD group and diversity of clusters identified during image segmentation was higher in the NED group, which indicated a higher level of ITH in patients with more favorable outcomes. Signature of molecular components that correlated with long-term outcomes could be associated with proteins involved in the immune functions. Furthermore, a positive correlation between ITH and histopathological lymphocytic host response was observed. Hence, we proposed that a higher level of ITH revealed by MSI in cancers with a better prognosis could reflect the presence of heterotypic components of tumor microenvironment such as infiltrating immune cells enhancing the response to the treatment.

### Keywords
Cancer prognosis; head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; intratumor heterogeneity; long-term outcome; mass spectrometry imaging; tumor microenvironment

### Affiliations
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Monika Pietrowska

### Lab Head
Dr Piotr Widlak
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology


