### Accession
PXD021515

### Title
CD63/CD9-GFP extracellular vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study aimed to identify subpopulations of extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by HeLa cells, and determine markers which enable to identify them, and which indicate their endosomal or plasma membrane origin. We used CD63 and CD9 as markers of EVs, and followed their intracellular trafficking using the RUSH assay. We used mass spectrometry to identify specific or common proteins in immunoprecipitated GFP+ EVs from HeLa transfected with the RUSH CD63-GFP or CD9-GFP, after a short (3h) or a long (24h) trafficking time from the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Sample Protocol
2,5E6 cells per 10cm dish were plated on the day before transfection. 24h after transfection, DMEM without FCS with 40nM biotin was incubated during 3h or 24h with cells transfected with the RUSH plasmids CD63- or CD9-eGFP, or non-transfected cells as control. Harvested medium from 12 plates per transfection or 18 plates of non-transfected cells was centrifuged 20min at 300g and concentrated with Centricon plus-70 filters (Millipore) with a 100KDa molecular weight cut-off. The CCM concentrated to 500uL was then submitted to size exclusion chromatography using qEV 70nm columns (Izon). Fractions 7 to 12 were recovered and pooled according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled fractions were finally concentrated using 500uL 100kDa molecular weight cut-off concentrators (Sartorius). The percentage of transfected cells was determined by flow cytometry and the concentration of recovered EVs was measured by nanoparticle tracking analysis with the ZetaView device (Particle Metrix). For 3h samples, EVs from 20E6 GFP-positive cells were incubated with the beads. An equivalent number of total particles from the non-transfected control sample was used. For 24h samples, a total of 60.108 particles was incubated with the beads. The protein G beads were previously hybridized with the anti-GFP overnight and cross-linked using BS3 (ThermoFisher) for 1h at 4°C and finally washed with PBS 0,001% Tween. The incubation with the beads was performed immediately after isolation, in PBS 0,001% Tween overnight at 4°C in rotation.  The beads were then washed three time with PBS 0,001% Tween and three times with PBS. The flow through recovered for Western blot was concentrated using 500uL 100kDa molecular weight cut-off concentrators. Immuno-isolated vesicles on beads were eluted with 100 µL 80/20 MeCN/H2O + 0.1 % TFA. Dry pellets were solubilized and reduced in 20 µL 8M urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 with vortexing at 37°C for 1 h. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. After diluting to 1 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were trypsine/LysC (1 µg, Promega) digested in a total volume of 200 µL with vortexing at 37°C overnight. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (2% MeCN/0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Four independent biological replicates of each sample were analysed.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database using Sequest-HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites was allowed. Oxidized methionine, Carbamidomethyl cysteines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.9. FDR calculation used Percolator (The, 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (Valot, 2011). XICs from proteotypic peptides between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=4). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on a two-tailed T-test was performed and p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure. In order to eliminate nonspecific proteins, only proteins having at least two peptides across 2 biological replicates and which showed an log2(fold change) > 0 in the samples containing the GFP versus NT samples were selected. Proteins recovered in more than 200/411 IP analyses according to the contaminant repository for affinity purification (the CRAPome PMID: 2392180833), hence the contaminant commonly isolated or identified non-specifically by this technic, were removed from further analysis. Proteins were considered enriched in one GFP sample compared to the other if they showed a log2(fold change) ≥ 1 or ≤ -1 and an adjusted p-value of less than 0,05. Proteins with a log2(fold change) between -1 and 1 were considered as common to two samples.

### Publication Abstract
Despite their roles in intercellular communications, the different populations of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and their secretion mechanisms are not fully characterized: how and to what extent EVs form as intraluminal vesicles of endocytic compartments (exosomes), or at the plasma membrane (PM) (ectosomes) remains unclear. Here we follow intracellular trafficking of the EV markers CD9 and CD63 from the endoplasmic reticulum to their residency compartment, respectively PM and late endosomes. We observe transient co-localization at both places, before they finally segregate. CD9 and a mutant CD63 stabilized at the PM are more abundantly released in EVs than CD63. Thus, in HeLa cells, ectosomes are more prominent than exosomes. By comparative proteomic analysis and differential response to neutralization of endosomal pH, we identify a few surface proteins likely specific of either exosomes (LAMP1) or ectosomes (BSG, SLC3A2). Our work sets the path for molecular and functional discrimination of exosomes and small ectosomes in any cell type.

### Keywords
Human, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


