### Accession
PXD033878

### Title
Phosphatases modified by LH signaling in ovarian follicles: testing their role in regulating the NPR2 guanylyl cyclase

### Description
In response to luteinizing hormone (LH), multiple proteins in rat and mouse granulosa cells are rapidly dephosphorylated, but the responsible phosphatases remain to be identified. Because the phosphorylation state of phosphatases can regulate their interaction with substrates, we searched for phosphatases that might function in LH signaling by using quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified all proteins in rat ovarian follicles whose phosphorylation state changed detectably in response to a 30-min exposure to LH, and within this list, identified protein phosphatases or phosphatase regulatory subunits that showed changes in phosphorylation. Phosphatases in the phosphoprotein phosphatase (PPP) family were of particular interest because of their requirement for dephosphorylating the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) guanylyl cyclase in the granulosa cells, which triggers oocyte meiotic resumption. Among the PPP family regulatory subunits, PPP1R12A and PPP2R5D showed the largest increases in phosphorylation, with 4–10 fold increases in signal intensity on several sites. Although follicles from mice in which these phosphorylations were prevented by serine-to-alanine mutations in either Ppp1r12a or Ppp2r5d showed normal LH-induced NPR2 dephosphorylation, these regulatory subunits and others could act redundantly to dephosphorylate NPR2. Our identification of phosphatases and other proteins whose phosphorylation state is rapidly modified by LH provides clues about multiple signaling pathways in ovarian follicles.

### Sample Protocol
Dried bRP fractions of peptides prior and after phosphopeptide enrichment were dissolved in 2% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a setup as previously described in Silbern et al, 2021. Phosphorylated peptides were injected in technical duplicates and separated using an 88 min gradient consisting of loading at 98% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) FA in water) 2% buffer B (80% ACN (v/v) 0.1% FA (v/v) in water) for 4 min; linear gradient ranging from 7% to 32% B over 56 min; followed by linear increase to 50% B over 18 min, washing step at 90% B for 5 min and re-equilibration step at 2% B for 5 min. For the separation of non-phosphorylated peptides, the first two steps were adjusted accordingly: i) loading at 5% B for 5 min; ii) linear gradient from 8 to 34% B over 56 min. A tandem quadrupole – Orbitrap/Ion Trap mass spectrometer (Tribrid Fusion, ThermoFisher Scientific) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired in Orbitrap at the resolution of 120,000, scan range 350-2000 m/z, normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 250% and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. The most abundant precursors of charge state 2-7 were subjected to fragmentation using HCD and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 33%. The length of the duty cycle was fixed to 3 s. Precursor ions were excluded from repetitive fragmentation for 30 s. MS2 spectra were acquired at the resolution of 30,000, normalized AGC target of 1000%, and 200 ms maxIT. The top 10 fragment ions were isolated using synchronous precursor selection (SPS, McAlister, 2014 ) and fragmented in HCD at NCE of 50%. Resulting SPS-MS3 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution, normalized AGC target of 500% and maxIT of 200ms. When analyzing non-phosphorylated peptides, the resolution and maxIT of MS2 scans were reduced to 15,000 and 54 ms, respectively. Accordingly, maxIT of SPS-MS3 scans was set to 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10, Tyanova , 2016) using default settings if not stated otherwise. MS-data from phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides were processed simultaneously after defining “Phospho (S,T,Y)” modification as variable modification in the group parameters for the samples after the enrichment step. Other default modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (fixed) and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terms (both variable modifications). Up to five variable modifications were allowed per peptide. Trypsin was selected as the protease. “Reporter ion MS3” was selected as quantification parameter. Default mass tolerances were preserved at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. For the analysis of ovarian follicles from rats, canonical protein sequences of Rattus norvegicus were downloaded from UniProt (February 2019, 29951 entries,  UniProt Consortium). Further steps of statistical analysis were conducted in R programming language using custom scripts as described in Silbern et al, 2021. In brief, impurity-corrected reporter ion intensities were used to assess differential abundance of phosphorylated peptides at the level of phosphorylation sites (“Phospho(S,T,Y).txt” output table of MaxQuant). Only phosphorylation sites with localization probability >0.75 were considered for the analysis. Reporter ion intensities were log2-transformed, normalized by median polishing, and subjected to differential expression testing using limma (Smyth, 2005 ). Limma-moderated p-values were subjected for multiple testing correction following the approach from Storey and Tibshirani, 2003 . Phosphorylation evets were considered as significantly altered (“candidates”) if satisfying following criteria: i) absolute log2 (Treated/Control) > log2(1.5) and ii) q-value < 0.01. Impurity-corrected protein group intensities (“proteinGroups.txt” output table) were analyzed in a similar way in order to confirm that treatment had no significant impact on the proteome level.

### Publication Abstract
In response to luteinizing hormone (LH), multiple proteins in rat and mouse granulosa cells are rapidly dephosphorylated, but the responsible phosphatases remain to be identified. Because the phosphorylation state of phosphatases can regulate their interaction with substrates, we searched for phosphatases that might function in LH signaling by using quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified all proteins in rat ovarian follicles whose phosphorylation state changed detectably in response to a 30-min exposure to LH, and within this list, identified protein phosphatases or phosphatase regulatory subunits that showed changes in phosphorylation. Phosphatases in the phosphoprotein phosphatase (PPP) family were of particular interest because of their requirement for dephosphorylating the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) guanylyl cyclase in the granulosa cells, which triggers oocyte meiotic resumption. Among the PPP family regulatory subunits, PPP1R12A and PPP2R5D showed the largest increases in phosphorylation, with 4-10 fold increases in signal intensity on several sites. Although follicles from mice in which these phosphorylations were prevented by serine-to-alanine mutations in either Ppp1r12a or Ppp2r5d showed normal LH-induced NPR2 dephosphorylation, these regulatory subunits and others could act redundantly to dephosphorylate NPR2. Our identification of phosphatases and other proteins whose phosphorylation state is rapidly modified by LH provides clues about multiple signaling pathways in ovarian follicles.

### Keywords
Fibroblast growth factor, Phosphorylation, Cyclic gmp, Chondrocytes, Npr2, Luteinizing hormone, Ovarian follicle

### Affiliations
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciencies, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany; 2. Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr.
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciencies, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany; 2. Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.


