### Accession
PXD019885

### Title
Wild and cultivated species of rice have distinctive proteomic responses to drought

### Description
Drought often compromises yield in non-irrigated crops such as rainfed rice, imperiling the communities that depend upon it as a primary food source. In this study, two cultivated species (Oryza sativa cv. Nipponbare and Oryza glaberrima cv. CG14) and an endemic, perennial Australian wild species (Oryza australiensis) were grown in soil at 40% field capacity for 7-d (drought). The hypothesis was that the natural tolerance of O. australiensis to erratic water supply would be reflected in a unique proteomic profile. Leaves from droughted plants and well-watered controls were harvested for label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. Physiological and gene ontology analysis confirmed that O. australiensis is responded uniquely to drought, with superior leaf water status and enhanced levels of photosynthetic proteins. Moreover, distinctive patterns of expression of proteins in drought were observed across the entire O. australiensis proteome. An intermediate impact of drought on photosynthetic and stress-response proteins is reported in O. glaberrima relative to O. sativa but the drought response was most striking in O. australiensis. For example, photosynthetic proteins decreased when O. sativa after drought, while a narrower range of stress-responsive proteins was up-regulated. Distinctive proteomic profiles and the expression levels of individual proteins with specific functions in response to drought in O. australiensis indicate the importance of this species as a source of stress tolerance genes.

### Sample Protocol
Plants from 3 different rice species were grown in a temperature controlled greenhouse; O. australiensis, O. sativa and O. glaberrima. Plants were well watered for 30 days, followed by applying drought stress until the field capacity (FC) reached 40%. leaf samples were collected from treated and control plants. Proteins were extracted from leaf tissue using trichloroacetic acid – acetone extraction and precipitation. In-solution digested peptides were separated and identified using nanoflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography – tandem orbitrap mass spectrometry on a Thermo Q-exactive. Peptides and proteins were identified using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.5.0 for peptide to spectrum matching and label free quantitation (LFQ). FASTA files of protein sequences from 15 species of Oryza genus containing a total of 297,554 proteins were downloaded from UniProt in June 2019 and assembled into a single database for peptide to spectrum matching. Fixed modification with cysteine carbamidomethylation was used, and variable modifications considered included methionine oxidation, protein N terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamination, and N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion. False discovery rate was set at 1% for proteins and peptides and estimated using a reversed sequence database. Enzymatic specificity of arginine or lysine occurring not prior to a proline, along with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, was applied. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.5 Da and 20 ppm respectively. Matching between runs was performed with match time window of 0.7 min and retention time alignment window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
Drought often compromises yield in non-irrigated crops such as rainfed rice, imperiling the communities that depend upon it as a primary food source. In this study, two cultivated species (<i>Oryza sativa</i> cv. Nipponbare and <i>Oryza glaberrima</i> cv. CG14) and an endemic, perennial Australian wild species (<i>Oryza australiensis</i>) were grown in soil at 40% field capacity for 7 d (drought). The hypothesis was that the natural tolerance of <i>O. australiensis</i> to erratic water supply would be reflected in a unique proteomic profile. Leaves from droughted plants and well-watered controls were harvested for label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. Physiological and gene ontology analysis confirmed that <i>O. australiensis</i> responded uniquely to drought, with superior leaf water status and enhanced levels of photosynthetic proteins. Distinctive patterns of protein accumulation in drought were observed across the <i>O. australiensis</i> proteome. Photosynthetic and stress-response proteins were more abundant in drought-affected <i>O. glaberrima</i> than <i>O. sativa</i>, and were further enriched in <i>O. australiensis</i>. In contrast, the level of accumulation of photosynthetic proteins decreased when <i>O. sativa</i> underwent drought, while a narrower range of stress-responsive proteins showed increased levels of accumulation. Distinctive proteomic profiles and the accumulated levels of individual proteins with specific functions in response to drought in <i>O. australiensis</i> indicate the importance of this species as a source of stress tolerance genes.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Drought stress, Oryza glaberrima, Parallel reaction monitoring, Oryza australiensis, Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Sara Hamzelou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Paul A. Haynes
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia


