### Accession
PXD005536

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of acquired drug resistance to pazopanib and dasatinib

### Description
Acquired drug resistance and tumour relapse impacts the majority of patients being treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and remains a key challenge in modern anti-cancer therapy. The lack of clinically effective therapeutic strategies to overcome drug resistance represents a significant unmet need. Understanding the signalling pathways that drive drug resistance will facilitate the development of new salvage therapies to effectively treat patients with secondary TKI resistance. In this study, we utilise quantitative mass spectrometry to characterise the global phosphoproteomic alterations that accompany the acquisition of resistance to two FDA-approved multi-target TKIs, pazopanib and dasatinib, in the A204 rhabdoid tumour cell line. Our analysis finds that only a limited fraction of the quantified phosphoproteome (<10%) is altered upon the acquisition of drug resistance with pazopanib resistant cells displaying elevated phosphorylation levels in cytoskeletal regulatory pathways and dasatinib resistant cells showing an upregulation of components of the insulin receptor/IGF1-R signalling pathway. Drug response profiling with a targeted panel of small molecule inhibitors rediscovers several previously reported vulnerabilities associated with pazopanib and dasatinib resistance and identifies a new dependency to the second generation HSP90 inhibitor NVP-AUY-922. This study provides a useful resource detailing the candidate signalling determinants of acquired TKI resistance; and reveals a therapeutic approach of inhibiting HSP90 function as a means of salvage therapy to overcome pazopanib and dasatinib resistance.

### Sample Protocol
A204 cells grown in DMEM media containing Dasatinib and Pazopanib at a concentration of 500nM. Drug concentration was incremented from 2µM to 3µM and 5µM in a stepwise manner over 6 weeks. A final drug concentration of 5µM was maintained in resistant cells. SILAC labelled cells were lysed in 8M urea and equal amounts of heavy (DasR or PasR cells) and light (parental cells) lysates were mixed prior to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. Peptides were desalted on a C18 cartridge and reconstituted with 400 µl of IP buffer. After immuno-precipitation with pTyr100, pTyr1000 and 4G10, which were used in a prior study [Wong et al, 2016], the supernatant was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Approximately 2 mg of cell lysate from the supernatant was enriched for phosphopeptides using sequential IMAC.  2 mg of cell lysate was enriched for phosphopeptides using TitanSphere Phos-TiO spin tips. The flow through was applied to a new spin tip and analysed separately. For IMAC-enriched samples, reversed phase chromatography was performed on eluted peptides using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system. The equivalent of 2 µg of each total lysate and 70% of the phospho-enriched eluates were analysed as 6 µL injections, and loaded on to a Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap cartridge at 8 µL/min 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were then resolved on a 75 µm I.D. 15 cm C18 packed emitter column. The total lysates were run over 245 min using a three-step gradient of 96:4 to 65:35 buffer A:B, whereas the phospho-enriched samples were run over 125 min using a three-step gradient of 96:4 to 65:35 buffer A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately pre-column via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was infused into an LTQ Velos Orbitrap from the end of the tapered tip silica column. The ion transfer tube was heated to 275°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition based on a full 30,000 resolution FT-MS scan with preview mode disabled and no internal lock mass was used. For the total lysates, the top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation and analysed using normal ion trap scans, whereas for the phospho-enriched samples, the top 10 most intense ions were fragmented using enhanced ion trap scans. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT-MS maximum inject time was 500 ms and normalised collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10 ms. Total lysate peptides were subjected to wideband activation to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MSA was used for the phospho-enriched samples to target phosphoserine/threonine peptides by fragmenting precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of 32.70, 49.00, 65.40 and 98.00 m/z, corresponding to neutral loss of phosphate, if observed in the top 3 most intense fragment ions. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count acquired after 8 s delay followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10 ppm mass window for 45 s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.  For TiO2-enriched samples, peptides were resolved on a 75 µm I.D. 50 cm C18 Easy-Spray packed emitter column over 240 min using a multi-step gradient of buffers A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 250 nL/min.  Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 2.3 kV applied using the Easy-Spray ion Source.  Sample was infused into a Q-Exactive HF from the packed emitter.  The ion transfer tube was heated to 275°C and the S-lens set to 50%.  MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition based on a full FT-MS scan from 350 to 1850 m/z at 120,000 resolution, with a target AGC value of 3,000,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  No internal lock mass calibrant was used.  The top 15 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and dynamically excluded for 30 s.  The normalised collision energy was set to 32 with an activation time of 10 ms.  Precursor ions with unknown or single charge states were excluded from selection.  Fragmented ions were scanned in the FT-Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution with a target AGC value of 50,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant [69] (version 1.5.5.1) and the peptides were identified (maximal mass error = 6 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and product ions, respectively) from the MS/MS spectra searched against human UniProt database using Andromeda [70] search engine. The following peptide bond cleavages: arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid (a general setting referred to as Trypsin/P) and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. SILAC based experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in quantification algorithm [69] with minimal ratio count = 2 and enabled ‘Requantify’ feature. For each of the three biological replicate experiments, three technical replicates of the proteome; two technical replicates of the IMAC-phosphopeptide enrichment; and two technical replicates of the titanium dioxide-phosphopeptide enriched samples were analysed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation; deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid; acetylation of protein N-terminus; with phospho (STY) as variable modifications for phosphoproteome searches. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as default in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups. Data were further analysed using Microsoft Office Excel 2010 and Perseus [71] (version 1.5.5.3). Both proteomic and phosphoproteomic data were filtered to remove potential contaminants and IDs originating from reverse decoy sequences. Proteomic data was also filtered  to exclude proteins only identified by site. The phosphoproteomic data set was normalized to the median H/L ratio of the sample proteome. The log2 values of the H/L ratios were then determined. Phosphorylation sites (STY) were filtered to include only high confidence phosphosite IDs (localization probability ≥ 75%). The dataset was then filtered for only valid quantifiable IDs in at least two out of three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Dasatinib, Phosphoproteomics, A204, Pazopanib

### Affiliations
ICR
Protein Networks, The Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB, UK

### Submitter
Frank McCarthy

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Protein Networks, The Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB, UK


