### Accession
PXD003841

### Title
Tube-gel digestion: a fast and reproducible sample preparation protocol for label-free quantitative proteomics of complex biological samples

### Description
Comparison of tube-gel protocol to stacking gel and liquid digestion for label-free extracted ion-current quantification of complex biological samples Dataset with known fold-changes (UPS1 spiked in yeast background at 25-10-5-2.5-1-0.5 fmol)

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was prepared in triplicates with tube-gel protocol, stacking gel and liquid digestion. Each sample was analyzed on a nanoLC-MS/MS system composed of a nanoAcquity LC and a Q-exactive+ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant environment software (version 1.5.3.30)

### Publication Abstract
Sample preparation, typically by in-solution or in-gel approaches, has a strong influence on the accuracy and robustness of quantitative proteomics workflows. The major benefit of in-gel procedures is their compatibility with detergents (such as SDS) for protein solubilization. However, SDS-PAGE is a time-consuming approach. Tube-gel (TG) preparation circumvents this drawback as it involves directly trapping the sample in a polyacrylamide gel matrix without electrophoresis. We report here the first global label-free quantitative comparison between TG, stacking gel (SG), and basic liquid digestion (LD). A series of UPS1 standard mixtures (at 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, 10, and 25 fmol) were spiked in a complex yeast lysate background. TG preparation allowed more yeast proteins to be identified than did the SG and LD approaches, with mean numbers of 1979, 1788, and 1323 proteins identified, respectively. Furthermore, the TG method proved equivalent to SG and superior to LD in terms of the repeatability of the subsequent experiments, with mean CV for yeast protein label-free quantifications of 7, 9, and 10%. Finally, known variant UPS1 proteins were successfully detected in the TG-prepared sample within a complex background with high sensitivity. All the data from this study are accessible on ProteomeXchange (PXD003841).

### Keywords
Liquid digestion, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Sample preparation, Tube-gel, Stacking gel

### Affiliations
UMR7178 IPHC-DSA-LSMBO
UMR 7178 - IPHC - CNRS - UdS - Laboratory of BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry - STRASBOURG, FRANCE

### Submitter
Leslie MULLER

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
UMR 7178 - IPHC - CNRS - UdS - Laboratory of BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry - STRASBOURG, FRANCE


