### Accession
PXD010494

### Title
LC-MS/MS EThcD of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV S N-linked glycopeptides from recombinant spike ectodomains and whole MERS virions

### Description
Recent outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle-East respiratory syndrome along with the threat of a future coronavirus pandemic underscore the importance of finding ways to neutralize these viruses. The trimeric spike transmembrane glycoprotein S mediates entry into host cells and is the major target of neutralizing antibodies. To understand the humoral immune response elicited upon natural infections with coronaviruses, we structurally characterized the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV S glycoproteins in complex with neutralizing antibodies isolated from human survivors using cryo electron microscopy and characterized the site-specific N-linked glycan profile of the recombinant S proteins with LC-MS/MS using EThcD fragmentation. Although the two antibodies studied blocked attachment to the host cell receptor, only the anti-SARS-CoV S antibody triggered premature fusogenic conformational changes via receptor functional mimicry. These results provide a structural framework for understanding coronavirus neutralization by human antibodies and shed light on the coronavirus fusion activation pathway which appears to take place through a receptor-driven ratcheting mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
In solution: MERS-CoV S or SARS-CoV S were either unaltered or subjected to Endo F and Endo H deglycosylation treatment. Two microliters of the deglycosylases were allowed to incubate with 20 µg of S for 4-14 hrs in 50mM sodium acetate pH 4.4 at 37 Celcius in a 20 µL reaction. 6 µg of S were then incubated in 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 40mM iodoacetamide at 95 Celcius for five minutes and 25 Celcius for thirty minutes in the dark. Denaturated, reduced, and alkylated S (1.6 µg) was then diluted into fresh 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 14 hrs at 37 Celcius either with 0.032 µg of trypsin (Sigma Aldrich), chymotrypsin (Sigma Aldrich), trypsin then sequentially chymotrypsin, alpha lytic protease (Sigma), or AspN protease (Pierce). Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 2% and the samples spun at 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes and then again for 5 minutes to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate and collect the peptides from the supernatants. The SARS S digests with trypsin, chymotrypsin and alpha lytic protease were processed in parallel after cotton-enrichment of glycopeptides. Approximately 0.5 mg of cotton wool was packed into 100 µL pipette tips. Glycopeptides were diluted in 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and bound to the cotton plug, followed by washing of the cotton plug with 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Glycopeptides were eluted in 0.1% formic acid in water. In gel: 120 µL of MERS-CoV England1 and EMC2012 virions and 40 µg of purified MERS2P were run on a 4-15% gradient Tris-Glycine Gel (BioRad). One lane of each sample was loaded with 40 µL while a second lane was loaded with 40 µL, allowed to run for 2 minutes, and loaded with another 40 µL. The bands were excised and washed with milliQ water and acetonitrile. 1 mg/mL DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was incubated with the gel pieces at 60 Celcius for 1 hour. Following an acetonitrile wash, 10 mg/mL iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in darkness. Following extensive washes, either 30 µg/mL trypsin or chymotrypsin in ammonium bicarbonate was incubated with the gel pieces for 1.5 hours on ice. The solution was replaced with ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 37 Celcius. The supernatant was collected and dried down in a speedvac for 1 hr. The peptides were reconstituted in 40 µL 10% formic acid, 5% DMSO.  Peptide supernatant was collected and between 4 and 8 µL were run on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. A 35 cm analytical column and a 3cm trap column filled with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 5 micrometer (Dr. Maisch GMBH) beads was used. Nanospray LC-MS/MS was used to separate peptides over a 110-minute gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile. A positive spray voltage of 2100 was used with an ion transfer tube temperature of 350 Celcius. An electron-transfer/higher energy collision dissociation ion fragmentation scheme was used (Frese et al., 2013) . The supplemental higher energy collision dissociation energy was 0.15 for the runs. A resolution setting of 120,000 with an AGC target of 2*10 5 was used for MS1, and a resolution setting of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1*10 5 was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using Byonic (Bern et al., 2012) against a custom database of recombinant coronavirus spike proteins, searching for glycan modifications with 12/24 ppm search windows for MS1/MS2, respectively. The in-solution digestions of the recombinant ectodomain were searched against a custom database of recombinant coronavirus spike proteins, proteases, and common contaminants. The in-gel digestion experiments were first searched against a database comprised of the full MERS-CoV proteome and the full Chlorocebus sabaeus (virus produced in VeroE6 cells) or human proteome (ectodomain produced in HEK293F cells) retrieved from UniProt, with variable N-linked glycosylations omitted from the search to identify background contaminants. The top 16 contaminants were then assembled together with the S sequence into a focused database for the glycopeptide identifications. In all experiments, up to three missed cleavages were permitted using C-terminal cleavage at R/K for trypsin, F/Y/W/M/L for chymotrypsin, R/K/F/Y/W/M/L for trypsin-chymotrypsin, T/A/S/V for alpha lytic protease, and N-terminal cleavage at D for AspN. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of lysine as variable common 1, glycan modifications as variable common 2, with a variable common max. parameter of 3. The N-linked glycan databases of Byonic were merged into a single non-redundant set of glycan compositions for the searches. All reported glycopeptides in the Byonic results files were manually inspected for quality of fragment assignments. All glycopeptide identifications were merged into a single non-redundant list per sequon. Glycans were classified based on HexNAc content as high-mannose (2 HexNAc), hybrid (3 HexNAc) or complex (>3 HexNAc). Byonic search results were exported to mzIdentML format to build a spectral library in Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) and extract peak areas for individual glycoforms from MS1 scans. The full database of variable N-linked glycan modifications from Byonic was manually added to the Skyline project file in XML format. Byonic search results from in-gel digestions of both virion samples and ectodomain were merged into a single spectral library and manually inspected for quantitation. Reported peak areas were pooled based on the number of HexNAc, Fuc or NeuAc residues to distinguish high-mannose/hybrid/complex glycosylation, fucosylation and sialylation, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Recent outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle East respiratory syndrome, along with the threat of a future coronavirus-mediated pandemic, underscore the importance of finding ways to combat these viruses. The trimeric spike transmembrane glycoprotein S mediates entry into&#xa0;host cells and is the major target of neutralizing antibodies. To understand the humoral immune response elicited upon natural infections with coronaviruses, we structurally characterized the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV S glycoproteins in complex with neutralizing antibodies isolated from human survivors. Although the two antibodies studied blocked attachment to the host cell receptor, only the anti-SARS-CoV S antibody triggered fusogenic conformational changes via receptor functional mimicry. These results provide a structural framework for understanding coronavirus neutralization by human antibodies and shed light on activation of coronavirus membrane fusion, which takes place through a receptor-driven ratcheting mechanism.

### Keywords
Ethcd, Sars, N-linked glycosylation, Mers

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle WA USA
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle WA USA


