### Accession
PXD015177

### Title
Arginine valency in C9ORF72 dipolypeptides mediates promiscuous proteome  binding that transmits multiple modes of toxicity

### Description
Motor Neuron Disease patients with the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion mutations feature abnormal expression of 5 different dipeptide repeat polymers (DPRs). Two of these, poly-GR and poly-PR, have proven highly toxic to cell and animal models. To investigate the mechanisms, we defined the interactomes of the DPRs in 10× and 101× repeat lengths as fusions to GFP in Neuro2a cells using quantitative proteomics. Relative to the more inert poly-GA and poly-PA peptides, poly-PR and poly-GR of both repeat lengths were promiscuous binders to the proteome and especially ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors and translation elongation factors including ribosome recycling factor ABCE1, suggesting a role in ribosome stalling. The PR101 and GR101 DPRs robustly stalled the ribosome compared to the other DPRs and an unrelated mutant protein (Huntingtin) that causes neurodegeneration. Poly-GR also bound to arginine methylases and led to hypomethylation of endogenous proteins, with a profound destabilization of the actin cytoskeleton. Our findings point to arginine in the GR and PR polymers as multivalent toxins to translation as well as arginine methylation with concomitant downstream effects on widespread biological processes including ribosome biogenesis, mRNA splicing and cytoskeleton assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates or quadruplicates of GFP-tagged DPRs (10x and 101x) or GFP-transfected Neuro2a were harvested in DNase I (Sigma)-containing lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.5% v/v NP-40; 1 mM PMSF; EDTA-free Complete protease inhibitor cocktail). Cell lysates were passed through a 27 Gauge syringe needle 25 times, followed by a 31 Gauge needle 10 times and incubated on ice for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 g for 10 min at 4°C. GFP-Trap®_MA beads (ChromoTek GmbH, Germany) were added to 0.5 mg of the supernatant and incubated for 2 h at 4°C. After three washing steps (in 10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 1 mM PMSF; EDTA-free Protease inhibitor cocktail) and used for further sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were dimethyl-labelled then separated on Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm) in a gradient buffer(5% DMSO/0.1% v/v formic acid) to buffer B (100% CH3CN/5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid v/v) at 5 μL/min flowrate. The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive-ionization mode. The survey scan range was set from 400 to 1500 300 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000. Up to the 15 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2-5 were subjected to collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30 ±5%, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion to minimize resequencing was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.81; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Data were filtered against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database (version 2016_07; 16794 proteins) combined with common contaminant proteins. GFP sequence (UniProt ID: P42212) was also added to the database. For protein identification, the search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, and 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance. The enzyme specificity was set as trypsin. The maximum number of missed cleavage sites permitted was two, and the minimum peptide length required was six. The following modifications were allowed: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Dimethylation (K), Dimethylation (N-Term), Dimethylation: 2H(4) (K), Dimethylation 2H(4) (N-term), 2H(6)13C(2) Dimethylation (K), 2H(6)13C(2) Dimethylation (N-term) (Variable); Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed). The false discovery rate (FDR) maximum was set to 1% at the peptide identification level and 5% at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those identified by at least two peptides, one of which was unique, in all three replicates. The common contaminant, Keratin, was excluded from the dataset. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.3.0.81 using the precursor ion quantifier node. Dimethyl labelled peptide pairs (between two comparison of light, medium or heavy) were established with a 2 ppm mass precision, and a signal to noise threshold of 3. A retention time tolerance of isotope pattern multiplets was set to 0.8 min. Three single peak or missing channels were allowed for peptide identification. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation (light, medium and-or heavy dimethyl derivatives). Missing quantitation values was replaced with a constant (zero-filling). The peptide group abundance and protein abundance values were normalized to account for sample loading. In brief, the total peptide abundances for each sample was calculated and the maximum sum for all files was determined. The normalization factor was the factor of the sum of the sample and the maximum sum in all files. After calculating the normalization factors, the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node normalized peptide group abundances and protein abundances by dividing abundances with the normalization factor over all samples. The normalized protein abundances were imported into Perseus software (v 1.6.5.0). Protein abundances were logarithmized (with respect to base 2). The samples were then grouped according to the replicates. For pairwise comparison of proteomes and determination of significant differences in protein abundances Welch’s t-test based on permutation-based FDR statistics was then applied (250 permutations; FDR=0.01; S0=1) were applied.

### Publication Abstract
<i>C9ORF72</i>-associated Motor Neuron Disease patients feature abnormal expression of 5 dipeptide repeat (DPR) polymers. Here we used quantitative proteomics in a mouse neuronal-like cell line (Neuro2a) to demonstrate that the Arg residues in the most toxic DPRS, PR and GR, leads to a promiscuous binding to the proteome compared with a relative sparse binding of the more inert AP and GA. Notable targets included ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors and translation elongation factors. PR and GR comprising more than 10 repeats appeared to robustly stall on ribosomes during translation suggesting Arg-rich peptide domains can electrostatically jam the ribosome exit tunnel during synthesis. Poly-GR also recruited arginine methylases, induced hypomethylation of endogenous proteins, and induced a profound destabilization of the actin cytoskeleton. Our findings point to arginine in GR and PR polymers as multivalent toxins to translation as well as arginine methylation that may explain the dysfunction of biological processes including ribosome biogenesis, mRNA splicing and cytoskeleton assembly.

### Keywords
Ran-translation; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als); proteotoxicity; protein aggregation; abce1; methylosome; prmt1; prmt5

### Affiliations
PhD student
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia

### Submitter
Mona Radwan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Danny Hatters
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia


