### Accession
PXD023990

### Title
Glycolytic modulation through HIF signaling determines HIV-1 elite control status

### Description
Natural control of HIV infection in Elite Controllers (EC) is a characteristic of <1% of HIV infected individuals. Extensive research has tried to elucidate the mechanism of control without any concrete results due to a large heterogeneity in the EC group, both between the sexes and how they obtain control. Therefore, we sought to identify signaling pathways associated with the EC phenotype by proteomics (all male) and transcriptomic (male and female) analysis. Further, we integrated the proteomics and transcriptomic analysis in the male cohort. We found that HIF signaling and downstream glycolysis are specific traits of the EC phenotype. Within this pathway ENO1 was upregulated in EC on a protein level irrespective of sex.  We also performed targeted transcriptomic analysis where we identified HIF target genes as specifically de-regulation of in EC group. Namely, we observed an increase in the antiviral transcript GPS2, while CXCR4 and EIF5A were down regulated. Although we could not detect any difference in protein levels of HIF-1α in total PBMCs, we observed a higher portion of HIF-1α and HIF-1β in the nuclei of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells indicating an increased activation of HIF signaling in the male EC. Furthermore, the intracellular glucose levels were elevated in EC even as metabolite transporter expression of Glut1 and MCT-1 was decreased in lymphocytes showing that the EC have a unique metabolic uptake and secretion profile. Combined our data indicate the role HIF-1 signaling and glycolysis has in natural control of HIV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 40 µL of 0.1% ProteaseMax (Promega), 4 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% acetonitrile (AcN). The samples were probe sonicated using Vibra-cell™ Ultrasonic Liquid Processor VCX 130 (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 1 min, with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude and sonicated in bath for 5 minutes, followed by vortexing and centrifugation for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. Protein concentrations were determined in supernatants in a 1:2 dilution in water. Protein yields varied between 3 to 95 µg. Ten µg of each sample (except for EC1 (7 µg), HC13 (3 µg), HC17 (3 µg), VP3 (8 µg), and VP10 (3 µg)) were subjected to tryptic digestion, following protein reduction with 6 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 60 min and alkylation with 22 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and digestion was carried out at 37°C over night. Tryptic peptides were cleaned on C18 HyperSep™ filter plate with 40 µL bed volume (ThermoFisher Scientific) and dried on a speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific). TMT10plex™ isobaric labelling reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 100 µg aliquots were dissolved in 30 µL dry AcN, scrambled and mixed with the digested samples dissolved in 70 µL triethylammonium bicarbonate, followed by incubation at 22°C for 2 h at 550 rpm. The reaction was then quenched with 12 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at 22°C for 15 min at 550 rpm. The labelled samples were pooled and dried on a speedvac (miVac, ThermoFisher Scientific). The TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of 2% AcN/0.1% formic acid. Five µL samples were injected into a EASY-nLC™ 1000 liquid chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific) on-line coupled to a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 50 cm long EASY-Spray™ C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific), with an organic gradient: 4-26% B (solvent B=98% AcN/0.1% formic acid) in 180 min, 26-95% B in 5 min, and 95% B for 8 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometric (MS) acquisition method was comprised of one survey full spectrum ranging from m/z 350 to 1600, acquired with a resolution of R=140,000 (at m/z 200), followed by data-dependent higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of maximum 16 most intense precursor ions with a charge state 2+ and 3+, applying 60 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass scans were acquired with a resolution of R=70,000, targeting 2x105 ions, setting isolation width to 2.0 Th and normalized collision energy to 33%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were directly loaded in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and searched against human SwissProt protein databases (21,008 entries) using the Mascot Server v2.5.1 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and 0.05 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of N-termini were set. For quantification both unique and razor peptides were requested. The final quantitative data analysis was performed with an in-house developed R-studio script, as described below. The raw data generated from the machine was first subjected to data normalization using the R/Bioconductor package NormalyzerDE [41]. The R package performs data normalization using eight different methods. Normalization using quantile method was found better and it was used for further downstream analysis. Batch effect was corrected using R function ComBat from the package SVA. Sample distribution was evaluated using dimensionality reduction by principal component analysis (PCA) with R package PCAtools. First two principal components capturing maximum variance of the data were plotted in 2D space using R package ggplot v3.3.2 [43]. Differentially protein abundance between groups were identified by R/Bioconductor package Limma v3.42.2. Proteins with adjusted p-value <0.05 were considered as significant. Functional analysis of significantly regulated proteins was performed using enrichr module of python package GSEAPY v 0.9.16 (https://pypi.org/project/gseapy/). Enrichment test for molecular pathway analysis was performed by KEGG gene-set library downloaded from Enrichr web resources.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Hif signaling, Glycolysis, Elite controller

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


