### Accession
PXD017858

### Title
HEK293T cell proteome abundance (WT vs NUFIP1 knock-out). Related to Supplementary Table 5 from An et al (2020)

### Description
HEK293T cells proteome comparison with or without NUFIP1 deletion. TMT channels 128n, 128c, 130c, 131n and 131c were not used for this analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 100 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 containing 0.1% RapiGest and digested at 37°C for 2 h with LysC protease at a 200:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C. Tandem mass tag labeling of each sample was performed by adding indicated amount of the 20 ng/μL stock of TMT reagent along with acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Typically 10 ul of TMT reagent was added for 100 g of protein input. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, labeling efficiency of a small aliquot was tested, and the reaction was then quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) for 15 min.  The TMT-labeled samples were pooled together at a 1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid for 15 min, centrifuged at 10000×g for 5 minutes at room temperature and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters). Dried TMT-labeled sample was resuspended in 100 l of 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 and fractionated using BPRP HPLC. Briefly, samples were offline fractionated, into 96 fractions and then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and 12 fractions (even numbers) were used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Fractions were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed in house with ~35 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with a gradient consisting of 5%–21% (0-125 min), 21-28% (125-140min) (ACN, 0.1% FA) over a total 150 min run at ~500 nL/min. For analysis, we loaded 1/10 of each fraction onto the column. Each analysis used the Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT method, to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000 at 200 Th; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5×105; maximum injection time 50 ms). Precursors for MS2 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; Turbo scan rate; AGC 2.0×104; isolation window 0.7 Th; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 35 ms). Monoisotopic peak assignment was used, and previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (150 s ± 10 ppm). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65; AGC 3×105; maximum injection time 100 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th).

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed using the SEQUEST-HT engine (Proteome Discoverer v2.3.0.420 - Thermo Fisher Scientific). against the UniProt Human Reference Proteome (2019) using the following parameters (post-recalibration): a tolerance level of 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2 and false discovery rate of the Percolator decoy database search was set to 1%. Trypsin was used as the digestion enzyme, three missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted (integration tolerance of 0.003 Da) the summed signal-to-noise ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs for unique and razor peptides. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that were less than 10 per channel, isolation specificity ≤0.3, or had less than 70% of correctly selected SPS ions were excluded from quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian cells reorganize their proteomes in response to nutrient stress through translational suppression and degradative mechanisms using the proteasome and autophagy systems<sup>1,2</sup>. Ribosomes are central targets of this response, as they are responsible for translation and subject to lysosomal turnover during nutrient stress<sup>3-5</sup>. The abundance of ribosomal (r)-proteins (around 6% of the proteome; 10<sup>7</sup> copies per cell)<sup>6,7</sup> and their high arginine and lysine content has led to the hypothesis that they are selectively used as a source of basic amino acids during nutrient stress through autophagy<sup>4,7</sup>. However, the relative contributions of translational and degradative mechanisms to the control of r-protein abundance during acute stress responses is poorly understood, as is the extent to which r-proteins are used to generate amino acids when specific building blocks are limited<sup>7</sup>. Here, we integrate quantitative global translatome and degradome proteomics<sup>8</sup> with genetically encoded Ribo-Keima<sup>5</sup> and Ribo-Halo reporters to interrogate r-protein homeostasis with and without active autophagy. In conditions of acute nutrient stress, cells strongly suppress the translation of r-proteins, but, notably, r-protein degradation occurs largely through non-autophagic pathways. Simultaneously, the decrease in r-protein abundance is compensated for by a reduced dilution of pre-existing ribosomes and a reduction in cell volume, thereby maintaining the density of ribosomes within single cells. Withdrawal of basic or hydrophobic amino acids induces translational repression without differential induction of ribophagy, indicating that ribophagy is not used to selectively produce basic amino acids during acute nutrient stress. We present a quantitative framework that describes the contributions of biosynthetic and degradative mechanisms to r-protein abundance and proteome remodelling in conditions of nutrient stress.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Proteome

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115 USA

### Submitter
Alban Ordureau

### Lab Head
Dr Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115 USA


