### Accession
PXD012687

### Title
Identification of AGR2 interacting proteins in H1299 cells using SILAC quantification

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis with SILAC quantification to identify proteins interacting with AGR2 protein in H1299 lung cancer cells

### Sample Protocol
H1299-LZ4 and H1299-LZ4-AGR2 cells (here and thereafter H1299 and H1299-AGR2) cells used for mass spectrometry experiments were maintained in (SILAC) DMEM containing unlabeled (R0K0, light) or labeled lysine and arginine (R10K8, heavy), respectively (Dundee Cell Biosciences, Dundee, UK), in three replicates each. Cells were grown up to 80% confluence and then were washed three times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 0.1 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2) directly on plates. 0.6mM dithiobis[succinimidylpropionate] (DSP) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) in 1.4% DMSO in PBS (control: DMSO in PBS) was applied for 30 min at room temperature (10 ml of solution per 15 cm dish). The crosslinking reaction was stopped by addition of Tris pH 7.5 (10 mM final concentration) for 15 min. Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in NP-40 Lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA pH 8, 1% NP40, 1% protease inhibitors, 1 mM PMSF), incubated on ice with shaking for 30 min and then sonicated by 30× 0,1 s pulses and 1 s pauses on maximum power (Vibra-Cell, Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT, USA) and centrifuged 14,000 g/4 °C/30 min. RC-DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France) was used to determine protein concentration. 200 µl of streptavidin-agarose suspension (Merck KGaA - Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was washed in 0.1% Tween20 in PBS (PBS-T) and labeled with 4.5 µl of biotinylated 6aa-aptamers (5 mg/ml in DMSO) E7 (AGR2-targeting, PTTIYY) and F4 (untargeted control) overnight on rotating wheel at 4 °C and washed 6× with PBS-T (13). These aptamer containing mixtures were mixed with mixture of 200 µg of R0K0 H1299-LZ4 and 200 µg of R8K10 H1299-LZ4-AGR2 lysates and incubated overnight at 4 °C on rotating wheel and then washed 6× with PBS-T. 50 µl of 0.1 M glycine pH 2.5/10 min/room temperature were used for elution of precipitated protein. The eluates were neutralized with 5 µl of 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8. Trypsin digestion was performed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as follows. Whole eluate was added onto Vivacon 500 ultrafiltration spin columns (10 kDa membrane cutoff, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) with 200 µl of UT buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5). The columns were centrifuged at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. 100 μl of UT buffer was then added onto the columns followed by addition of 40 µl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, mixed and left in thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 min/600 rpm/37 °C to reach a complete reduction of proteins. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. Subsequently, 100 μl of UT buffer and 20 μl of 300 mM iodoacetamide were added onto the columns and mixed. The samples were alkylated firstly for 1 min/600 rpm/25 °C in thermomixer and then 20 min in dark without shaking, followed by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. The columns were washed 2 times with 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged for 14,000g/20 min/20 °C. The digestion was performed by the addition of 2 μl of 0.25 μg/μl trypsin (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by incubation for 12 h at 37 °C in a wet chamber. The digests were collected by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C. The columns were then washed again with 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl by centrifugation at 14,000g/15 min/20 °C and the digests were desalted as described previously (http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/pr800622b). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a system consisting of RSLCNano on-line connected to Orbitrap Elite MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were trapped on a 3.5 µm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters) 0.1 × 30 mm pre-column and separated on a 2 µm Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) 0.75 × 250 mm column directly connected to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 95 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/methanol/trifluoroethanol/FA 59.9%/30%/10%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 1–2 min from 99% A and 1% B to 98% A and 2% B, then to 89% A and 11% B at 30 min, then to 75% C and 25% B at 60 min, then to 55% A and 45% B at 90 min, and 5% A and 95% B at 95 min at a flow rate of 300 nL·min−1. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was set to 240000 and the ion population was set to 1 × 106 with an m/z window from 350 to 1700. Maximum of top 10 precursors were selected for CID in the ion trap. For MS/MS in the ion trap, the ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 m/z) and the dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The samples were run in two technical replicates (injections).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed in MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 (www.maxquant.org) using Andromeda database search algorithm. The data analysis parameters were as follows: Database: UniProt/SwissProt human database 2017_03 downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org (2017/03/30) with 20,183 protein sequences (complemented by database of common protein contaminants according to the standard Andromeda settings), enzyme name: Trypsin (cleaving polypeptides at the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine), max. missed cleavage sites 2, taxonomy: Homo sapiens. Decoy database search: PSM FDR 0.01, protein FDR 0.01, site FDR 0.01. Tolerances: 20 ppm/4.5 ppm (first search/main search) peptide tolerance and 0.5 Da IT MS/MS fragment match tolerance. Modifications: Dynamic (variable): oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (K). Static (fixed): carbamidomethyl (C). SILAC quantification: Multiplicity 2, max. labeled AAs 3, light-no labels, heavy-Agr10,Lys8 labels.

### Publication Abstract
Anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) known to be overexpressed in many human epithelial cancers and is involved in cell migration, cellular transformation, angiogenesis, and metastasis. This protein inhibits the activity of the tumor suppressor p53, and its expression levels can be used to predict cancer patient outcome. However, the precise network of AGR2-interacting partners and clients remains to be fully characterized. Herein, we used label-free quantification and also stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture-based LC-MS/MS analyses to identify proteins interacting with AGR2. Functional annotation confirmed that AGR2 and its interaction partners are associated with processes in the ER that maintain intracellular metabolic homeostasis and participate in the unfolded protein response, including those associated with changes in cellular metabolism, energy, and redox states in response to ER stress. As a proof of concept, the interaction between AGR2 and PDIA3, another ER-resident PDI, was studied in more detail. Pathway analysis revealed that AGR2 and PDIA3 play roles in protein folding in ER, including post-translational modification and in cellular response to stress. We confirmed the AGR2-PDIA3 complex formation in cancer cells, which was enhanced in response to ER stress. Accordingly, molecular docking characterized potential quaternary structure of this complex; however, it remains to be elucidated whether AGR2 rather contributes to PDIA3 maturation in ER, the complex directly acts in cellular signaling, or mediates AGR2 secretion. Our study provides a comprehensive insight into the protein-protein interaction network of AGR2 by identifying functionally relevant proteins and related cellular and biochemical pathways associated with the role of AGR2 in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Anterior gradient protein 2; protein-protein interactions; protein disulfide isomerase; lc-ms; silac

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University


