### Accession
PXD029428

### Title
Integrative functional proteomics identifies PARP1 protein complex differences and PARP inhibitor-mediated DDR and AKT-mTOR signaling in ovarian carcinoma:  ADP-Ribosylation

### Description
BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian carcinoma (OC) has been shown to be particularly sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPis) and BRCA1/2 mutation status is currently used as a predictive biomarker for PARPi therapy. Despite eliciting major clinical benefit for the majority of patients, a significant proportion of BRCA1/2-deficient OC tumors do not respond to PARPis for reasons that are incompletely understood. Using an integrated chemical, phospho- and ADP-ribosylation proteomics approach we sought to develop additional mechanism-based biomarker candidates for PARPi therapy in OC and identify new targets for combination therapy to overcome primary resistance. Chemical proteomics with PARPi baits in a BRCA1-isogenic OC cell line pair, as well as patient-derived BRCA1-profiecient and deficient tumor samples, and subsequent validation by co-immunoprecipitation showed differential PARP1 and PARP2 protein complex composition with Ku70 and Ku80 in PARPi-sensitive, BRCA1-deficient UWB1.289 (UWB) cells compared to PARPi-insensitive, BRCA1-reconstituted UWB1.289 (UWB+B) cells. Global phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics furthermore revealed that rucaparib induced the cell cycle pathway and NHEJ pathway in UWB cells, but down-regulated ErbB signaling in UWB+B cells. In addition, we observed AKT PARylation and pro-survival AKT-mTOR signaling in UWB+B cells after PARPi treatment. Consistently, synergy of PARPis with DNAPK or AKT inhibitors was more pronounced in UWB+B cells identifying these pathways as actionable vulnerabilities. In conclusion, the combination of chemical proteomics, phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics can identify differential PARP1/2 complexes and diverse, but actionable drug compensatory signaling in OC.

### Sample Protocol
Based on a published protocol (Kalesh, K., et al., An Integrated Chemical Proteomics Approach for Quantitative Profiling of Intracellular ADP-Ribosylation. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9.), UWB and UWB+B cells were treated with 10 mM rucaparib or DMSO for one hour, medium was removed, and the cells were treated with 0.5 mM 6YnAd and 0.5 mM 2YnAd for an additional hour. Whole cell lysates were prepared and proteins were quantified. 500 µg protein per each condition were subjected to click reactions using Azide-PEG3-Biotin or Azide-TAMRA-Biotin capture reagent. Proteins were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform/water system and air-dried precipitates were resuspended. 30 µg of protein was loaded per gel lane (12% SDS Tris-HCl gels) and resolved by SDS-PAGE. The gels were scanned for fluorescence labelling using a GE typhoon 5400 gel scanner and 500 µg of protein was subjected to affinity enrichment on NeutrAvidin-Agarose beads. After extensive washing the beads were subjected to 3 mM dithiothreitol treatment, 10 mM iodoacetamide treatment and overnight trypsinization. Samples were acidified to pH 3 using formic acid, allowed to stand for 5 min, centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Beads were washed with 0.1% formic acid solution in water, centrifuged and supernatants were mixed with the previous supernatants. The collected tryptic peptides were cleared with C18 ZipTip clean up (Millipore). The peptides were re-dissolved in HPLC buffer spiked with Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC). LC-MS/MS analysis using a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) was performed as described previously (Ctortecka, C., et al., Functional Proteomics and Deep Network Interrogation Reveal a Complex Mechanism of Action of Midostaurin in Lung Cancer Cells. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2018. 17(12): p. 2434-2447).
Controls without probes (DMSO), treatment controls with ADP-ribosylation probes (Probes-DMSO), and Rucaparib treatment with ADP-ribosylation probes (Probes-Ruca) pulldowns were performed for UWB parental cells (U) and UWB cells expressing BRCA1 (U+B).  The samples are: PD1112-1114: U-DMSO-R1-3, PD1115-1117: U-Probes-DMSO-R1-3, PD1118-1120: U-Probes-Ruca-R1-3, PD1121-1123: U+B-DMSO-R1-3, PD1124-1126: U+B-Probes-DMSO-R1-3, PD1127-1129:  U+B-Probes-Ruca-R1-3

### Data Protocol
This experiment was designed to identify ADP-ribosylated proteins, rather than specific sites of modification.  Data were searched against the UniProt 2018 human protein database using the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.5.2.8). Up to two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.05.  Similar parameters were used for Mascot to support this data upload.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian carcinoma (OC) has been shown to be particularly sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis). Furthermore, BRCA1/2 mutation status is currently used as a predictive biomarker for PARPi therapy. Despite providing a major clinical benefit to the majority of patients, a significant proportion of BRCA1/2-deficient OC tumors do not respond to PARPis for reasons that are incompletely understood. Using an integrated chemical, phospho- and ADP-ribosylation proteomics approach, we sought here to develop additional mechanism-based biomarker candidates for PARPi therapy in OC and identify new targets for combination therapy to overcome primary resistance. Using chemical proteomics with PARPi baits in a BRCA1-isogenic OC cell line pair, as well as patient-derived BRCA1-proficient and BRCA1-deficient tumor samples, and subsequent validation by coimmunoprecipitation, we showed differential PARP1 and PARP2 protein complex composition in PARPi-sensitive, BRCA1-deficient UWB1.289 (UWB) cells compared to PARPi-insensitive, BRCA1-reconstituted UWB1.289+BRCA1 (UWB+B) cells. In addition, global phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics furthermore revealed that the PARPi rucaparib induced the cell cycle pathway and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway in UWB cells but downregulated ErbB signaling in UWB+B cells. In addition, we observed AKT PARylation and prosurvival AKT-mTOR signaling in UWB+B cells after PARPi treatment. Consistently, we found the synergy of PARPis with DNAPK or AKT inhibitors was more pronounced in UWB+B cells, highlighting these pathways as actionable vulnerabilities. In conclusion, we demonstrate the combination of chemical proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and ADP-ribosylation proteomics can identify differential PARP1/2 complexes and diverse, but actionable, drug compensatory signaling in OC.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Brca, Parp1, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


