### Accession
PXD002595

### Title
Western black widow major ampullate, minor ampullate, and tubuliform silk gland LC-MSMS, Part 2

### Description
Spider silk research has largely focused on spidroins, proteins that are the primary components of spider silk fibers. Although a number of spidroins have been characterized, other types of proteins associated with silk synthesis are virtually unknown. Previous comparison of tissue-specific RNAseq libraries identified 647 predicted genes that were differentially expressed in silk glands of the Western black widow, Latrodectus hesperus. Only ~5% of these transcripts encode spidroins and the remaining predicted genes presumably encode other proteins associated with silk production. Here, we used proteomic analysis of multiple silk glands and dragline silk fiber to investigate the translation of the differentially expressed genes. We find 48 proteins encoded by the differentially expressed transcripts in L. hesperus major ampullate, minor ampullate, and tubuliform silk glands, and detect 16 SST encoded proteins in major ampullate silk fibers. The observed proteins include known silk-related proteins, but most are uncharacterized, with no annotation. These unannotated proteins likely include novel silk associated proteins. Major ampullate and minor ampullate glands have the highest overlap of identified proteins, consistent with their shared, distinctive ampullate shape and the overlapping functions of major ampullate and minor ampullate silks. Our study substantiates and prioritizes predictions from differential expression analysis of spider silk gland transcriptomes.

### Sample Protocol
Animal collection, dissection of silk glands, and collection of silk fibers Adult L. hesperus females were collected on the University of California, Riverside campus and were fed commercially available crickets. Prior to dissection, individuals were not fed for two days to minimize contamination from gut contents. Spiders were individually anesthetized using carbon dioxide gas, and their abdomens were dissected in 1x SSC. In L. hesperus, major ampullate, minor ampullate, and tubuliform glands are easily distinguished during dissection because of their distinctive morphologies and spatial arrangement in the abdomen. Silk glands were visually inspected to ensure that there were no breaks or punctures. If damage was detected, no silk glands from that individual were used to avoid cross-contamination. Major ampullate, minor ampullate, and tubuliform glands were dissected into separate microfuge tubes and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen or immediately used for protein extraction (below).  Major ampullate silk fibers were manually drawn from spiders as described in the literature. Major ampullate fibers are extruded from large and distinctive silk spigots, enabling visual verification of major ampullate silk collection during fiber harvesting. Fibers were drawn onto spools at a rate of 5-7 cm per second for a total of 2-3 minutes. It was sometimes necessary to use up to three individuals to amass the targeted amount of silk fibers. Fibers from each individual were stored on separate spools at room temperature in closed containers.  Two biological replicates were collected for each gland type and major ampullate silk fibers. Replicates consisted of one of the following: two major ampullate glands from one individual, six tubuliform glands from one individual, four minor ampullate glands from two individuals, or the combined silk spools of up to three individuals.  Protein extraction  Fresh or frozen silk glands were macerated with a sterile pestle in protein extraction buffer (10% glycerol; 50 mM Tris pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl2; 2% SDS; 150 mM NaCl; 0.2% β-mercaptoethanol; 0.005 M EDTA) supplemented with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Silk fibers were cut with a clean razor blade, immersed in protein extraction buffer supplemented with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, macerated with a sterile pestle, and incubated at room temperature overnight. Samples were then fractionated on an SDS-PAGE gel (5% stacking; 6.4% separating) and visualized with Bio-Safe Coomassie stain (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Protein concentrations were estimated from these visualizations, with a target of > 500 ng/lane. For each sample, multiple lanes (10–15 μl/lane; total of 20–30 μl of sample) were excised and combined for in gel digest. Standard protocols for in-gel tryptic digestion from the Arizona Proteomics Consortium (http://proteomics.arizona.edu/protocols) were followed. Briefly, proteins in acrylamide gels were digested overnight at 37ºC with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin and 1.25 ng/µl chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM calcium chloride. Digested peptides were extracted from gel pieces with a Bioruptor® Standard sonication system (Diagenode, Denville, NJ, USA) for 30 minutes. After sonication, the supernatant was purified using Ziptips® C18 Pipette Tips according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), dried, and stored at -20 ºC until shipment for analysis at the Arizona Proteomics Consortium.  LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis of trypsin/chymotrypsin-digested proteins was carried out using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion, Ithaca, NY). Peptides were eluted from a C18 precolumn (100-μm i.d. × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto an analytical column (75-μm i.d. × 10 cm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was used for the following concentrations and times: 5%, 5 min; 5-7%, 5 min; 7-15%, 45 min; 15-35%, 60 min; 35-40%, 28 min; 40-85%, 5 min; 85%, 10 min; a return to 5% in 1 minute, and another 10 minute hold of 5% solvent B. All flow rates were 400 nl/min. Certain LC-MS/MS replicate runs were also performed using a shorter 125 minute RP gradient (5% solvent B hold for 10 min; 5-20%, 65 min; 20-35%, 25 min; 35%, 9 min; 35-95%, 5 min; and finally a 95% solvent B hold for another 5 minutes).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 2.1.0 software using a survey mass scan at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning mass/charge (m/z) 400-1600, followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) of the 14 most intense ions in the linear ion trap analyzer. Precursor ions were selected by the monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) setting with selection or rejection of ions held to a +/- 10 ppm window. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 45 seconds after a single MS/MS.  Tandem mass spectra were searched against a protein database made by combining Chelicerata proteins downloaded from NCBI on October 17, 2013 and reduced for redundant entries via CD Hit (available at http://weizhong-lab.ucsd.edu/cd-hit/), with common contaminant proteins such as keratins (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/crap/), and with a non-redundant longest open reading frame translation of an L. hesperus transcriptome (Clarke et al. 2014; see above). At the time of the search, this combined protein database contained 182,000 entries. All MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein database described above using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) considering tryptic/chymotryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Iodoacetamide derivatives of cysteines and oxidation of methionines were specified as variable modifications. Proteins were identified at 99% confidence with XCorr score cut-offs as determined by a reversed database search. The protein and peptide identification results were visualized with Scaffold v 3.6.1 and v 4.0 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and which uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra. Proteins were accepted that passed a minimum of two peptides identified at 95% peptide confidence and 99.9% protein confidence by the Peptide and Protein Profit algorithms, respectively, within Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Spider silk research has largely focused on spidroins, proteins that are the primary components of spider silk fibers. Although a number of spidroins have been characterized, other types of proteins associated with silk synthesis are virtually unknown. Previous analyses of tissue-specific RNA-seq libraries identified 647 predicted genes that were differentially expressed in silk glands of the Western black widow, Latrodectus hesperus. Only &#x223c;5% of these silk-gland specific transcripts (SSTs) encode spidroins; although the remaining predicted genes presumably encode other proteins associated with silk production, this is mostly unverified. Here, we used proteomic analysis of multiple silk glands and dragline silk fiber to investigate the translation of the differentially expressed genes. We find 48 proteins encoded by the differentially expressed transcripts in L. hesperus major ampullate, minor ampullate, and tubuliform silk glands and detect 17 SST encoded proteins in major ampullate silk fibers. The observed proteins include known silk-related proteins, but most are uncharacterized, with no annotation. These unannotated proteins likely include novel silk-associated proteins. Major and minor ampullate glands have the highest overlap of identified proteins, consistent with their shared, distinctive ampullate shape and the overlapping functions of major and minor ampullate silks. Our study substantiates and prioritizes predictions from differential expression analysis of spider silk gland transcriptomes.

### Keywords
Minor ampullate silk glands, Major ampullate silk glands, Spidroins, Spider, Tubuliform silk glands, Latrodectus hesperus

### Affiliations
Department of Biology University of California, Riverside
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Ro Crystal Chaw

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl Y Hayashi
Department of Biology University of California, Riverside


