### Accession
PXD026928

### Title
Mycoplasma gallisepticum WhiA knockdown and overexpression

### Description
Proteomes of Mycoplasma gallisepticum strains with overexpression and knockdown of WhiA transcription factor. The overexpression was introduced on a transposon vector carrying M. gallisepticum whiA gene with strong constitutive promoter and strong SD sequence. The knockdown was made by CRISPRi. dCas9 protein and sgRNA against whiA gene were introduced on a transposon vector.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis was performed as follows: the samples were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) with a protease inhibitor cocktail (GE HealthCare) through ultrasonication with a Branson 1510 sonicator at 4 °C for 1 min. Protein concentration was estimated using the BCA assay (Sigma). Aliquots containing 300 µg of the protein material were diluted to 1 µg/µL with lysis buffer, and Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma) and chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma) were added to final concentrations of 10 and 30 mM, respectively. Cys-reduction and alkylation were achieved by heating the sample for 10 min at 85 °C. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:100 w/w to the protein amount and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Then, the second trypsin portion 1:100 w/w was added, and the sample was incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid. The precipitated sodium deoxycholate was removed using ethyl acetate. The samples were purified using OASIS columns (Waters) and analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.   LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20×0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 μm sorbent (GL Sciences, Japan), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 μl/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 500×0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch, Germany) into the emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) [4]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 μl/min flow at RT.  MS data were collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70 K resolution, 350–2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3 × 106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of +2 to +6 charge, 8 × 103 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5 K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1 × 10^5.

### Data Protocol
Identification of DDA files was performed with MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 Software with default settings against the M. gallisepticum S6 Uniprot reference database with two additional protein sequences: TetM and dCas9 S. pyogenes. Log2 Fold change, Student's t-test and Benjamimi-Hochberg correction were calculated using R version 3.6.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Whia, Knockdown, Overexpression, Transcription factor, Mycoplasma

### Affiliations
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Aleksandr Zubov

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia


