### Accession
PXD001841

### Title
Phosphorylation of S.pombe Rap1 analysed by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Identification and semi-quantitation of phosphorylation sites on Schizosaccharomyces pombe DNA-binding protein Rap1. A Rap1 construct was cultured in homozygous diploid temperature-sensitive pat1-114 mutant strain of S. pombe cells (time points: 3.5 h and 4.5h), and was purified by anti-PK immunoprecipitation. The resulting samples were run into a 1D SDS-PAGE gel with the target band excised, tryptically digested and analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and immunoprecipitation The Rap1-3xPK construct was expressed in synchronous meiotic S. pombe cell cultures (homozygous diploid temperature-sensitive strain), and harvested at 3.5 h and 4.5 h time-points (6 L each time point).  The proteins, in RIPA buffer (including protease and phosphatase inhibitors, Roche), were subjected to immunoprecipitation using M-270 Epoxy Dynabeads (Invitrogen), coated with anti-PK antibodies.  The proteins were eluted from the beads using Laemmli buffer (with beta-mercapthoethanol).  The sample was heated to 65C for 15 minutes and the beads were removed.  The sample was then run into a 7.5% pre-cast gel (Bio-Rad) and stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Pierce).  In-gel digestion  The excised gel bands of interest were diced and reduced with 5 mM TCEP, free cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and the proteins subjected to digestion with trypsin.  After digestion, the proteolytic peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and triethylammonium bicarbonate washes, the solution dried in vacuo and was reconstituted in 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS.  The peptides were separated using an HP1200 platform (Agilent, Wokingham, UK) by reversed phase chromatography using a 75 μm I.D. 15 cm C18 packed emitter column (3 μm particle size; NIKKYO TECHNOS CO.,LTD, Tokyo, Japan) over 30 min using a linear gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B. Sample was infused into an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition. The top 10 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation and analysed using enhanced ion trap scans. Multistage activation (MSA) was used to target phosphoserine/threonine peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data was submitted for database searching using Proteome Discoverer v1.3 and Mascot V2.3. The following Mascot search parameters were used: Database: SwissProt: SwissProt_040511a (526,969 sequences), Uniprot_cu_Spombe (4,983 sequences), Enzyme specificity: Trypsin (KR) 2 missed cleavages, Mass tolerance: Precursor: 5 ppm Fragment: 0.25 Da, Variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term) Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation of Methionine, PyroGlu (Peptide N-term Q), Mono/di (KR), tri methylation (K), Phosphorylation (STY). MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications were grouped and validated using Scaffold v4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Rap1, Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, Department of Cancer Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Andrew Thompson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew James Thompson
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, Department of Cancer Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.


