### Accession
PXD006049

### Title
Proteomic analysis of antigen-capturing nanoparticles

### Description
Immunotherapy holds tremendous promise for improving cancer treatment. Administering radiotherapy with immunotherapy has been shown to improve immune responses and can elicit an “abscopal effect”. Unfortunately, response rates for this strategy remain low. Herein, we report an improved cancer immunotherapy approach that utilizes antigen-capturing nanoparticles (AC-NPs). We engineered several AC-NPs formulations and by using a proteomic approach, we demonstrated that the set of protein antigens captured by each AC-NP formulation is dependent upon NP surface properties.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins captured by each AC-NP formulation were digested with trypsin using the FASP protocol. The peptides were analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS using a Waters nanoAcquity coupled to a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed 5µm C18AQ column and eluted over a 120 min gradient consisting of 5–40% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent mode where the 10 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 1.4. Peak lists were searched against a Reviewed Mouse Uniprot database using SEQUEST. The following parameters were used to identify tryptic peptides for protein identification: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.6 Da product ion mass tolerance; up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of Met was set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were used for relative quantitation. The Percolator node within PD was used to calculate peptide false discovery rates (FDR), and a 5% FDR was used to filter all results.

### Publication Abstract
Immunotherapy holds tremendous promise for improving cancer treatment. To administer radiotherapy with immunotherapy has been shown to improve immune responses and can elicit the 'abscopal effect'. Unfortunately, response rates for this strategy remain low. Herein we report an improved cancer immunotherapy approach that utilizes antigen-capturing nanoparticles (AC-NPs). We engineered several AC-NP formulations and demonstrated that the set of protein antigens captured by each AC-NP formulation is dependent on the NP surface properties. We showed that AC-NPs deliver tumour-specific proteins to antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and significantly improve the efficacy of &#x3b1;PD-1 (anti-programmed cell death 1) treatment using the B16F10 melanoma model, generating up to a 20% cure rate compared with 0% without AC-NPs. Mechanistic studies revealed that AC-NPs induced an expansion of CD8<sup>+</sup> cytotoxic T cells and increased both CD4<sup>+</sup>T/T<sub>reg</sub> and CD8<sup>+</sup>T/T<sub>reg</sub> ratios (T<sub>reg</sub>, regulatory T cells). Our work presents a novel strategy to improve cancer immunotherapy with nanotechnology.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Cancer immunotherapy

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Radiation Oncology, UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Z. Wang
Department of Radiation Oncology, UNC-Chapel Hill


