### Accession
PXD021738

### Title
Inhibition of CBP synergizes with the RNA-dependent mechanisms of azacitidine by limiting protein translation

### Description
The nucleotide analogue azacitidine (AZA) interferes with RNA and DNA metabolism and is currently the best treatment option for a subset of patients with high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes. However, only half of treated patients respond and almost all patients that initially respond eventually relapse. Thus, response-predicting biomarkers and new treatment options are urgently needed to improve the clinical management of these patients. Here, we performed a loss-of-function shRNA screen in combination with AZA treatment in a MDS-derived AML cell line to identify chromatin regulators affecting drug response. We identified the histone acetyl transferase and transcriptional co-activator CBP as a major regulator of AZA sensitivity. Compounds inhibiting the enzymatic activity of CBP synergistically reduced viability of MDS-derived AML cell lines when combined with AZA. Surprisingly, this affect was specific for the RNA-dependent functions of AZA and not observed with the related compound decitabine that is limited to DNA incorporation. The identification of immediate target genes suggested that the effect of CBP inhibition is mediated by downregulation of genes encoding the translational machinery, which could be confirmed in proteomic analysis of nascent proteins. Furthermore, proteins most affected by CBP inhibition include key drivers of cycle progression. Taken together, our results identify a novel synergistic interaction between CBP inhibitors and specifically AZA that warrants further evaluation for the combinatorial treatment of high-risk MDS patients. Beyond the scope of MDS and AZA, we provide novel insight in the function of clinically promising CBP inhibitors that is related to unexpected interference with the translational machinery.

### Sample Protocol
De novo protein synthesis was assessed using the ClickIT Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific) and ClickIT-AHA (L-Azidohomoalanine) (Thermo Scientific) according to the Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit instructions. In more detail, 10x106 MOLM-13 cells were treated with 10 µM C646 for 2 hours followed by 2 hours of AHA labelling (in methionine-free media). Then, the urea lysis buffer (C10416, Thermofisher) supplemented with protease inhibitors were added to the samples and kept on ice for 5-10 minutes. The mixture was sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was recovered in new-clean tubes.  AHA-labeled nascent proteins were cross-linked covalently to alkyne agarose resin (C10416, Thermofisher) by adding the catalyst solution (C10416, Thermofisher) for 18h in a rotator at room temperature. The resin was then recovered by centrifugation at 1,000g for 1min and washed three times with milliQ water. The proteins bound to the resin were reduced and alkylated using 10 l of 1M DTT in 1ml of SDS Wash Buffer (C10416, Thermofisher) and 1ml of 40mM iodoacetamide in SDS Wash Buffer, respectively.  The resin was then strongly washed with SDS Wash Buffer and the Spin Columns provided by the kit (C10416, Thermofisher). The beads were finally resuspended in 500l of digestion buffer (C10416, Thermofisher) and 10l of Trypsin 0.1g/l for 18h at 37ºC.     The resin was removed by centrifugation (1,000g for 5min) and the supernatants with the peptides were recovered to new clean tubes. Finally, the peptides were desalted using a C-18 reverse phase cartridge, dried in a speedvac and kept at -80ºC until further use. LC-MS/MS acquisition protocol The trypsin-digested dried peptides were reconstituted in 20 μL of 3% Acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% formic acid aqueous solution for MS analysis. Samples were loaded to 300 μm × 5 mm C18 PepMap100, 5mm, 100Å (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15μL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18 T3 (75 μm × 25 cm, 100Å, Waters) with a 120 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3% to 35 % B in 90 min, from 35 % to 50 % B in 5 min, from 50 % to 85% B in 2min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN) at 250 nL/min flow rate. The column outlets were directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by CID. The MSMS was detected in the Ion Trap (with Max Injection time of 35ms). The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 10,000 (CID) for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software vs 4.0.27.10 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (1.6.7.0) and the built-in search engine called Andromeda were used to search the .raw files obtained in the MS analyses against a Swisprot/Uniprot human database downloaded from the www.uniprot.org web site (October, 2019). A target and decoy database were used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da.  The final list of proteins obtained in this analysis was filtered using the following criteria. First, the proteins labelled as “Potential Contaminant”, “Reverse” and “Identified Only by Site” were removed. Second, the proteins found in the negative control (cells non-labelled with AHA) were used to filter the background proteins. To address this, we first calculated the mean (MP) of Peptide-Spectrum Matches (PSM) found for every protein in the untreated condition. Then we obtained the number of PSMs found for every protein in the negative control (ncP) and then we calculated the ratio MP/ncP. Only the proteins with a MP/ncP>10 were kept in the list. The rest of them were removed. Third, we obtained the list of proteins whose translation was altered due to the treatment by comparing the number of PSMs found in the untreated cells vs. those found in the treated cells. Only the proteins detected in the untreated cells which were not detected in the treatment as well as the proteins with a decrease in more than 75% of the number of PSMs in the treated cells were included in the final list of candidates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myelodysplastic syndromes; secondary acute myeloid leukemia, Clonal hematopoietic disorders, Hypomethylating agents; azacitidine; epigenetic regulation; lysine acetyl tranferase inhibitors; creb binding protein / cbp / p300; shrna screen; protein synthesis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute
1)Program for Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer,  Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institute (PMPPC-IGTP),  08916 Badalona, Spain 2)Cancer and Leukemia Epigenetics and Biology Program, Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC),  Campus ICO-GTP-UAB,  08916 Badalona, Spain

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Buschbeck
1)Program for Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer,  Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institute (PMPPC-IGTP),  08916 Badalona, Spain 2)Cancer and Leukemia Epigenetics and Biology Program, Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC),  Campus ICO-GTP-UAB,  08916 Badalona, Spain


