### Accession
PXD021928

### Title
A Metaproteomic Workflow for Sample Preparation and Data Analysis Applied to Mouse Faeces: 3

### Description
Many diseases have been associated with gut microbiome abnormalities. The root cause of such diseases is not only due to bacterial dysbiosis, but also to change in bacterial functions, which are best studied by proteomic approaches. Although bacterial proteomics is well established, metaproteomics is hindered by challenges associated with the sample physical structure, contaminating proteins, the simultaneous analysis of hundreds of species and the subsequent data analysis. Here, we present a systematic assessment of sample preparation and data analysis methodologies applied to LC-MS/MS metaproteomics experiment.  We could show that low speed centrifugation (LSC) has a significant impact on both peptide identifications and reproducibility. LSC led to increase in peptide and proteins identifications compare to no LSC. Notably, the dominant bacterial phyla, i.e. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, showed divergent representation between LSC and no-LSC. In terms of data processing, protein sequence databases derived from mouse faeces metagenome provided at least four times more MS/MS identification compared to databases of concatenated single organisms. We also demonstrated that two-steps database search strategy comes at the expense of a dramatic rise in number of false positives compared to single-step strategy. Overall, we found a positive correlation between matching metaproteome and metagenome abundance, which could be linked to core microbial functions, such as glycolysis-gluconeogenesis, citrate cycle and carbon metabolism. We observed significant overlap and correlation at the phylum, class, order and family taxonomic levels between taxonomy-derived from metagenome and metaproteome. Notably, nearly all functional categories (e.g., membrane transport, translation, transcription) were differentially abundant in the metaproteome (activity) compared to what would be expected from the metagenome (potential). In conclusion, these results highlight the need to perform metaproteomics when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in DMEM medium (PAN-Biotech) supplemented with FBS (10 %, PAN Biotech), sodium pyruvate (1 %) and penicillin/streptavidin (100 U/ml, PAN Biotech) at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. Cells were harvested at 80 % confluence with lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 60 mM Tris pH 8.0) complemented with protease (complete Mini EDTA-free tablets, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and 1 % N- ocetylglucoside (NOG, Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min on ice. DNA and RNA were removed from the cell lysate using benzonase (Merck) for 10 min on room temperature (RT). Cell debris was cleared by centrifugation (2,800 × g, 10 °C, 20 min). Proteins were precipitated from cell lysates using eight volumes of acetone (-20 °C) and one volume of methanol and incubated overnight at -20 °C. The resulting solution was centrifuged (2,800 × g, 10 °C, 20 min) to form a cell pellet. The pellet was washed twice with 80 % acetone (-21 °C) and resuspended in lysis buffer without NOG. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. 3 mg of extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h and digested with Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako Chemicals) for 3 h at RT. After adding four volumes of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega Corporation) overnight. To stop the digestion, 1 % TFA was added. peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and desalted on C18 StageTips. Samples were measured on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were chromatographically separated using 75 μm (ID), 20 cm packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptide sample was eluted over 213 min using a 7 % (0 min), 15 % (140 min) and 33 % (213 min) gradient of solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a washout procedure. MS1 spectra were acquired between 300-1,650 Thompson at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target of 3 × 106 within 25 ms. Using a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec, the top 12 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with an NCE of 27. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and a minimum AGC of 4.5 × 103 within 45 ms. The top 10 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). The protein sequence databases used for database search consisted of the complete Homo sapiens Uniprot database (93,799 sequences) and frequently observed contaminants (248 entries), as well as the mouse microbiome catalogue (~2.6 million proteins). Several processings were performed differing in the number of microbiome catalogue entries included, such as 1:0, 1:1, 1:2, 1:5, 1:10 and 1:20 H. sapiens:bacteria protein sequences and using a single- or two-step database search. A FDR of 1 % was required at the peptide and protein levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and full tryptic enzyme specificity was required. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modiﬁcations.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal microbiota plays a key role in shaping host homeostasis by regulating metabolism, immune responses and behavior. Its dysregulation has been associated with metabolic, immune and neuropsychiatric disorders and is accompanied by changes in bacterial metabolic regulation. Although proteomics is well suited for analysis of individual microbes, metaproteomics of fecal samples is challenging due to the physical structure of the sample, presence of contaminating host proteins and coexistence of hundreds of taxa. Furthermore, there is a lack of consensus regarding preparation of fecal samples, as well as downstream bioinformatic analyses following metaproteomics data acquisition. Here we assess sample preparation and data analysis strategies applied to mouse feces in a typical mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic experiment. We show that subtle changes in sample preparation protocols may influence interpretation of biological findings. Two-step database search strategies led to significant underestimation of false positive protein identifications. Unipept software provided the highest sensitivity and specificity in taxonomic annotation of the identified peptides of unknown origin. Comparison of matching metaproteome and metagenome data revealed a positive correlation between protein and gene abundances. Notably, nearly all functional categories of detected protein groups were differentially abundant in the metaproteome compared to what would be expected from the metagenome, highlighting the need to perform metaproteomics when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Metaproteomics, Taxonomy, Metagenome

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Maček
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen


