### Accession
PXD015462

### Title
Acute Pulmonary and Serologic Changes in the Proteomes of Bromine Exposed Mice (lungdata)

### Description
Bromine is the most common organohalide found in nature. This halogen is often produced from sea brines and salt lakes. The primary producers and consuming countries of Br2 include the USA, Israel, Jordon, and China. The production of many products including brominated fire retardants (BFR’s), in addition to drilling fluids, agricultural materials, and biocides for the treatment of water all require Br2. While accidental exposure has occurred during production processes and transportation, a major concern is that larger storehouses of Br2 are potential targets for terrorist groups throughout the World. Higher concentrations of Br2 are life threatening within as little as 30 minutes. In our present study, we utilized the common C57BL/6 mouse model to survey the lung and serologic proteomes following exposure to near lethal levels of Br2 for 30 minutes. We describe detailed acute changes found within the global proteomes of these animals, in addition to post-translationally modified brominated proteins longitudinally over three time points from 30min to 96hrs post exposure. Through the application of common proteomics workflows combined with systems biology analysis, we were able to identify robust and highly significant biomarkers and pathways associated with Br2 exposure that are new to this model.

### Sample Protocol
Lung Tissues: Proteomics analysis was carried out as previously referenced with minor changes ([16], under section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 and Protein IDs for GeLC). The protein fractions were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# PI23225), and ~20µg of protein per sample were then diluted to 35µL using NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (1x final conc., Invitrogen, Cat.#NP0007). Proteins were then reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10min prior to loading onto Novex NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0315BOX) and separated ~half way (15min at 200 constant V). The gels were stained overnight with Novex Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen, Cat.# LC6025). Following de-staining, each lane was partitioned into three separate MW fractions and equilibrated in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc). Each gel plug was then digested overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, Cat.# V5280) following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at 0.1µg/µL.

### Data Protocol
The XCalibur RAW files were collected in profile mode, centroided and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1. The data was searched using SEQUEST, which was set for two maximum missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 20ppm, trypsin digestion, variable modification C @ 57.0293, M @ 15.9949, and FWY @ 77.9105. Searches were performed with a species specific subset of the UniRef100 database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bromine/ lung/ sera/ gelc/ nlc-esi-ms2/ proteomics/ discovery/ systems biology

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James Mobley
University of Alabama at Birmingham


