### Accession
PXD003439

### Title
Proteome profiling of Bacillus subtilis stressed with the antibiotics tetracycline and chelocardin

### Description
Chelocardin is an atypical tetracycline and its mechanism of action is discussed controversially in literature. Therefore, we analyzed the bacterial response of Bacillus subtilis to chelocardin and as a control for classical tetracyclines to tetracycline by proteomic profiling. The induced marker proteins mirror the damage in the cell due the antibiotic stress. Proteomic profiling was carried out by 2D-PAGE and spot identification by nUPLC-ESI-MS/MS. The proteomic profile of chelocardin demonstrates a dual mechanism of action with protein biosynthesis inhibition and membrane damage.

### Sample Protocol
Bacillus subtilis 168 (trpC2) [Anagnostopoulos and Spizizen, 1961] was grown in Belitzky minimal medium (BMM) [Stülke et al., 1993] under steady agitation at 37 °C. Pulse-labeling of newly synthesized proteins was performed as described recently [Wenzel et al., 2011] to study the bacterial response to tetracycline and chelocardin. Briefly, after reaching an OD500 of 0.35, 5 ml aliquots of bacterial cultures were treated with 5.5 µg/ml tetracycline (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany), or with 3, 6, or 12 µg/ml chelocardin (purified according to Lukežič et al., 2013) for 10 minutes. One aliquot was left untreated as a control. Proteins newly synthesized were labeled radioactively during a 5 min pulse of 1.85 MBq L-[35S]methionine (Hartmann Analytic, Braunschweig, Germany). Subsequently, 100 µg/ml chloramphenicol, 1 mM non-radioactive L-methionine and 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, were added and the aliquots were transferred onto ice to stop protein biosynthesis. Cells were washed twice with 100 mM Tris/1 mM EDTA pH 7.5, then resuspended in 10 mM Tris buffer containing 1.4 mM PMSF and disrupted by ultrasonication using the VialTweeter system (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). The soluble protein fraction was separated from the cell debris by centrifugation. A Bradford assay (Roti NanoQuant, Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) was used to analyze the protein concentration of the samples. Protein biosynthesis rates were determined by measuring the incorporation rates of radioactive methionine with a scintillation counter after precipitation of proteins with 20% trichloroacetic acid. 2D-PAGE experiments were carried out as published recently [Wenzel et al., 2011]. In brief, 55 µg of labeled proteins (for analytical gels) or 300 µg of unlabeled proteins (for preparative gels) were loaded onto 24 cm immobilized pH gradient strips pH 4-7 (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). These protein amounts lead to a distinct separation for each approach. Isoelectric focusing and 2D-PAGE were performed with the Multiphor II and the Ettan DALTtwelve system (GE Healthcare), respectively. Gels were stained with 0.003% ruthenium(II)tris (4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenantrolin disulfonate) [Rabilloud et al., 2001] and protein profiles were imaged using a Typhoon Trio+ Variable Mode Imager (GE Healthcare) with an excitation wavelenght of 532 nm and a 610 nm emission filter. Analytical gels were dried on Whatman paper and exposed to Storage Phosphor Screens (GE Healthcare), which were scanned using the Typhoon Trio+ with a setting of 633 nm excitation wavelenght and a 390 nm emission filter. The Decodon Delta 2D image analysis software (Decodon, Greifswald, Germany) was used for quantitation and visualization as described previously [Bandow et al., 2008]. Each protein spot was quantified in relation to the total protein spots on the respective gel to normalize to the protein synthesis capacity. Marker proteins were defined as being induced at least two-fold in each of three independent biological replicates represented by one gel, respectively.  A Synapt G2-S high definition mass spectrometer equipped with a lock spray source for electrospray ionization and a ToF detector (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) were used to identify protein spots as described recently [Wenzel et al., 2013]. Protein spots were excised manually from preparative gels, destained with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 30% acetonitrile, and digested with 6.25 ng/µL or 12.5 ng/µL trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) depending on the protein abundance for 16 h at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water by ultrasonification for 15 min. In the case of low-intensity protein spots, the elution was performed twice and eluates were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. First, eluates were loaded onto a trap column (C18, pore size 100 Å, particle diameter 5 µm, inner diameter 180 µm, length 20 mm). After that they were eluted from an analytical column at 50 °C (C18, pore size 130 Å, particle diameter 1.7 µm, inner diameter 75 µm, length 150 mm) using a 0.1% formic acid to acetonitrile gradient (350 µL/min, linear gradient 2-5% acetonitrile in 2 min, 5-60% acetonitrile in 20 min) and directly subjected to mass spectrometry. Spectra were recorded in positive resolution mode over a mass range of 50 to 1800 m/z with 0.5 s/scan. The following parameters were used for the NanoLockSpray source: capillary voltage, 2.7 kV; sampling cone voltage, 30 V; source temperature, 70 °C; desolvation temperature, 150 °C; cone gas flow, 50 L/h; desolvation gas flow, 550 L/h. Leucine enkephaline serving as lock mass analyte was fed through the lock spray channel (lock mass capillary voltage, 3.2 V). The spectra were analyzed using MassLynx V4.1 SCN813 (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using the ProteinLynxGlobalServer 2.5.2 software (Waters). Mass spectra were processed using the following parameters: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS ToF resolution, automatic; lock mass window, 0.3 Da; low energy threshold, 50 counts; elevated energy threshold, 15 counts; elution time 5-28 min, intensity threshold, 500 counts. A non-redundant version of the B. subtilis strain 168 database (NCBI Bio Project accession PRJNA56675) containing 4180 protein entries (with added sequences of trypsin and human keratin) was used for protein identification using the following parameters: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimal fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimal fragment ion matches per protein, 5; minimal peptide matches per protein, 2; maximum protein mass, 250 kDa; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N and Q, oxidation M; false positive rate, 4%. Annotations of protein spots in the case of more than one identified protein were performed in regard to following parameters: PLGS score, peptide intensities, coverage, molecular weight, isoelectric point, and previous identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Classical tetracyclines targeting the protein biosynthesis machinery are commonly applied in human and veterinary medicine. The development and spread of resistance seriously compromise the successful treatment of bacterial infections. The atypical tetracycline chelocardin holds promise as it retains activity against tetracycline-resistant strains. It has been suggested that chelocardin targets the bacterial membrane, thus differing in mode of action from that of classical tetracyclines. We investigated the mechanism of action of chelocardin using global proteome analysis. The proteome profiles after sublethal chelocardin stress were compared to a reference compendium containing antibiotic response profiles of Bacillus subtilis. This approach revealed a concentration-dependent dual mechanism of action. At low concentrations, like classical tetracyclines, chelocardin induces the proteomic signature for peptidyl transferase inhibition demonstrating that protein biosynthesis inhibition is the dominant physiological challenge. At higher concentrations B. subtilis mainly responds to membrane stress indicating that at clinically relevant concentrations the membrane is the main antibiotic target of chelocardin. Studying the effects on the membrane in more detail, we found that chelocardin causes membrane depolarization but does not lead to formation of large pores. We conclude that at growth inhibiting doses chelocardin not only targets protein biosynthesis but also corrupts the integrity of the bacterial membrane. This dual mechanism of action might prove beneficial in slowing the development of new resistance mechanisms against this atypical tetracycline.

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis tetracycline chelocardin 2d-page proteomics

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Raum: ND 06/795, Tel.: +49 234 32 23102

### Submitter
Jennifer Stepanek

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Elisabeth Bandow
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Raum: ND 06/795, Tel.: +49 234 32 23102


