### Accession
PXD001768

### Title
Differential analysis of dystrophic dog muscle after MuStem cell therapy

### Description
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), the most common form of inherited neuromuscular disorder, is caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene leading to progressive muscle loss. Secondary changes in signaling pathways and energy metabolism are aggravating factors. Thus, for the evaluation of novel therapeutic approaches, it is essential to analyse the reversal of both primary and secondary abnormalities in treated muscle. MuStem cells constitute a new progenitor cell population proposed as a source of cells for a therapeutic strategy. When injected in Golden Retriever Muscular Dystrophy (GRMD) dogs, MuStem cells contribute to myofiber regeneration, satellite cell replenishment, and dystrophin expression. This cell therapy leads to muscle damage course limitation with an increased regeneration activity and an interstitial expansion restriction, and persisting stabilization of the dog's clinical status. In this study, we used isotope-coded protein labeling (ICPL) to compare the protein expression profiles of muscles coming from three different types of dogs: healthy, GRMD and GRMD after injection of MuStem cells. Based on the comparison of three biological replicates, these triplex ICPL experiments led to the identification of proteins differentially expressed after treatment. This study contributes to a better understanding of the mechanisms of action of MuStem cells.

### Sample Protocol
For each dog, three biopsies were cut in different regions of the muscle in order to reduce the heterogeneity between the samples, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until used. Muscles were then powdered in liquid nitrogen, and homogenized in a lysis buffer constituted of 1% Nonidet-P40, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 137 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA, 1% phosphatase inhibitors II, 0.5% protease inhibitors cocktail and benzonase using the TissueLyser system. Homogenates were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min at 4°and supernatants were centrifuged at 20000 g for 45 min at 4°C. Proteins were purified by TCA/acetone, 10:90 precipitation at -20°C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 15000 g for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and remaining acetone was removed by evaporation at RT. The protein pellet was then dissolved in 6 M guanidine HCl, pH 8.5. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. Total protein concentration was adjusted to 4.1 mg/mL in all samples. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced for 30 min at 60°C by adding 0.5 µL of 0.2 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine to 20 µL of each protein sample. Free cysteines were then alkylated for 30 min at RT in the dark with 0.5 µL of 0.4 mM iodoacetamide. Excess of iodoacetamide was quenched for 15 min at RT by adding 0.5 µL of 0.5 mM N-acetyl-cysteine. Lysine residues were labelled at RT for 2 h by adding respectively 3 µL of 12C-nicotinoyloxysuccinimide light (105.02 Da), heavy (111.04 Da) and super-heavy (115.04 Da) labels to the 3 samples. Labels were permutated for the three biological replicates. Remaining reagents were quenched for 20 min at RT using 2 µL of 6 mM hydroxylamine. Esters formed during the labelling procedure were hydrolysed by raising the pH to 12 with 1M NaOH for 20 min. The three labelled samples were then combined and the proteins were purified by acetone precipitation at -20°C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 15000 g for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and remaining acetone was removed by evaporation at RT. The protein pellet was then dissolved in 20 mM HEPES, pH 9 with a final protein concentration of 2.5 mg/mL. Labelled proteins (50 µg) were separated by SDS-PAGE using a 12% precast gel (NuPage, Invitrogen). The gel was fixed in 30% ethanol, 10% acetic acid for 15 min, washed in water for 15 min and stained with Coomassie blue using the EZBlue gel staining reagent (Sigma). The entire gel lane was manually cut into 20 pieces. The 20 bands excised from the gel were washed with H2O, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 50 mM NH4HCO3 in ACN/water, 1:1 and dehydrated with 100% ACN. In-gel digestion was performed overnight at 37°C with modified trypsin (Promega) at 4 ng/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Extraction of digestion peptides was further performed by sequential incubation in the following solutions: ACN/H2O/TFA, 70:30:0.1 then 100% ACN and ACN/ H2O /TFA, 70:30:0.1. Extracts were concentrated by evaporation in a SpeedVac to reach a final volume of 30 µL. Mobile A (H2O/formic acid, 100:0.1) and B (ACN/formic acid, 100:0.1) phases for HPLC were delivered by the Ultimate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Dionex, LC Packings). 10 µL of peptide mixture was loaded on a trapping precolumn (5 mm × 300 μm i.d., 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 μm) for 3 min in 2% buffer B at a flow rate of 25 µL/min. This step was followed by reverse-phase separations at a flow rate of 0.250 µL/min using an analytical column (15 cm × 300 μm i.d., 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 μm, Dionex, LC Packings). We ran a gradient ranging from 2% to 35% of B for the first 60 min, 35% to 60% of B from min 60-85, and 60% to 90% of B from min 85-105. Finally, the column was washed with 90% of B for 16 min, and with 2% of B for 19 min prior to loading of the next sample. The peptides were detected by directly eluting them from the HPLC column into the electrospray ion source of the mass spectrometer. An ESI voltage of 1.4 kV was applied to the HPLC buffer using the liquid junction provided by the nanoelectrospray ion source and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 200°C. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument was operated in its data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full survey scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (mass range 400–2000) were acquired in the OrbiTrap section of the instrument with a resolution of r = 60000 at m/z 400; ion injection times are calculated for each spectrum to allow for accumulation of 106 ions in the OrbiTrap. The 10 most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity above 2000 counts and a charge state ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 30 ms. Peaks selected for fragmentation were automatically put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in RAW file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. The data analysis was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot (Mascot server v2.2.07; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engines for peptide and protein identification. For each ICPL triplex experiment, the 20 RAW files corresponding to the 20 excised bands were submitted together to database search. MS/MS spectra were compared to the Canis Familiaris Uniprot Reference Proteome database (UP000002254, August 2014, 25440 sequences, 14669653 residues). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. As the modification of lysine residues by ICPL labelling prevents the cleavage of lysine residues by trypsine, arginine C (which only cleaves the arginine residues) was selected as enzyme with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine, variable light, heavy and super-heavy ICPL labels of lysine and N-terminus of proteins and variable acetylation of lysine and N-terminus of proteins. Identified peptides were filtered based he Mascot score to obtain a false discovery rate of 5%. Only rank 1 peptides were considered. In the case of peptides shared by different proteins, proteins were automatically grouped. The proteins within a group are ranked according to their protein score. The protein reported in the protein table corresponds to the top score protein. Only unique peptides were considered by ProteomeDiscoverer for relative quantification. Single peak quantification channels were used and missing quantification values were automatically replaced by minimum intensity by ProteomeDiscoverer. The list of quantified peptides was then exported in Excel. Peptide ratios were transformed in log2. In the case of a peptide quantified several times or detected under different modified forms, the median peptide ratio was used. Peptide ratios were normalized by quantile-quantile normalization. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of the corresponding peptide ratios. Proteins quantified with only one peptide and proteins quantified in only one triplex experiment were rejected. For proteins quantified in two triplex experiments at least, a median ratio was calculated. A cut-off corresponding to a fold change of 1.5 was applied to consider a protein was considered as differentially expressed. The LIMMA statistic test was then applied.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic profiling plays a decisive role in the elucidation of molecular signatures representative of a specific clinical context. MuStem cell based therapy represents a promising approach for clinical applications to cure Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). To expand our previous studies collected in the clinically relevant DMD animal model, we decided to investigate the skeletal muscle proteome 4 months after systemic delivery of allogenic MuStem cells. Quantitative proteomics with isotope-coded protein labeling was used to compile quantitative changes in the protein expression profiles of muscle in transplanted Golden Retriever muscular dystrophy (GRMD) dogs as compared to Golden Retriever muscular dystrophy dogs. A total of 492 proteins were quantified, including 25 that were overrepresented and 46 that were underrepresented after MuStem cell transplantation. Interestingly, this study demonstrates that somatic stem cell therapy impacts on the structural integrity of the muscle fascicle by acting on fibers and its connections with the extracellular matrix. We also show that cell infusion promotes protective mechanisms against oxidative stress and favors the initial phase of muscle repair. This study allows us to identify putative candidates for tissue markers that might be of great value in objectively exploring the clinical benefits resulting from our cell-based therapy for DMD. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001768 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001768).

### Keywords
Cell therapy, Icpl, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Golden retriever muscular dog, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Proteomics Core Facilities Biogenouest IRSET Inserm U1085 France

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Proteomics Core Facilities Biogenouest IRSET Inserm U1085 France


