### Accession
PXD016386

### Title
Proteome wide measurements of protein half-lives in Mycoplasma pneumoniae

### Description
We obtained proteome wide measurements of protein half-lives in M. pneumoniae by performing pulse-chase experiments following SILAC methods. We estimated degradation rates of individual proteins by measuring the increase in light protein compared to heavy protein labeling along the growth curve.

### Sample Protocol
Protein turnover rates of M. pneumoniae proteins were measured by pulse-chase experiments following the analysis method for SILAC as described in (Pratt et al. 2002) (see also (Schwanhäusser et al. 2011; Christiano et al. 2014)). Briefly, M. pneumoniae was passaged several times in Hayflick medium supplemented with 20 mM heavy (Lys-8, 13C(6)15N(2)) L-lysine until reaching a labeling efficiency of 86%. Then, labeled cells were washed three times with Hayflick before being transferred in duplicate in unlabeled medium. After 0.5, 3h, 6h, 8h, 12h, 18h, 24h, 30h and 36h of culture, cells were washed three times in PBSx1 and harvested by centrifugation. For the longer time points, medium was changed every 12h. Samples before cell inoculation into unlabeled medium (0h) were also taken as a reference. Finally, the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (7M Urea, 0.2 M NH4HCO3 or 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and protein concentration determined using the Pierce TM BCA Protein Assay Kit before mass spectrometry analysis. Protein half-lives were estimated from two to four biological replicates.   Samples lysed with Urea or SDS were digested with trypsin in solution or using the filter-aided protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al. 2009), respectively. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher  Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides (2µg) were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud (Chiva et al., 2018) has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.  Chiva, C., Olivella, R., Borràs, E., Espadas, G., Pastor, O., Solé, A., and Sabidó, E. (2018). QCloud: A cloud-based quality control system for mass spectrometry-based proteomics laboratories. PLoS One 13, e0189209. Christiano, Romain, Nagarjuna Nagaraj, Florian Fröhlich, and Tobias C. Walther. 2014. “Global Proteome Turnover Analyses of the Yeasts S. Cerevisiae and S. Pombe.” Cell Reports 9 (5): 1959–65. Pratt, Julie M., June Petty, Isabel Riba-Garcia, Duncan H. L. Robertson, Simon J. Gaskell, Stephen G. Oliver, and Robert J. Beynon. 2002. “Dynamics of Protein Turnover, a Missing Dimension in Proteomics.” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics: MCP 1 (8): 579–91. Schwanhäusser, Björn, Dorothea Busse, Na Li, Gunnar Dittmar, Johannes Schuchhardt, Jana Wolf, Wei Chen, and Matthias Selbach. 2011. “Global Quantification of Mammalian Gene Expression Control.” Nature 473 (7347): 337–42. Wiśniewski, Jacek R., Alexandre Zougman, Nagarjuna Nagaraj, and Matthias Mann. 2009. “Universal Sample Preparation Method for Proteome Analysis.” Nature Methods 6 (5): 359–62.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.5 Matrix Science (Perkins et al., 1999). The data were searched against a home-made database consisting on a list of common contaminants and all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs >19aa (87,051 entries). For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and Lys-8 (13C(6)15N(2)) were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the Precursor ions quantifier node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) and protein ratios were calculated as the mean of peptide group ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation is a crucial cellular process in all-living systems. Here, using Mycoplasma pneumoniae as a model organism, we defined the minimal protein degradation machinery required to maintain proteome homeostasis. Then, we conditionally depleted the two essential ATP-dependent proteases. Whereas depletion of Lon results in increased protein aggregation and decreased heat tolerance, FtsH depletion induces cell membrane damage, suggesting a role in quality control of membrane proteins. An integrative comparative study combining shotgun proteomics and RNA-seq revealed 62 and 34 candidate substrates, respectively. Cellular localization of substrates and epistasis studies supports separate functions for Lon and FtsH. Protein half-life measurements also suggest a role for Lon-modulated protein decay. Lon plays a key role in protein quality control, degrading misfolded proteins and those not assembled into functional complexes. We propose that regulating complex assembly and degradation of isolated proteins is a mechanism that coordinates important cellular processes like cell division. Finally, by considering the entire set of proteases and chaperones, we provide a fully integrated view of how a minimal cell regulates protein folding and degradation.

### Keywords
Protein half-life, Degradation rates, Silac

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Marc Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain


