### Accession
PXD037985

### Title
Wide Window Acquisition and AI-based data analysis to reach deep proteome coverage for a wide sample range, including single cell proteomic inputs – Co-immunoprecipitation samples

### Description
A comprehensive proteome map is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Although great improvements in sample preparation, instrumentation and data analysis already yielded impressive results, current studies suffer from a limited proteomic depth and dynamic range therefore lacking low abundant or highly hydrophobic proteins. Here, we combine and benchmark advanced micro pillar array columns (µPAC™) operated at nanoflow with Wide Window Acquisition (WWA) and the AI-based CHIMERYS™ search engine for data analysis to maximize chromatographic separation power, sensitivity and proteome coverage. Using this optimized workflow on immunoprecipitation samples of Smarca5/SNF2H, we found 32 additional interaction partners compared to the original workflow utilizing a packed bed column. These additional interaction partners include previously described interaction partners of Smarca5 like Baz2b as well as undescribed interactors including Arid1a, which is also involved in chromatin remodeling and has been described as key player in neurodevelopmental and malignant disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse ES cells were grown on 15 cm plates until confluency. Cells were harvested and washed with 1 × PBS. Then, cells were resuspended in buffer1 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2, Protease inhibitors (Roche)) and incubated for 20 min at 4°C. After centrifugation, cells were resuspended in buffer2 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2, Protease inhibitors (Roche), 0.5 % IGEPAL CA-630, 10% glycerol) and incubated for 10 min at 4°C. After this, cells were again centrifuged and nuclei were resuspended in buffer3 (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.3, 200 mM KCl, 3.2 mM MgCl2, 0,25% Triton, 0.25% NP-40, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM DDT, Protease inhibitors (Roche)). 4 µl benzonase was added to the nuclei and the digest was incubated for 1 hour at 4°C. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation. For the Smarca5 IP, WT and Smarca5-Flag cells were added to magnetic anti FLAG M2 beads and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. Beads were subsequently washed four times with buffer4 (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.3, 200 mM KCl, 3.2 mM MgCl2, 0,25% Triton, 0.25% NP-40, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM DDT) and four times with Tris buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl).  Frozen magnetic beads were thawed, 20 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Merck, Sigma-Aldrich, 09830-1KG) as well as 600 ng of LysC (Wako Chemicals, 129-02541) added and incubated for 4h at 37°C at 1,200 rpm shaking. Supernatant was aspirated, transferred and tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP, Merck, Sigma-Aldrich, 646547-10×1ML) added up to 1 mM and cysteine reduction performed for 30 min at 60°C. Reversible blockage of cysteines was performed with S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Merck, Sigma-Aldrich, 64306-1ML) at 4 mM for 30 min at room temperature. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight with 600 ng trypsin (Promega, V5280) at 37°C without shaking. Digestion was quenched by addition of 10 μL 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Scientific, VC296817). The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Jail-Break 1.0 adaptor insert as the spray emitter (Phoenix S&T) as well as a FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap™ C18, 5 mm × 300 μm i.d., 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as the mobile phase. 10 min after sample injection, the trapping column was switched in line with the analytical column and peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto the analytical column using a flow rate of 230 nl/min and a binary 3 h gradient of 220 min. The analytical column was either a classical 50 cm packed bed column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap™ C18, 500 mm × 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å) or a prototype 110 cm µPAC™ GEN2 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, micropillar array column, C18) The gradient started with mobile phases of 98% A (water:formic acid, 99.9:0.1 v/v) and 2% B (water:acetonitrile:formic acid, 19.92:80:0.08 v/v/v), increasing to 35% B over the next 120 min, followed by a gradient over 5 min to 95% B, held for 5 min and decreasing over 2 min back to gradient 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C. The trapping column was switched out of line from the analytical column 3 min after reaching 2% B again, and equilibration at 2% B was continued until the total run time of 165 min was reached. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with the FAIMS Pro using three different compensation voltages (CVs) at -45, -60 and -75 in an alternating fashion switching between CVs every 0.9s. A full scan (m/z range of 350–1,200, MS1 resolution of 60,000, normalized AGC Target of 100%) was followed by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions until the cycle time of 0.9s was reached. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a normalized collision energy of 30%, an isolation width of 1.0 m/z, a resolution of 30,000 and a normalized AGC target of 200%. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8 and >8) were placed on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 s. Additionally, the intensity threshold was set to a minimum intensity of 2.5 × 10^4.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, RAW files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (v.3.0.0.757, Thermo Scientific). All the created MS/MS spectra were searched either using MSAmanda v.2.014,15 or CHIMERYS™ (MSAID GmbH, Germany). For the processing step, the RAW files were searched against the mouse Uniprot reference database (2022-03-04; 21,962 sequences and 11,728,099 residues) and an in-house contaminant database (PD-Contaminants_IGGs_v17_tagsremoved; 344 sequences and 142,046 residues). The following search parameters were used for MS Amanda 2.0: the peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 10 ppm; the maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2; and the result was filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on the protein level using the Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Beta-methylthiolation on cysteines was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. For CHIMERYS™ the following search parameters were used: as prediction model inferys_2.1_fragmentation was chosen using trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Peptide length was restricted to 7-30 amino acids, a maximum of three modifications per peptide and a charge state of 2-4. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 20ppm. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was predefined by the software as fixed modification and could not be unselected even though the samples had been treated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) to reversibly sulfenylate cysteine introducing beta-methylthiolation. However, since only around 8% of the peptides identified with MS Amanda 2.0 contained cysteines, this incorrect parameter was considered negligible in the course of this analysis, while using the correct fixed modification would have surely resulted in even better results for all CHIMERYS™ searches. Peptide areas were quantified using IMP-apQuant28 using only PSM of high confidence level, with a minimum sequence length of 7 and a minimum score of 150 for MS Amanda 2.0 and -99 for the CHIMERYS™ Ion Coefficient and match between runs and RT correction were disabled. Retention time tolerance was set to 0.5, missing peaks to 2 and FWHM interpolation was enabled, and number of checked peaks set to 5. The results were filtered to 1% FDR on the protein level using the Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteomic analysis is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Despite tremendous progress in proteomics, current studies still suffer from limited proteomic coverage and dynamic range. Here, we utilize micropillar array columns (&#xb5;PACs) together with wide-window acquisition and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine to achieve excellent proteomic comprehensiveness for bulk proteomics, affinity purification mass spectrometry and single cell proteomics. Our data show that &#xb5;PACs identify &#x2264;50% more peptides and &#x2264;24% more proteins, while offering improved throughput, which is critical for large (clinical) proteomics studies. Combining wide precursor isolation widths of m/z 4-12 with the CHIMERYS search engine identified +51-74% and +59-150% more proteins and peptides, respectively, for single cell, co-immunoprecipitation, and multi-species samples over a conventional workflow at well-controlled false discovery rates. The workflow further offers excellent precision, with CVs &lt;7% for low input bulk samples, and accuracy, with deviations &lt;10% from expected fold changes for regular abundance two-proteome mixes. Compared to a conventional workflow, our entire optimized platform discovered 92% more potential interactors in a protein-protein interaction study on the chromatin remodeler Smarca5/Snf2h. These include previously described Smarca5 binding partners and undescribed ones including Arid1a, another chromatin remodeler with key roles in neurodevelopmental and malignant disorders.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Co-immunoprecipitation, Orbitrap exploris 480, Micropillar array chromatography, Trap-and-elute, Smarca5, Protein-protein interactions, Ultimate3000 rslcnano

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


