### Accession
PXD020011

### Title
Biogenesis of HLA ligand presentation in immune cells upon activation reveals changes in peptide length preference

### Description
Induction of an effective tumor immunity is a complex process that includes the appropriate presentation of the tumor antigens, activation of specific T cells, and the elimination of malignant cells. Potent and efficient T cell activation is dependent on multiple factors, such as timely expression of co-stimulatory molecules, the differentiation state of professional antigen presenting cells (e.g. dendritic cells; DCs), the functionality of the antigen processing and presentation machinery (APPM), and the repertoire of HLA class I and II-bound peptides (termed immunopeptidome) presented to T cells. So far, how molecular perturbations underlying DCs maturation and differentiation affect the in vivo cross-presented HLA class I and II immunopeptidomes is largely unknown. Yet, this knowledge is crucial for further development of DC-based immunotherapy approaches. We applied a state-of-the-art sensitive MS-based immunopeptidomics approach to characterize the naturally presented HLA-I and -II immunopeptidomes eluted from autologous immune cells having distinct functional and biological states including CD14+ monocytes, immature DC (ImmDC) and mature DC (MaDC) monocyte-derived DCs and naive or activated T and B cells. We revealed a presentation of significantly longer HLA peptides upon activation that is HLA allotype specific. This was apparent in the self-peptidome upon cell activation and in the context of presentation of exogenously loaded antigens. Importantly, a similar trend was also present in a large collection of immunogenic HLA-I epitopes from pathogens, suggesting that peptide length is an important feature with potential implications on the rational design of anti-cancer vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
For high-throughput HLA-I and -II immunoaffinity purification, we used a previously described protocol from our group.  We used the 96-well single-use micro-plate with glass fiber and 10 µm polypropylene membranes. Cell lysis was performed with PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Mixture, 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside at 4 °C for 1 h. Lysis buffer was added to the cells at a concentration of 1 ml per 5e6 cells. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge at 4 °C at 14,200 rpm for 30 min. Anti-pan HLA-I (HB95) and HLA-II (HB145) antibodies cross-linked to protein-A sepharose 4B beads beads were loaded on their respective plates at a final bead volume of 100 ul. The lysates were loaded by gravity first through the HLA-I affinity plate and then through the HLA-II affinity plate at 4 °C. The plates were washed separately using the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor four times with 2 ml of 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, four times with 2 ml of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and again four times with 2 ml of 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, the beads were washed twice with 2 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Two Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plates were required for the purification and concentration of HLA-I and HLA-II peptides. Each C18 plate was handled separately. Each affinity plate was stacked on top of a C18 plate and the HLA complexes including the peptides were eluted with 500 µl of 1% TFA. The C18 wells were washed with 2 ml of 0.1% TFA. Thereafter, the HLA peptides were eluted with 500 µl of 32% acetonitrile (ACN)) in 0.1% TFA. The recovered HLA-I and -II peptide samples were transferred separately into eppendorf tubes, dried using vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C.  Cell pellets of approximately 1e6 cells were resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 8 M Urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. The cell lysates were sonicated in the Bioruptor instrument for 15 cycles, each cycle at maximum mA for 30 s at 4 °C. Subsequently, centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 30 min separated the soluble from the insoluble protein fractions. The soluble fraction was collected and the protein concentration of the lysates was determined by a Bradford protein assay. Proteins were reduced with a final concentration of 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by alkylation with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 60 min in the dark. After the alkylation step, the digestion was carried out with a mixture of endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. The first step consists of endoproteinase Lys-C digestion for 4 h at 37 °C with a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w). Subsequently, the samples were diluted 8 times with 50 mM AMBIC to a Urea concentration of 1 M. The second step of digestion was performed with Trypsin overnight at 37 °C with a substrate to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w). After digestion, the samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) and desalted on C18 spin columns.  HLA-I and HLA-II peptide samples were re-suspended in 9 ul of 0.1% FA and 2/3 of the sample volume were placed in the UHPLC autosampler. All samples were acquired using the nanoflow UHPLC Easy nLC 1200 coupled online to a Q Exactive HF or a HFX Orbitrap mass spectrometers with a nanoelectrospray ion source. We packed the uncoated PicoTip 8 µm tip opening with 75 µm i.d. 45 cm long analytical columns with ReproSil-Pur C18. Mounted analytical columns were kept at 50 °C using a column oven.  For proteomics, data-dependent “top15” method was used. The mass spectrometer scan range was set to 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (200 m/z) and the mass spectrometer scan range was set to 300 to 800 m/z. For MS/MS, AGC target values of 1e5 were used with a maximum injection time 25 ms at set resolution of 15,000 (200 m/z). The peptide match option was disabled. In case of unassigned precursor ion charge states or a charge state of one, no fragmentation was performed and the peptide match option was set to “preferred.” The dynamic exclusion of precursor ions from further selection was set for 20 s.  For immunopeptidomics, data was acquired with data-dependent “top10” method, which isolates within a 1.2 m/z window the ten most abundant precursor ions and fragments them by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 27%. The mass spectrometer scan range was set to 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (200 m/z) and the AGC target value of 3e6 ions was set. For MS/MS, AGC target values of 1e5 were used with a maximum injection time of 175 ms. For HLA-I peptidomics, in case of assigned precursor ion charge states of four and above, no fragmentation was performed. For HLA-II peptidomics, in case of assigned precursor ion charge states of one, and from six and above, no fragmentation was performed.

### Data Protocol
We employed the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.5.1 (31) to search the peak lists against the UniProt databases (Human 42,148 entries, March 2017) and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants. Methionine oxidation (15.99491 Da) was set as a variable modification. For proteomics, a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) was used. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. A peptide spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and no protein FDR were set for peptidomics analyses, whereas for proteomic analyses also a protein FDR of 0.01 was set. For experiments with DCs loaded with synthetic peptides, a PSM FDR of 0.05 was set and Serine/Threonine phosphorylation (79.96633 Da) was added as a variable modification due to the loading of a phosphorylated long synthetic peptide. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific for immunopeptidomics, whereas C-terminal specificity for K and R, and maximum 3 miscleavages were chosen for analysis of proteomics samples. Possible sequence matches were restricted to 8 to 25 amino acids (a.a.) for immunopeptidomics and proteomics while to 8 to 30 a.a. for the experiments with DCs loaded with synthetic peptides. A maximum peptides mass of 4600 Da for proteomics and 3000 Da for immunopeptidomics. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. We enabled the “match between runs” option, which allows matching of identifications across different replicates in a time window of 0.5 min and an initial alignment time window of 20 min between datasets of the same donor (class I and class II separately). For proteomic analysis, “match between runs” module was enabled between all samples of the same donor and label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled in the MaxQuant environment (32).

### Publication Abstract
Induction of an effective tumor immunity is a complex process that includes the appropriate presentation of the tumor antigens, activation of specific T cells, and the elimination of malignant cells. Potent and efficient T cell activation is dependent on multiple factors, such as timely expression of co-stimulatory molecules, the differentiation state of professional antigen presenting cells (e.g., dendritic cells; DCs), the functionality of the antigen processing and presentation machinery (APPM), and the repertoire of HLA class I and II-bound peptides (termed immunopeptidome) presented to T cells. So far, how molecular perturbations underlying DCs maturation and differentiation affect the <i>in vivo</i> cross-presented HLA class I and II immunopeptidomes is largely unknown. Yet, this knowledge is crucial for further development of DC-based immunotherapy approaches. We applied a state-of-the-art sensitive MS-based immunopeptidomics approach to characterize the naturally presented HLA-I and -II immunopeptidomes eluted from autologous immune cells having distinct functional and biological states including CD14<sup>+</sup> monocytes, immature DC (ImmDC) and mature DC (MaDC) monocyte-derived DCs and naive or activated T and B cells. We revealed a presentation of significantly longer HLA peptides upon activation that is HLA allotype specific. This was apparent in the self-peptidome upon cell activation and in the context of presentation of exogenously loaded antigens, suggesting that peptide length is an important feature with potential implications on the rational design of anti-cancer vaccines.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Proteomics, Immune cells

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1005 Lausanne

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Centre de recherche Agora Rue du Bugnon 25A CH-1005 Lausanne


