### Accession
PXD014352

### Title
Tissue Proteome Profiling of Ovarian cancer.

### Description
Ovarian cancer is one of the leading causes of death from cancer in females, worldwide. An early diagnosis of ovarian carcinoma is likely to improve clinical outcome of patients in terms of reduced morbidity and mortality. The objective of our project is the proteomic analysis of ovarian malignant and non-malignant tissue samples to find potential biomarkers of disease diagnosis and prognosis that can be assessed non-invasively through patient plasma/serum screening. In this project, we have used a methodical approach involving 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis in conjunction with MALDI-TOF MS analysis followed by immunological validation of the selected markers by western blotting and ELISA for identification of biomarkers of ovarian cancer. The associated research paper is in preparation.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood samples (3-4mL) from patients with malignant (OC group) and non-malignant ovarian neoplasms (control subjects) were collected in EDTA vacutainer following the approved guidelines. Plasma was separated after centrifugation at 4 °C and stored at -80°C until used for analysis. Resected ovarian biopsies taken within half an hour of surgery homogenized with liquid nitrogen in lysis buffer, centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C after vigorous shaking and the resulting supernatant stored at -80 °C until further use. 2D-gel electrophoresis was performed with 1st dimension pH 3-10 and 2nd dimension with 12% polyacrylamide SDS gels. After electrophoresis, the gels were stained with colloidal coomassie G-250 dye and scanned using Syngene gel documentation system and the individual protein spots were analyzed for pI and molecular weight, followed by quantification and matching of the spots using ImageMaster 2D Platinum v7.0 (GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences) software. Differentially represented 2DE spots were excised from 2D gels and in gel tryptic digestion performed by sequencing grade trypsin. Resulting peptides after mixing with freshly prepared matrix solution (α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 0.1 % triflouroacetic acid/acetonitrile) and analyzed using MALDI-TOF MS (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). A 337 nm nitrogen laser and a 2 GHz digitizer were used at a laser frequency and an intensity of 100 Hz and 60 % - 70 %, respectively. Spectra were attained in linear positive ion mode with 25 kV accelerating voltage, 6 kV lens potential and mass to charge (m/z) range of 500-5000. Delayed extraction was applied at 100 ns, the detector gain and the sample rate were set to 7.5 and 0.5 GS/s, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained after mass spectrometry was analyzed with the help of MASCOT Wizard 1.1.2 (http://www.matrixscience.com/wizard.html) from Matrix Science (www.matrixscience.com) and MS-fit program from Protein Prospector (www.prospector.ucsf.edu). The parameters set for analysis were; trypsin as the enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, missed cleavage up to one and the identified proteins with MOWSE score >60 were considered as acceptable. The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software ver.20. Paired t-test was applied on the multiple spots intensities of the same protein obtained from 2D-gel images of at least 3 independent experiment sets and false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach. PMF score for identified proteins was calculated with cut off value ˃79. The identified proteins were categorized according to their GO (www.geneontology.com) using Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) software to have an overview of the molecular functions and biological processes. Network construction analyses and canonical pathways associated with data proteins were elucidated by QIAGEN's Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis software (IPA®, QIAGEN Redwood City) involving annotations of molecular and cellular functions. Proteins with high fold-changes (≥2.5) were considered for validation studies by western blot (WB) and enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISA). WB was performed in duplicates with polyclonal primary antibodies [tubulin beta 2C chain, TUBB2C, PA5-25050, Invitrogen] and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (A6154, Sigma Aldrich). The immunoblot prepared using TMB (3,3’, 5,5’ tetramethyl benzidine, Sigma) peroxidase substrate system. Quantitative validation of the candidate marker protein, tubulin beta 2C chain, in the plasma of population cohort performed in pre-coated ELISA plates against tubulin beta 2C chain [MyBioSource, San Diego, CA USA (Catalogue No. MBS9336369)] in duplicates. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) along with unpaired Student's t-test was used for comparative analysis of the antibody titer amongst tumor and benign cohorts with significance level <0.05. To assess the performance of marker protein (tubulin beta 2C chain) in distinguishing malignant disease from non-malignant conditions, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was also formed.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal among female reproductive system malignancies. Depending upon the stage at presentation, the five year survival ratio varies from &#x223c;92 to &#x223c;30%. The role of biomarkers in early cancer diagnosis, including OC, is well understood. In our previous study, through an initial screening, we have analyzed eleven proteins that exhibited differential expression in OC using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2D-GE) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometric (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis. In continuation of our previous study, the present work describes analysis of twenty more proteins that showed aberrant expression in OC. Among these, six showed consistent significant deregulation in the OC false discovery rate [FDR &#x2264; 0.05]. Upon MS analysis, they were identified as vimentin, tubulin beta 2C chain, tubulin alpha 1C chain, actin cytoplasmic 2, apolipoprotein A-I, and collagen alpha 2(VI) chain [peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) score &#x2265; 79]. One of the differentially regulated proteins, tubulin beta 2C chain, was found to be significantly (fold change, 2.5) enhanced in OC. Verification by western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) demonstrated that the tubulin beta 2C chain may serve as a valuable marker for OC (ANOVA <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001). The assessment of the likely association of TBB2C with OC in a larger population will not only help in developing clinically useful biomarkers in the future but also improve our understanding of the progression of OC disease.

### Keywords
2d-page, Proteome profiling, Mass spectrometry, Western blotting, Ovarian cancer, Elisa

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan
Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar, School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan

### Submitter
Muhammad Akhtar

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar
Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar, School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan


