### Accession
PXD004010

### Title
JUMPg: an Integrative Proteogenomics Pipeline Identifying Unannotated Proteins in Human Brain and Cancer Cells

### Description
Proteogenomics is an emerging approach to improve gene annotation and interpretation of proteomics data. Here we present JUMPg, an integrative proteogenomics pipeline including customized database construction, tag-based database search, peptide-spectrum match filtering, and data visualization. JUMPg creates multiple databases of DNA polymorphisms, mutations, splice junctions, partially trypticity, as well as protein fragments translated from the whole transcriptome in all six frames after RNA-seq de novo assembly. We use a multistage strategy to search these databases sequentially, in which the performance is optimized by re-searching only unmatched high quality spectra, and re-using amino acid tags generated by the JUMP search engine. The identified peptides/proteins are displayed with gene loci using the UCSC genome browser. The JUMPg is applied to process a label-free mass spectrometry dataset of Alzheimer’s disease postmortem brain, uncovering 496 new peptides of amino acid substitutions, alternative splicing, frame shift, and “non-coding gene” translation. The novel protein PNMA6BL specifically expressed in the brain is highlighted. We also tested JUMPg to analyze a stable-isotope labeled dataset of multiple myeloma cells, revealing 991 sample-specific peptides that include protein sequences in the immunoglobulin light chain variable region. Thus, the JUMPg program is an effective proteogenomics tool for multi-omics data integration.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsinized brain cell lysate was fractionated into 10 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. The resolved peptides in ten fractions were further separated  on a  reverse phase column (100 um × 150 cm, 2.7-μm HALO C18 resin) during a 540-min gradient of 15% to 65% solvent B (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B, 0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile; flow rate of 300 nl/min). The data was acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer operated (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Proteogenomics analysis was performed by JUMPg in three stages. i) MS data were searched against a database combining mutations and splice junction peptides as well as UniProt human proteins (downloaded in February 2015) with fully tryptic restriction. The resulting PSMs in the 1st stage were filtered to 1% unique protein FDR. ii) Partially tryptic search was carried out with the unmatched high quality spectra against proteins accepted during the 1st stage. iii) The remaining spectra were matched to RNA-seq 6FT database, and filtered to 0% FDR (±0.156%). Common parameters include ±6 ppm for precursor ion mass tolerance, dynamic mass shift for oxidized Met (+15.9949 Da), and the consideration of a, b, and y ions.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics is an emerging approach to improve gene annotation and interpretation of proteomics data. Here we present JUMPg, an integrative proteogenomics pipeline including customized database construction, tag-based database search, peptide-spectrum match filtering, and data visualization. JUMPg creates multiple databases of DNA polymorphisms, mutations, splice junctions, partially trypticity, as well as protein fragments translated from the whole transcriptome in all six frames upon RNA-seq de novo assembly. We use a multistage strategy to search these databases sequentially, in which the performance is optimized by re-searching only unmatched high-quality spectra and reusing amino acid tags generated by the JUMP search engine. The identified peptides/proteins are displayed with gene loci using the UCSC genome browser. Then, the JUMPg program is applied to process a label-free mass spectrometry data set of Alzheimer's disease postmortem brain, uncovering 496 new peptides of amino acid substitutions, alternative splicing, frame shift, and "non-coding gene" translation. The novel protein PNMA6BL specifically expressed in the brain is highlighted. We also tested JUMPg to analyze a stable-isotope labeled data set of multiple myeloma cells, revealing 991 sample-specific peptides that include protein sequences in the immunoglobulin light chain variable region. Thus, the JUMPg program is an effective proteogenomics tool for multiomics data integration.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Genomics, Rna-seq, Proteomics, Database search, Spectrum quality control, Mass spectrometry, Multistage analysis

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


