### Accession
PXD016416

### Title
Comparative gene expression profiling of mutants of Amycolatopsis mediterranei S699

### Description
The project aims to unveil the mechanism of rifamycin and its analog production by wild type A. mediterranei S699 and mutant A. mediterranei DCO#34 known to produce 24-desmethylrifamycin B at two time points. Stain that donot produce this molecule is taken as the negative control in the study.

### Sample Protocol
Master -mix of cell suspension (100mg/ml) was prepared in cell lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCL buffer pH-8, 4% SDS, 5mM DTT and protease inhibitor tablets (ThermoFisher, Scientific) and aliquot equally in tubes. For chemical lysis cell suspension was alternatively incubated at 95°C and -80°C freezer for 15 min each.Whole content was bead berated up to 50 cycles using FastPrep (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at maximum speed (6m/s) and maximum cycle duration (45s) inside the cold room.Cell lysate obtained from different methods was centrifuged at 16000g for 20min at 4C. Supernatant with soluble protein was transferred in fresh tubes and recovery was checked using SDS-PAGE. For purification purpose protein from cell lysate was precipitated using chilled acetone (4:1) with 100 mM NaCl. In order to remove the contamination of detergent, salt, lipid and nucleic acids from extracted proteins lysate was precipitated and purified using acetone/TCA method. For digestion ProteoExtract TM All-in-OneTrypsin Digest Kit (Thermo Scientific) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions. For in gel digestion extracted protein sample was separated using precast SDS-polyacrylamide gradient gel (4-20%) gradient gel (Biored). Sample analysis was carried out using an externally calibrated Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos nLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher) equipped with UltiMate 3000RSLC nano LCsystem. Both trap column and analytical column have C18-AQ packaging. Separation will be carried out using Easy nanoLC-II (Thermo-Scientific) with a continuous, vented column configuration. During the chromatographic separation, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific) version 2.0) software package and Mascot search nodes using tremble fasta database and the Percolator peptide validator. Database search was performed against Uniprot_Amycolatopsis_mediterranei_S699 &amp; Uniprot_Amycolatopsis_mediterranei_U32.

### Publication Abstract
Rifamycin B is produced by Amycolatopsis mediterranei S699 as a secondary metabolite. Its semi-synthetic derivatives have been used for curing tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. But the emergence of rifampicin-resistant strains required analogs of rifamycin B to be developed by rifamycin biosynthetic gene cluster manipulation. In 2014 genetic engineering of the rifamycin polyketide synthase gene cluster in S699 led to a mutant, A. mediterranei DCO#34, that produced 24-desmethylrifamycin B. Unfortunately, the productivity was strongly reduced to 20&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> as compared to 50&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> of rifamycin B. To understand the mechanisms leading to reduced productivity and rifamycin biosynthesis by A. mediterranei S699 during the early and late growth phase we performed a proteome study for wild type strain S699, mutant DCO#34, and the non-producer strain SCO2-2. Proteins identification and relative label-free quantification were performed by nLC-MS/MS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016416. Also, in-silico protein-protein interaction approach was used to determine the relationship between different structural and regulatory proteins involved in rifamycin biosynthesis. Our studies revealed RifA, RifK, RifL, Rif-Orf19 as the major regulatory hubs. Relative abundance expression values revealed that genes encoding RifC-RifI and the transporter RifP, down-regulated in DCO#34 and genes encoding RifR, RifZ, other regulatory proteins up-regulated. SIGNIFICANCE: The study is designed mainly to understand the underlying mechanisms of rifamycin biosynthesis in Amycolatopsis mediterranei. This resulted in the identification of regulatory hubs which play a crucial role in regulating secondary metabolism. It elucidates the complex mechanism of secondary metabolite biosynthesis and their conversion and extracellular transportation in temporal correlation with the different growth phases. The study also elucidated the mechanisms leading to reduced production of analog, 24-desmethylrifamycin B by the genetically modified strain DCO#34, derivatives of which have been found effective against rifampicin-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. These results can be useful while carrying out genetic manipulations to improve the strains of Amycolatopsis to produce better analogs/drugs and promote the eradication of TB. Thus, this study is contributing significantly to the growing knowledge in the field of the crucial drug, rifamycin B biosynthesis by an economically important bacterium Amycolatopsis mediterranei.

### Keywords
Amycolatopsis, 24-desmethylrifamycin b, Rifamycin, Production mechanism, 42h and 96h

### Affiliations
The energy and resources institute
Professor Rup Lal The Energy and Resources Institute  New Delhi-110003, India.

### Submitter
RUP LAL

### Lab Head
Dr Rup Lal
Professor Rup Lal The Energy and Resources Institute  New Delhi-110003, India.


