### Accession
PXD003425

### Title
Modified fish diet in six dolphins

### Description
Feeding a modified fish diet has been suggested to improve insulin sensitivity in bottlenose dolphins; however insulin sensitivity was not directly measured. Since demonstrating an improvement in insulin sensitivity is technically difficult in dolphins, we postulated that directional changes in the hormone axis: fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21)/Adiponectin/Ceramide (Cer), could provide further support to this hypothesis. Proteomic analysis of the serum proteins revealed few changes in serum proteins over the study period. In conclusion, changing the types of fish fed to dolphins resulted in increases in the insulin sensitizing hormone adiponectin and serum sphingosines consistent with an insulin sensitizing phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
One microliter of diluted peptides (1:40; v/v, approximately 1 µg) was loaded onto the trap at 5µl/min for 5 minutes before reverse phase separation at 350 nl/min from 0% to 40% mobile phase B [95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid] over 50 minutes. Target proteotryptic peptides were identified by performing runs in positive ion information dependent acquisition mode with product ion scans for 50ms with up to 20 product ion scans if precursors were 350-1250 m/z, exceeded 100 cps, and had a 2+ to 5+ charge state. Raw data files generated by the AB Sciex 5600 were converted to a peak list using the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (v. 1.3. beta, June 2012). Protein identifications were made using Mascot Daemon (v. 2.4.0) searching against the Ensembl (release 64) turTru1 dolphin genome assembly protein database [16,599 sequences; Lindblad-Toh (2011)] and the common Repository of Adventitious proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine) using the following parameters: trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was specified as a fixed modification; Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and Oxidation (M) were specified as variable modifications; a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da; instrument type was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. Mascot files were then uploaded into Scaffold Q+ (v.4.4.5) for analysis with a protein threshold set to 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR), a minimum number of peptides set to 3, and a peptide threshold set to 50%. Proteins were excluded from analysis that did not have a spectral count greater than 10 in at least one time point, or were missing more than 2 values at a time point. The quantitative value was normalized to total TIC with a normalization value set to 0. Exported values into sigma plot 11.0 and log10 transformed the data to help improve normality of the data.

### Data Protocol
a repeated one way ANOVA was performed on the log transformed values that met the inclusion criteria. Post-hoc comparisons versus time 0 were made using the Holm-Sidak post-hoc test. Differences were considered statistically significant if P<0.05. Fold change for each identified protein was calculated by dividing the mean quantitative value at a time point by the mean quantitative value at time 0. File name = Date run on MS, Animal identifier, weeks on modified diet, Acetonitrile elution concentration from SPE, random key identifier, mascot file name

### Publication Abstract
Feeding a modified fish diet has been suggested to improve insulin sensitivity in bottlenose dolphins; however, insulin sensitivity was not directly measured. Since demonstrating an improvement in insulin sensitivity is technically difficult in dolphins, we postulated that directional changes in the hormone axis: fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21)/Adiponectin/Ceramide (Cer), could provide further support to this hypothesis. We measured 2-h post-prandial serum FGF21, total adiponectin, percent unmodified adiponectin, ceramide, and sphingosine levels from dolphins fed a diet rich in heptadecanoic acid (C17:0) over 24&#x2009;weeks. Serum FGF21 was quantified by ELISA with an observed range of 129-1599&#x2009;pg/ml, but did not significantly change over the 24-week study period. Total adiponectin levels (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD) significantly increased from 776&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;400&#x2009;pmol/ml at week 0 to 1196&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;467&#x2009;pmol/ml at week 24. The percent unmodified adiponectin levels (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD) decreased from 23.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.0% at week 0&#x2009;to&#x2009;15.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;5.2% at week 24. Interestingly, although FGF21 levels did not change, there was a good correlation between FGF21 and total adiponectin (&#x3c1;&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.788, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). We quantified the abundances of serum ceramides and sphingosines (SPH) because adiponectin has a defined role in sphingolipid metabolism through adiponectin receptor-mediated activation of ceramidases. The most abundant ceramide in dolphin sera was Cer 24:1 comprising 49% of the ceramides measured. Significant reductions were observed in the unsaturated Cer 18:1, Cer 20:1, and Cer 24:1, whereas significant increases were observed in saturated Cer 22:0, Cer 24:0, and Cer 26:0. However, total serum ceramides did not change. Significant elevations were detected for total sphingosine, dihydrosphingosine, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate. Proteomic analysis of the serum proteins revealed few changes in serum proteins over the study period. In conclusion, shifting the dolphin diet to fishes rich in odd chain saturated fatty acids, such as C17:0, resulted in increased serum levels of the insulin sensitizing hormone adiponectin and serum SPH consistent with an insulin-sensitizing phenotype. It is still unclear whether FGF21 plays a role in the regulation of adiponectin in dolphins, similar to that shown in laboratory animal models.

### Keywords
Heptadecanoic acid, Dolphins, Adiponectin

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina

### Submitter
Philip  Sobolesky

### Lab Head
Dr Michael G. Janech
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina


