### Accession
PXD045406

### Title
Proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 particles unveils a key role of G3BP proteins in viral assembly

### Description
The aim of this project was to identify cellular factors enriched in SARS-CoV-2 virion preparations from infected Calu-3 cells as compared to preparation from mock-infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated virions were boiled in resuspension buffer supplemented with SDS (2% final concentration) at 95°C for 5 min.  Bottom-up experiments tryptic peptides were obtained by S-trap Micro Spin Column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Protifi, NY, USA). Briefly: proteins of the above eluate were diluted 1:1 with 2x reducing-alkylating buffer (20 mM TCEP, 100 mM Chloroacetamide in 400 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and 4% SDS) and left 5 min at 95°C to allow reduction and alkylation in one step. S-trap binding buffer was applied to precipitate proteins on quartz and proteolysis took place during 14 h at 37°C with 1 µg Trypsin sequencing grade (Promega). After speed-vacuum drying of eluted peptides, these were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 10% Acetonitrile (ACN). Liquid Chromatography-coupled Mass spectrometry analysis  LC-MS analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 HPLC nanoflow chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Les Ulis, France) coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). One μL was loaded, concentrated, and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length mounted onto the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia)) with a 60 min overall run-time gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in Data Dependent Analysis with Parallel Accumulation and Serial Fragmentation (DDA PASEF) mode with a 1.9 second/cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in PASEF. This enabled a recurrent loop analysis of a maximum of up to 120 most intense nLC-eluting peptides which were Collision Induced Dissociation-fragmented between each full scan every 1.9 second. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 166 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive polarity with PASEF in the 100-1.700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MSMS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the otof control software, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 1.000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and re-fragmented and summed until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u., while allowing a dynamic exclusion of 0.40 min elution gap.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.17 for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) analysis (Tyanova et al., 2015). The database used was a concatenation of Homo sapiens sequences from the Swissprot database (release june 2020 : 563,972 sequences; 203,185,243 residues, and the 16 proteins of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and an in-house list of frequently found contaminant protein sequences. The enzyme specificity was trypsin’s. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm. Oxidation of methionines was set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered complete. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-Free protein Quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. For differential analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were quality-checked using PTXQC (Bielow et al., 2016), then imported into the Perseus software (version 1.6.15) (Tyanova et al., 2016) for statistical analysis.  Proteomic statistics Proteins annotated as “Reverse” or “Only identified by site” were excluded from analysis as well as contaminant proteins according to MaxQuant and to the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins cRAP (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). LFQ intensities of quantified proteins were then log2-transformed. For A549 and Calu cell supernatants as for capture experiment, only proteins with at least 3 LFQ valid values in one of the groups were considered. Missing values were then replaced by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution according to default parameters (width=0.3 – down shift=1.8). A one-tailed paired Student t-test associated with a Benjamini Hochberg false discovery rate adjustment was performed in order to identify significant differential molecules among the proteins upregulated in SARS samples compared to uninfected ones.  In silico functional analysis Protein–protein interaction networks were built using STRING v.11.5 (Szklarczyk et al., 2021) based on Experiments and Databases interaction sources with default setting parameters. Data were imported and visualized using Cytoscape (v.3.8.2) (Shannon et al., 2003). Gene Ontologies over-representation analyses were performed with DAVID online tool (updated version 2021, https://david.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) (Huang et al., 2009a, 2009b). GOTERM_BP_4, GOTERM_MF_ALL functional annotation clustering and KEGG pathway annotation charts were retained. The top 10 results with an adjusted P-value (Benjamini-Hochberg) < 0.05 were plotted using ggplot2 package (version 3.3.5).

### Publication Abstract
Considerable progress has been made in understanding the molecular host-virus battlefield during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nevertheless, the assembly and egress of newly formed virions are less understood. To identify host proteins involved in viral morphogenesis, we characterize the proteome of SARS-CoV-2 virions produced from A549-ACE2 and Calu-3 cells, isolated via ultracentrifugation on sucrose cushion or by ACE-2 affinity capture. Bioinformatic analysis unveils 92 SARS-CoV-2 virion-associated host factors, providing a valuable resource to better understand the molecular environment of virion production. We reveal that G3BP1 and G3BP2 (G3BP1/2), two major stress granule nucleators, are embedded within virions and unexpectedly favor virion production. Furthermore, we show that G3BP1/2 participate in the formation of cytoplasmic membrane vesicles, that are likely virion assembly sites, consistent with a proviral role of G3BP1/2 in SARS-CoV-2 dissemination. Altogether, these findings provide new insights into host factors required for SARS-CoV-2 assembly with potential implications for future therapeutic targeting.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Cellular factors, Virions, Proteomic, G3bp1 and g3bp2

### Affiliations
Institut Cochin, Inserm U 1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Cité.
Proteom’IC facility, Université Paris Cité, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Cochin, F-75014 PARIS

### Submitter
Johanna BRUCE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Gallois-Montbrun
Institut Cochin, Inserm U 1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Cité.


