### Accession
PXD013748

### Title
Sparrow seminal fluid diversification -MS/MS

### Description
We investigated seminal fluid (SF) diversification in a recently diverged passerine species pair (Passer domesticus and P. hispaniolensis) using a  combination of proteomic and comparative evolutionary genomic approaches. Specifically, using tandem MS/MS semi-quantitative proteomic methods we identified and compared the SF proteome of two species of Passer sparrows - the house and Spanish sparrow. This analysis revealed  consistencies with known aspects of SF protein biology and function in other taxa, including the presence of a diversity of immune and antimicrobial proteins

### Sample Protocol
Solubilization buffer was added to each of 4 seminal fluid samples. Next, 9ug of total protein from each sample was separated in parallel on 4-12 % Nupage Bis-Tris gels running on an XCell SureLock Mini-Cell PowerEase 200 system. ). Gels were transferred to a gel slicer where each lane was cut horizontally into 16 slices, resulting in total of 64 samples for MS/MS analysis. Gel slices were subjected to proteolytic digestion using an Automated Preparation Station (Perkin Elmer). Proteins were first reduced and alkylated followed by digestion with trypsin at 37C for 16 h.   Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2m particle size, 100A pore size, 75um i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5um particle size, 100A pore size, 300um i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10L/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyser and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation. Post-run, the data was processed and peak-lists generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from each tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) run was analyzed by X!Tandem, Comet, and Mascot against the Passer domesticus protein  annotation. Only the longest protein isoform of each gene was included in the search database. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a  parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were used. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of  methionine was specified as a variable modification. Peptides were allowed up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. All downstream analyses of the  Comet and X!Tanden results were conducted using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 1). False Discovery Rates (FDRs) were  estimated with a randomized decoy database using PeptideProphet, employing accurate mass binning model and the nonparametric negative distribution model. Mascot results were curated using Scaffold (4.5.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR), including estimation of FDRs using the Scaffold  Local FDR algorithm. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability.   To ensure that protein assignations were robust and reproducible, protein identification was only accepted if they (1) could be established at greater than 99.0% probability, (2) include a minimum of two peptide matches and (3) were obtained in at least 2 of the 3 search engines used. Proteins that contained identical peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.   ProteinOrtho was used with default settings to establish orthology relationships between P. domesticus and zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata). For proteins that were not in ProteinOrtho, BLASTp was used to identify homologous zebra finch proteins (e-value of <1e-7 and requiring homology  50% of the protein length) to establish Gene Ontology classification

### Publication Abstract
Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) mediate an array of postmating reproductive processes that influence fertilization and fertility. As such, it is widely held that SFPs may contribute to postmating, prezygotic reproductive barriers between closely related taxa. We investigated seminal fluid (SF) diversification in a recently diverged passerine species pair (Passer domesticus and Passer hispaniolensis) using a combination of proteomic and comparative evolutionary genomic approaches. First, we characterized and compared the SF proteome of the two species, revealing consistencies with known aspects of SFP biology and function in other taxa, including the presence and diversification of proteins involved in immunity and sperm maturation. Second, using whole-genome resequencing data, we assessed patterns of genomic differentiation between house and Spanish sparrows. These analyses detected divergent selection on immunity-related SF genes and positive selective sweeps in regions containing a number of SF genes that also exhibited protein abundance diversification between species. Finally, we analyzed the molecular evolution of SFPs across 11 passerine species and found a significantly higher rate of positive selection in SFPs compared with the rest of the genome, as well as significant enrichments for functional pathways related to immunity in the set of positively selected SF genes. Our results suggest that selection on immunity pathways is an important determinant of passerine SF composition and evolution. Assessing the role of immunity genes in speciation in other recently diverged taxa should be prioritized given the potential role for immunity-related proteins in reproductive incompatibilities in Passer sparrows.

### Keywords
Seminal fluid, Bird, Sparrow

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Center for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis Department of Biosciences University of Oslo

### Submitter
Melissah Rowe

### Lab Head
Dr Melissah Rowe
Center for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis Department of Biosciences University of Oslo


