### Accession
PXD006036

### Title
Metabolic control of primed human pluripotent stem cell fate and function by the miR-200c-SIRT2 axis

### Description
A hallmark of cancer cells is the metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to glycolysis, a phenomenon referred to as the “Warburg effect”, which is also observed in primed human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Here, we report that downregulation of SIRT2 and upregulation of SIRT1 is a molecular signature of primed hPSCs and that SIRT2 critically regulates metabolic reprogramming during induced pluripotency by targeting glycolytic enzymes including aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphoglycerate kinase, and enolase. Remarkably, knockdown of SIRT2 in human fibroblasts resulted in significantly decreased OXPHOS and increased glycolysis. In addition, we found that miR-200c-5p specifically targets SIRT2, downregulating its expression. Furthermore, SIRT2 overexpression in hPSCs significantly affected energy metabolism, altering stem cell functions such as pluripotent differentiation properties. Taken together, our results identify the miR-200c-SIRT2 axis as a key regulator of metabolic reprogramming (Warburg-like effect), via regulation of glycolytic enzymes, during human induced pluripotency and pluripotent stem cell function. To address our hypothesis that acetylation affects the metabolic switch, we compared protein acetylation in hESCs and hDFs by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/ MS) analyses following immunoprecipitation with acetyl-Lys antibody.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of acetylated proteins, hESCs or hDFs (control) were grown in 100 mm dishes up to 60- 70 % confluence. Cells were collected, washed with PBS and lysed (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitor cocktail). Whole cell lysate from hESCs and hDFs were incubated for 10 min on ice followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and pellets were discarded. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (Pierce) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. For immunoprecipitation assays, 500 μg of hESC and hDFs lysates were incubated with anti-acetyl-Lys antibody (Cell signaling Technology, catalogue No. 9441, 1:100) at 4°C for overnight. After addition of Protein A/G UltraLink resin, samples were incubated at 4°C for 2 h. Beads were washed three times with PBS and proteins were released from the beads by addition of SDS-sample loading buffer. The eluted proteins were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and the gel stained with Coomassie Blue. For LC-MS/MS analyses, the gel was de-stained and bands cut and processed as follows. Briefly, acetylated proteins 4bands were divided into 10 mm sections and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The tryptic digests were separated by on-line reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC II UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap EASY-Column (100 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical EASY-Column (75 μm inner diameter, 10 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization using a 30 μm (i.d.) nanobore stainless steel online emitter (Thermo Scientific) and a voltage set at 2.6 V., at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The chromatography system was coupled in-line with an LTQ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the Human IPI v3.7 DB using the Sorcerer 2 IDA Sequest-based search algorithm, and comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4. This proteomic analysis identified >200 acetylated proteins in both hDFs and hESCs. To minimize non-specificity, we excluded proteins with less than 10 peptide hits. We found that a total of 28 and 15 proteins are hyper- and hypo-acetylated in hESCs compared to hDFs, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark of cancer cells is the metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to glycolysis, a phenomenon referred to as the 'Warburg effect', which is also observed in primed human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Here, we report that downregulation of SIRT2 and upregulation of SIRT1 is a molecular signature of primed hPSCs and that SIRT2 critically regulates&#xa0;metabolic reprogramming during induced pluripotency by targeting glycolytic enzymes including aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphoglycerate kinase, and enolase. Remarkably, knockdown of SIRT2 in human fibroblasts resulted in significantly decreased OXPHOS and increased glycolysis. In addition, we found that miR-200c-5p specifically targets SIRT2, downregulating its expression. Furthermore, SIRT2 overexpression in hPSCs significantly affected energy metabolism, altering stem cell functions such as pluripotent differentiation properties. Taken together, our results identify the miR-200c-SIRT2 axis as a key regulator of metabolic reprogramming (Warburg-like effect), via regulation of glycolytic enzymes, during human induced pluripotency and pluripotent stem cell function.

### Keywords
Sirt2, Acetylation, Differentiation, Human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang-Soo Kim
Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School


