### Accession
PXD010519

### Title
Plant-derived virus-like particle vaccines drive cross-presentation of influenza A hemagglutinin peptides by human monocyte-derived macrophages

### Description
A growing body of evidence supports the importance of T cell responses to protect against severe influenza, promote viral clearance and ensure long-term immunity. Plant-derived virus-like particle (VLP) vaccines bearing influenza hemagglutinin (HA) have been shown to elicit strong humoral and CD4+ T cell responses in both pre-clinical and clinical studies. To better understand the immunogenicity of theses vaccines, we tracked the intracellular fate of a model HA (A/California/07/2009 H1N1) in human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) following delivery either as VLPs (H1-VLP) or in soluble form. High-resolution tandem mass spectrometry identified 131 HA-derived peptides associated with MHC I in the H1-VLP-treated MDMs. Together with immunostaining and microscopy results, these data  suggest that HA delivery to antigen-presenting cells on plant-derived VLPs facilitates antigen uptake, endosomal processing and cross-presentation. These observations may help explain the broad and cross-reactive immune responses generated by these vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
MDMs were differentiated from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from healthy donors between the ages of 23-47. PBMCs were separated from whole blood by centrifugation. Monocytes were isolated by negative selection using magnetic microbeads and cultured in RPMI-1640/ penicillin/streptomycin/HEPES supplemented with fetal bovine serum and recombinant human macrophage colony-stimulating factor for 7 days. MDMs were exposed to either H1-VLPs or soluble H1 and lysed with Tris-HCl/NaCl/ NP-40 in presence of protease inhibitors. MHC I–peptide complexes were immunoprecipitated with anti-human HLA-A/B/C and peptides were eluted with 10% acetic acid. The eluate was cleaned by C18 solid-phase extraction and evaporated under vacuum. Reconstituted samples were analyzed by a Bruker Maxis II high-resolution QTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system in nano-ESI mode. HPLC solutions were water (A) and acetonitrile (B) both containing 0.1% formic acid. MS spectra were acquired at m/z 400–2200 and MS/MS spectra were recorded at m/z 150–2200 using collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation. Ions with z = 2–5 were preferred whereas singly charged ions were excluded. Redundant ions were also excluded for 2 min. Acquisition time was 0.5 s for MS and 0.06–0.25 s for each MS/MS scan depending on precursor ion signal intensity, with a total cycle time of 3.0 s. CaptiveSpray (Bruker) nanospray ionization source operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 1.8 kV. To enhance ionization, a continuous flow of nitrogen and vaporized acetonitrile (as dopant) was injected into the ion source during the analysis using a nanoBooster module. Samples were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were imported into the MaxQuant software and searched against an in-house influenza A virus (A/California/07/2009(H1N1)) hemagglutinin FASTA file including six UniProt-TrEMBL identifiers: C3W627, C3W5X2, I6T4Z8, R9RVT8, U3M8B4, U3M8F8. An unspecific search was conducted for peptides with a length of 5–20 residues at 0.01 false-discovery rate (FDR). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. A posterior error probability (PEP) threshold of 0.01 was set for all MaxQuant searches. To account for LC retention shifts, the “match between runs” option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only hits with a protein score > 30 were accepted. Samples 2, 3, 7, 8 represent donors A, B, C, D (VLP-treated) whereas samples 6, 4, 5 are associated with donors A, C and D (soluble HA), respectively. Sample 1 was excluded from this study.

### Publication Abstract
A growing body of evidence supports the importance of T cell responses to protect against severe influenza, promote viral clearance, and ensure long-term immunity. Plant-derived virus-like particle (VLP) vaccines bearing influenza hemagglutinin (HA) have been shown to elicit strong humoral and CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in both pre-clinical and clinical studies. To better understand the immunogenicity of these vaccines, we tracked the intracellular fate of a model HA (A/California/07/2009 H1N1) in human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) following delivery either as VLPs (H1-VLP) or in soluble form. Compared to exposure to soluble HA, pulsing with VLPs resulted in ~3-fold greater intracellular accumulation of HA at 15&#x2009;min that was driven by clathrin-mediated and clathrin-independent endocytosis as well as macropinocytosis/phagocytosis. At 45&#x2009;min, soluble HA had largely disappeared suggesting its handling primarily by high-degradative endosomal pathways. Although the overall fluorescence intensity/cell had declined 25% at 45&#x2009;min after H1-VLP exposure, the endosomal distribution pattern and degree of aggregation suggested that HA delivered by VLP had entered both high-degradative late and low-degradative static early and/or recycling endosomal pathways. At 45&#x2009;min in the cells pulsed with VLPs, HA was strongly co-localized with Rab5, Rab7, Rab11, MHC II, and MHC I. High-resolution tandem mass spectrometry identified 115 HA-derived peptides associated with MHC I in the H1-VLP-treated MDMs. These data suggest that HA delivery to antigen-presenting cells on plant-derived VLPs facilitates antigen uptake, endosomal processing, and cross-presentation. These observations may help to explain the broad and cross-reactive immune responses generated by these vaccines.

### Keywords
Cross-presentation, Virus-like particle, Major histocompatibility complex class i, Cell-mediated immunity, Plant-derived vaccine, Influenza, Human monocyte-derived macrophage, High-resolution mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
McGill University
Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Momar Ndao

### Lab Head
Dr Brian J. Ward
Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


