### Accession
PXD022231

### Title
The grain protein turnover atlas of hexaploid wheat Triticum aestivum

### Description
Cellular protein abundance results from the relative rates of protein synthesis and protein degradation. Through combining in vivo stable isotope labelling and in-depth quantitative proteomics, we created a protein turnover atlas of wheat grain proteins during grain development. Our data demonstrate that protein turnover rates for 1447 unique wheat grain protein groups have an apparent spatiotemporal pattern that aids explanation of the 60% of variation in protein abundances that are not attributable to gene expression. Protein synthesis rates of individual proteins vary over 100 fold and degradation rates over 20 fold. Storage proteins have both higher synthesis and degradation rates than the overarching average rates of grain proteins in other functional categories, while those proteins involved in photosynthesis, DNA synthesis and glycolysis, by contrast, are house-keeping proteins that show low synthesis and degradation rates at all times. Approximately 20% of total grain ATP production through respiration is used for grain proteome biogenesis and maintenance, and the grain invests nearly half of this budget in storage protein synthesis alone. Degradation of storage proteins as a class of grain proteins also consumed a significant amount of the total ATP allocated to protein degradation processes. This analysis suggests that 20% of newly synthesized storage proteins are turned over rather than stored suggesting that this process is not energetically optimal. This approach to measure protein turnover rates at the proteome scale shows how different functional categories of grain proteins accumulate, calculates the costs of futile cycling of protein turnover during wheat grain development and identifies the most and the least stable wheat grain proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction was performed on developing wheat grain using a chloroform/methanol precipitation approach. Peptide mixture were seperated into 12 fractions using an off-line HPLC. 1-2μg peptides were injected for LC-MSMS analysis, which was performed using the Agilent 6550 Q-TOF with a one-hour gradient. GC-MSMS analysis was performed using the Agilent 7890A gas chromatograph.

### Data Protocol
The online Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v.5.2.0) was used for comet search and PeptideProphet search. The 15N enrichment of each protein were obtained by using an in-house pipeline written in R. Label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) were performed by using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Protein abundance in cereal grains is determined by the relative rates of protein synthesis and protein degradation during grain development but quantitation of these rates is lacking. Through combining in&#x2009;vivo stable isotope labelling and in-depth quantitative proteomics, we have measured the turnover of 1400 different types of proteins during wheat grain development. We demonstrate that there is a spatiotemporal pattern to protein turnover rates which explain part of the variation in protein abundances that is not attributable to differences in wheat gene expression. We show that c. 20% of total grain adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production is used for grain proteome biogenesis and maintenance, and nearly half of this budget is invested exclusively in storage protein synthesis. We calculate that 25% of newly synthesized storage proteins are turned over during grain development rather than stored. This approach to measure protein turnover rates at proteome scale reveals how different functional categories of grain proteins accumulate, calculates the costs of protein turnover during wheat grain development and identifies the most and the least stable proteins in the developing wheat grain.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Grain, Gc-msms, Wheat, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology The University of Western Australia
The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
HUI CAO

### Lab Head
Dr A.Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology The University of Western Australia


