### Accession
PXD012966

### Title
A proteomic analysis of lysine crotonylation in systemic lupus erythematosus patients

### Description
Posttranslational modification (PTM) refers to the process of the covalent processing of translated proteins, as well as the activities and functions of proteins, and it is involved in almost all cellular pathways and processes. Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a recently identified PTM and plays a key role in regulating various biological processes. In the present study, we performed a crotonylation proteome analysis in both Systemic lupus erythematosus(SLE) and normal control (NC) subjects using high resolution LC-MS/MS. We identified a total of 1109 lysine modification sites distributed on 347 proteins, including 417 crotonylated sites that were upregulated and 275 that were downregulated. By intensive bioinformatic analysis, our data proved that subcellular locations of crotonylated proteins include the cytoplasm, mitochondria, nucleus and extracellular regions. Kcr was related to multiple metabolism pathways, such as the focal adhesion, PI3K-Akt signaling, salmonella infection, cell cycle, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), neurotrophin signaling, natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, malaria, Hippo signaling and legionellosis pathways, while downregulated Kcr proteins were related to carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids, glutathione metabolism, complement and coagulation cascades and the pentose phosphate pathway. Several Kcr proteins related to focal adhesion have also been discussed. Enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology (GO) revealed that the Kcr proteins were enriched in the platelet alpha granule lumen, actin filament binding and platelet degranulation classes. Protein domain enrichment analysis revealed that the 14-3-3, immunoglobulin-like fold, EF-hand and Ca-insensitive domains were enriched in Kcr proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Patients and controls Following the principle of informed consent and under the direction of a protocol approved by the Guangxi Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research Ethics Committee, we collected 3.5 ml peripheral blood samples from the normal control group, which consisted of 36 healthy people, and 11 SLE patients; the information regarding patients is displayed in Table 1. Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) (note: for PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g., 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into Kcr fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity Enrichment Pan antibody-based PTM enrichment: To enrich Kcr-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with prewashed antibody beads at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm ID. The gradient was composed of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, from 23% to 35% over 8 min and climbing to 80% over 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for the full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting as 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure was used that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4. The fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using a Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Kcr database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl modification on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and Kcr modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Bioinformatic Methods The differentially expressed proteins obtained from the quantitative proteomic analysis were normalized, and the functional classes of the proteins corresponding to the differentially modified sites were analyzed. Gene Ontology analysis and protein modification motif analysis were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Lysine crotonylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
University/Hospital: the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital) Street Name & Number: No. 1017, North of Dongmen Road,  Shenzhen City, Guangdong Province 518020, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
University/Hospital: the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital) Street Name & Number: No. 1017, North of Dongmen Road,  Shenzhen City, Guangdong Province 518020, China


