### Accession
PXD014092

### Title
The RNA fold interactome of evolutionary conserved yeast RNA structures in S. cerevisiae

### Description
Based on previous DMS-Seq data that provides in vivo structural conformation of RNA, we here applied a streamlined RNA pull-down approach to study 186 evolutionary conserved RNA folds in S. cerevisiae. These folds bound 162 different proteins, with the majority known or inferred to be RNA-binding proteins. In contrast to global RNA interactome capture methods; we were able to associate individual messenger RNAs harboring conserved RNA folds with their set of bound regulating proteins. Our data suggests a more widespread function of tRNA synthetases as mRNA regulators. Using an in vivo RNA reporter screen, we show that specific mRNA-RBP pairs regulate protein expression, which connects structural RNA features recognized by the RNA-binding protein to functionality.

### Sample Protocol
Coomassie stained gels were cut in one slice and destained with 50% EtOH/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The resulting gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and dried for 5 min in a concentrator (Eppendorf). Samples were incubated with reduction buffer (10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC) for 30 min at 56°C and further alkylated for 30 min in the dark with iodoacetamide (50 mM IAA/50 mM ABC). Gel pieces were completely dehydrated with ACN and covered in LysC solution (1 μg LysC per sample). Proteins were digested over night at 37°C and peptides were extracted twice by incubation with extraction buffer (3% TFA and 30% ACN) for 15 min. The gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% ACN and the extracted volume reduced to aproximately 150 μl in a concentrator (Eppendorf). Extracted peptides were desalted in StageTips using two layers of C18 material (Empore). Eluted peptides were injected via an autosampler into an uHPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo) and loaded on a 25 cm capillary (75 μm inner diameter; New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) for reverse-phase chromatography. The EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system was directly mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were eluted from the column with a 90 min optimized gradient from 2 to 40% ACN with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Chromatography was stabilized with a column oven set-up operating at 40°C (Sonation). The heated capillary temperature was set to 250°C. Spray voltage ranged from 2.2–2.4 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to ten triggered MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation. MS full scans were obtained in the orbitrap at 70,000 resolution with a maximal injection time of 20 ms, while MS/MS scan resolution was set to 17,500 resolution and maximal injection for 120 ms. Unassigned and charge state 1 were excluded from MS/MS selection and peptide match was preferred.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8.) and searched against Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ensembl annotated protein database R64-1-1.24 Oct 2014 (6,692 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while acetyl (N-term protein) and oxidation (Met) were considered as variable modifications. LysC (specific) was selected as enzyme specificity with maximal two miscleavages for MaxQuant analysis. Proteins were quantified with at least 2 ratio counts based on unmodified unique and razor peptides. Known contaminants and reverse hits were removed before plotting the protein ratios of the forward and reverse experiments in R (version 3.2.2).

### Publication Abstract
Evidence suggests that fasting exerts extensive antitumor effects in various cancers, including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the mechanism behind this response is unclear. We investigate the effect of fasting on glucose metabolism and malignancy in CRC. We find that fasting upregulates the expression of a cholesterogenic gene, Farnesyl-Diphosphate Farnesyltransferase 1 (FDFT1), during the inhibition of CRC cell aerobic glycolysis and proliferation. In addition, the downregulation of FDFT1 is correlated with malignant progression and poor prognosis in CRC. Moreover, FDFT1 acts as a critical tumor suppressor in CRC. Mechanistically, FDFT1 performs its tumor-inhibitory function by negatively regulating AKT/mTOR/HIF1&#x3b1; signaling. Furthermore, mTOR inhibitor can synergize with fasting in inhibiting the proliferation of CRC. These results indicate that FDFT1 is a key downstream target of the fasting response and may be involved in CRC cell glucose metabolism. Our results suggest therapeutic implications in CRC and potential crosstalk between a cholesterogenic gene and glycolysis.

### Keywords
Yeast; rbp; interactomics

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


