### Accession
PXD005676

### Title
Architecture of TAF11/TAF13/TBP complex suggests novel regulatory state of human general transcription factor TFIID

### Description
General transcription factor TFIID is a key component of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation in eukaryotic nuclei. Human TFIID is a megadalton-sized multiprotein complex comprising TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). TBP binds to core promoter DNA, recognizing the TATA-box. A number of transcription regulatory factors were found to compete with DNA for TBP binding. We identified a ternary complex formed by TBP and the histone fold (HF) domain containing TFIID subunits TAF11 and TAF13. We demonstrate that TAF11/TAF13 competes for TBP binding with TATA-box DNA, and also with the N-terminal domain of TAF1. In an integrative approach combing crystal coordinates, biochemical analyses and data from cross-linking mass-spectrometry (CLMS), we determine the architecture of the TAF11/TAF13/TBP complex, revealing TAF11/TAF13 interaction with the DNA binding surface of TBP. Our results thus suggest a novel regulatory state for TFIID function.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in suspension culture. 1011 cells were harvested by centrifugation and a nuclear extract was prepared. Briefly, nuclei were prepared by resuspending the pellets in 4 packed cell volume (PCV) of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM DTT and proteinase inhibitors and opening the cells with a Dounce-homogenizer. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation and lysed in 4 PCV of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9; 25% glycerol; 500 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors by powerful strokes. The lysate was centrifuged at 50,000 g for 20 minutes. The supernatant was filtered and proteins precipitating in 30% (w/v) (NH4)2SO4 were pelleted. They were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9; 20% glycerol; 100 mM KCl; 5 mM MgCl2; 1 mM DTT and dialysed against the same buffer. For immunopreciptation. 200 µl protein G-Sepharose (Pharmacia) was incubated with approximately 50 µg of the different antibodies (as indicated). Washed antibody-bound beads were then mixed with 4 mg of pre-cleared HeLa cell nuclear extract and incubated overnight at 4°C. Antibody-protein G Sepharose bound protein complexes were washed three times with IP buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2) containing 0.5 M KCl and twice with IP buffer containing 100 mM KCl. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the protein G columns with 0.1 M glycine (pH 2.5) and quickly neutralized with 2 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.8). For analysis by mass spectrometry, samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC and trypsin at 37°C overnight. They were then analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled in line with an Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were separated on a C18 nano-column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile and analysed in a Top 20 CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) data-dependent mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Human Swissprot database (Release 2013_04, 20225 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 7 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a 5 % FDR (false discovery rate) and rank 1. Proteins were identified with 1 peptide.

### Publication Abstract
General transcription factor TFIID is a key component of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation. Human TFIID is a megadalton-sized complex comprising TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). TBP binds to core promoter DNA, recognizing the TATA-box. We identified a ternary complex formed by TBP and the histone fold (HF) domain-containing TFIID subunits TAF11 and TAF13. We demonstrate that TAF11/TAF13 competes for TBP binding with TATA-box DNA, and also with the N-terminal domain of TAF1 previously implicated in TATA-box mimicry. In an integrative approach combining crystal coordinates, biochemical analyses and data from cross-linking mass-spectrometry (CLMS), we determine the architecture of the TAF11/TAF13/TBP complex, revealing TAF11/TAF13 interaction with the DNA binding surface of TBP. We identify a highly conserved C-terminal TBP-interaction domain (CTID) in TAF13, which is essential for supporting cell growth. Our results thus have implications for cellular TFIID assembly and suggest a novel regulatory state for TFIID function.

### Keywords
Tfiid; taf11; taf13;  dna binding;  tata-binding protein; histone fold

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire IGBMC, Illkirch, France  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, France  Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Tora Laszlo
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire IGBMC, Illkirch, France  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, France  Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France


