### Accession
PXD039288

### Title
Oxygen-sensing through ERFVII action and modulation in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Oxygen is a key signalling component of plant biology and, whilst  an oxygen-sensing mechanism was previously described in Arabidopsis thaliana. However, key features of the associated PCO N-degron pathway and Group VII ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERFVII) transcription factor substrates remain unknown. We demonstrate that ERFVIIs show non-autonomous activation of root hypoxia tolerance, and are essential for root development and survival under oxygen limiting conditions in the soil. We determine the combined effects of ERFVIIs in controlling genome expression and define genetic and environmental components required for proteasome-dependent oxygen-regulated stability of ERFVIIs through the PCO N-degron pathway. Using a plant extract, unexpected amino-terminal cysteine oxidation to sulphonic acid oxidation level of ERFVIIs was defined, suggesting a requirement for additional enzymatic activity within the pathway. Our results provide a holistic understanding of the properties, functions and readouts of this oxygen-sensing mechanism defined through its role in modulating ERFVII stability.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were expressed in Wheat Germ extracts and immunoprecipitated or as His-tagged proteins in E. coli. Trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS was performed to study modification at the N-terminus.

### Data Protocol
DDA LC-MS/MS data were searched using SearchGUI (J Proteome Res. 2018;17(7):2552-2555) to confirm identity. The main analysis of N-terminal modification was performed manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cysteine oxidation, N-degron pathway

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry University of Nottingham
 University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Neil  Oldham

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Neil Oldham
School of Chemistry University of Nottingham


