### Accession
PXD023092

### Title
Galactolipid and Phospholipid Profile and Proteome Alterations in Soybean Leaves at the Onset of Salt Stress

### Description
To explore the adaptive mechanisms of soybean in lipid signalling and remodelling of metabolism following salt stress, lipid profiling was performed on leaves of seedlings from cultivar C08 which is a salt-sensitive variety. In our previous study, C08 seedlings showed leaf drooping at 0.5 h under high salt stress followed by recovery. To study if this phenomenon could be closely linked to the dynamic changes in membrane lipid composition, integrated proteomic and lipidomic analyses were conducted. To address protein function in response to salt, label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis on salt-treated soybean seedling leaves was conducted. Our study identified putative enzymes or protein components involved in lipid regulation and provides a comprehensive understanding of lipid remodelling following salt treatment in soybean.

### Sample Protocol
Total leaf protein was extracted following the method of Lv et al., with minor modifications. Harvested primary leaves were ground in liquid N 2 with a mortar and pestle. The powdered sample was suspended in 2 ml of sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) buffer (2% [w/v] SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt [EDTA-Na 2 ], 20 mM dithiothreitol [DTT]) with 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (Sigma) and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The samples were heated at 95 °C for 30 min. After clarification by centrifugation at 14,000 g, the protein was precipitated with three volumes of acetone at -80 o C for 1 h. The protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 g and then resuspended in 8 M urea 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. The precipitation procedure was repeated once. The air-dried protein pellet was further dissolved in 8 M urea 50 mM Tris- HCl, pH 8.0 at 37 °C for over 3 h. Ten microgram protein per sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and trypsin-digested at 37 °C overnight using Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega) in a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w). The peptide mixture was desalted using a Pierce TM C-18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific™) and then dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Three biological replicates were performed. Eight hundred nanogram digested peptides from each sample was injected and analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion TM Lumos TM Tribrid TM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific™). Nano-liquid chromatography (LC) separation of digested peptides was carried out using a LC Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a C-18 5 μm-precolumn (300 µm i.d. × 5 mm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC nanoViper C-18 column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm). Mobile phase A (1.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) were used in LC. The LC mobile phase gradient profile was set as follows: 50°C chamber with 3 μL min -1 flow rate, beginning with 100% mobile phase A for 5 min, increasing mobile phase B from 0% to 6% in 3 min, to 18% in 40 min, to 30% in 10 min, then to 80% in 7 min, and finally re-equilibrating with 100% mobile phase A for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was acquired with Xcalibur software and analysed using the Proteome Discoverer v2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific™). The resulted MS/MS spectra were searched against the Glycine max reference protein database (Williams 82 a2v1) downloaded from the Phytozome portal (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) with Proteome Discoverer internal engine SEQUEST HT. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated and assigned to matched peptides by Percolator. Peptides with an FDR-value ≤ 0.01 were selected for subsequent analysis. Sample comparison was performed using the LFQ method in Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific™). Only proteins that were detected in at least two replicates and tested with an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were selected as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salt, Seedling, Lc-ms/ms, Leaf, Soybean

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Ailin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hon-Ming Lam
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong


