### Accession
PXD004888

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Extracellular Matrix Extracted from Mono- and Dual-Species Biofilms of Fusobacterium nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis

### Description
Background  The Gram-negative bacteria Fusobacterium nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis are associated with periodontitis and members of a complex microbial biofilm. The self-produced extracellular polymeric matrix (EPM) of biofilms generally consists of lipids, exopolysaccharides, nucleic acids and proteins. The proteinaceous components of the biofilm matrix play many roles in biofilm development and function. In this study the protein composition of the matrices in mono- and dual-species biofilms of F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis were analyzed.    Methods The bacteria were grown in a static biofilm model. Extraction of EPM was performed by careful mechanical shearing and filtration. Initial tryptic digestion of EPMs was followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to analyze the resulting peptide mixtures. Quantitative proteomic software MaxQuant was then employed for protein identifications and label-free quantitative (LFQ) analysis. Functional analyses of identified proteins were applied in classification and prediction of their possible roles in EPM. Results We identified 542 proteins in the matrix of F. nucleatum, 93 proteins in the matrix of P. gingivalis and 280 proteins in the dual-species biofilm matrix. Similarly, relative quantification based on LFQ intensity scores identified generally higher protein amounts in F. nucleatum and dual species EMPs, when compared to P. gingivalis EPM.  Acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase, alkyl hydroperoxide reductase C22 protein, neutrophil-activating protein A, tryptophanase and glutamate dehydrogenase were the top five proteins in the matrix of F. nucleatum biofilm. The oxidoreductase NAD-specific glutamate dehydrogenase and the proteolytic and adhesive protein Lys-gingipain were most abundant in P. gingivalis EPM. In the dual species EPM, F. nucleatum contributed to four out of the five with glutamate dehydrogenase on top. NAD-specific dehydrogenase from P. gingivalis was among the top five. Functional analyses with respect to virulence for example, revealed the stress-induced protein yicC in F. nucleatum EPM, while hemagglutinin HagA and fimbriae minor component FimD were among the top 5 in P. gingivalis EPM. Conclusions  We showed that the biofilm matrix of two important periodontal pathogens is abundant in proteins and nearly 70% of all EPM proteins originate from F. nucleatum when grown together with P. gingivalis. Outer membrane proteins, virulence related and oxidative stress proteins were among the most abundant proteins identified.

### Sample Protocol
The extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) were extracted from 4 days old biofilms. Samples with EPM extracts of mono- and dual-species biofilms were prepared in four biological replicates and subjected to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method developed by Wisniewski and co-workers, with minor modifications. Briefly, EPM samples were mixed in a solution of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) [solution to total protein ratio (v/w) 1:10] and incubated for 45 min at 56°C. Microcon device YM-10 filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) were first conditioned by adding 100 µl of urea buffer (8M urea, 10mM HEPES, pH 8.0) and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 5 min. Aliquots of EPM samples containing 50 µg of protein were mixed with 200 µl urea buffer in the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min and this step was repeated one more time. The filtrate was discarded and 100 µl of 0.05 M iodoacetamide was added to each sample. The samples were mixed at 600 rpm for 1 min in a thermo-mixer and incubated without mixing in dark for 20 min, followed by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 10 min, three washes with 100 µl urea buffer and another three washes with 100 µl 40 mM NH4HCO3 in H2O. EPM remaining on the filter were digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) at 37°C for 16 h. The released peptides were collected by adding 50 µl of mass spectrometry grade water followed by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 15 min. This step was repeated twice. Samples were concentrated (to 20-40 µl volume) in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Filtration and desalting  StageTips for filtration and desalting were prepared by packing 3M Empore C18 extraction disks (3M, MN, USA) in 200 µl pipet tips by a blunt ended needle and a plunger or metal rod that helped to fit the extracted disks in the pipet tips, according to the protocol developed by Rappsilber and colleagues. The disks were wetted by passing 20 µl of methanol, followed by 20 µl of elution buffer [80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA)]. The disks were then conditioned and equilibrated with 20 µl of 0.1% FA just before the last residue of the previous buffer left the tip to avoid drying of the disks. Samples (volumes 20-40 µl) were loaded on top of the Stage Tip.  The disks with samples were desalted by washing with 20 µl of 0.1% FA and were transferred to new tubes. Peptides were eluted and collected by adding 20 µl elution buffer two times. The collected samples were dried in the vacuum concentrator and stored at -80°C until further analyses. Peptide samples were resuspended by adding 1 µl of 100% FA and 19 µl of 2% ACN prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit, University of Bergen (PROBE) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 0.5 to 1 µg protein was loaded onto a pre-concentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm ×75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, vol/vol (TFA). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl/min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) in water or ACN (vol/vol), respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5% B, 5-6 min 8% B, 6-135 min 7–32% B, 135-145 min 33–40% B, and 145-150 min 40-90% B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90% B (150-170 min) and 5% B (175-195 min), respectively.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1,000 counts for MS/MS, and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS raw data were processed by using the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.2.8, with default settings. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) and match between runs (retention time alignment between different replicates) were optional software features, which were used in the MS/MS data searches. The MS spectra were searched against protein database of either F. nucleatum type strain ATCC 25586 or P. gingivalis type strain ATCC 33277. The respective files were downloaded from the UniProt knowledgebase on the 4th of February 2015. The post MaxQuant analysis included filtering of the generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table for contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits by the Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org). Each protein identified in at least two of four replicates was considered valid. To discriminate differential expressions of proteins present both in the mono- and dual-species biofilm, t-test with p-value ≤ 0.05 were used.

### Publication Abstract
The Gram-negative bacteria Fusobacterium nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis are members of a complex dental biofilm associated with periodontal disease. In this study, we cultured F.&#xa0;nucleatum and P.&#xa0;gingivalis as mono- and dual-species biofilms, and analyzed the protein composition of the biofilms extracellular polymeric matrix (EPM) by high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was used for identification of proteins and sequence-based functional characterization for their classification and prediction of possible roles in EPM. We identified 542, 93 and 280 proteins in the matrix of F.&#xa0;nucleatum, P.&#xa0;gingivalis, and the dual-species biofilm, respectively. Nearly 70% of all EPM proteins in the dual-species biofilm originated from F.&#xa0;nucleatum, and a majority of these were cytoplasmic proteins, suggesting an enhanced lysis of F.&#xa0;nucleatum cells. The proteomic analysis also indicated an interaction between the two species: 22 F.&#xa0;nucleatum proteins showed differential levels between the mono and dual-species EPMs, and 11 proteins (8 and 3 from F.&#xa0;nucleatum and P.&#xa0;gingivalis, respectively) were exclusively detected in the dual-species EPM. Oxidoreductases and chaperones were among the most abundant proteins identified in all three EPMs. The biofilm matrices in addition contained several known and hypothetical virulence proteins, which can mediate adhesion to the host cells and disintegration of the periodontal tissues. This study demonstrated that the biofilm matrix of two important periodontal pathogens consists of a multitude of proteins whose amounts and functionalities vary largely. Relatively high levels of several of the detected proteins might facilitate their potential use as targets for the inhibition of biofilm development.

### Keywords
Bacterial biofilms, Proteomics., Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Extracellular polymeric matrix, Label-free quantitative tandem mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Sharjah, College of Dental Medicine, Department of Oral and Craniofacial Health Sciences
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Marwan Mansoor Ali Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Vidar Bakken
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


