### Accession
PXD024887

### Title
Palmdelphin confers nuclear resilience to the aortic valve endothelium

### Description
Background: Palmdelphin (PALMD), a protein of unknown function, belongs to the family of Paralemmin proteins implicated in cytoskeletal regulation. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PALMD locus, which reduce its expression, are strong risk factors for development of calcific aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) and for severity of the disease. Methods: Public database screening and immunodetection of PALMD showed dominant expression in endothelial cells (ECs). Mass spectrometry allowed identification of PALMD partners. The consequence of loss of PALMD expression was assessed in siRNA silenced EC cultures, in knockout mice and in human valve samples and EC cultures from patients. RNA sequencing on siRNA silenced cells and transcript arrays on valve samples from a Swedish SNP rs7543130 patient cohort informed about gene regulatory changes. Results: ECs express the cytoplasmic PALMD-KKVI splice variant, which was shown to exist in complex with RAN GTPase activating protein1 (RANGAP1). RANGAP1 regulates the activity of the GTPase RAN and thereby, nucleocytoplasmic shuttling via Exportin1 (XPO1). Reduced PALMD expression resulted in subcellular relocalization of RANGAP1 and XPO1, providing a mechanism for the gene regulatory changes established in PALMD-deficiency. Gene ontology analysis showed enrichment of actin and RHO GTPAse related terms in PALMD-silenced ECs. In accordance, PALMD-silenced ECs showed multiple changes in adhesive and migratory properties and cells were softer. In particular, PALMD-deficient ECs failed to form a perinuclear actin cap when exposed to flow. The perinuclear actin cap is known to provide protection against mechanical stress. Lack of the actin cap correlated with tilting of the nuclear long axis relative to the cell body, which was established in PALMD-deficient ECs, mice and patient valve samples. The loss of the actin cap may contribute to further dysregulated gene transcription eventually promoting calcific precipitations and inflammation in CAVS. Conclusions: We identify RANGAP1 as a PALMD partner in ECs. Disrupting the PALMD/RANGAP1 complex changes the subcellular localization of essential nucleocytoplasmic shuttling components, thereby instigating the loss of actin-dependent nuclear resilience, which in turn promotes further deterioration of gene expression patterns predisposing to the establishment of CAVS.

### Sample Protocol
IP Sample preparation for LC MS/MS analysis.  1. Add 70 μL 25 mM AmmBic, 1 mM DTT to the beads (enough volume to cover the beads). 2. Incubate 1 hour at 37°C, shaking. 3. Let the samples reach room temperature. 4. Add chloroacetamide to a final conc. of 5 mM and incubated 10 min at room temperature. 5. Add DTT to a final conc. of 5 mM. 6. Add trypsin to a final conc. of 0.002 μg/μL. For 100 μL this is 0.2 μg/sample, adjust     amount of trypsin depending on sample amount, but for most IPs this is a lot). 7. Incubate overnight at 37°C, shaking. 8. Remove supernatant with peptides (on magnetic rack) and speed vacuum the solution. 9. Dissolve peptides in 10-20 μL mobile phase A solution. 10. For LC MS/MS analysis, transfer the samples into the MS injection vial. LC-ESI-MS/MS Q-Exactive-HF. Vial analysis. Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 1 μg was injected from each sample. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 2% B up to 40% B in 180 min, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min.  FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30-40% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150-200 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification. The MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator or Target Decoy PSM Validator (build date 20180628) under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) against human Uniprot database and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off.  We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2-missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications; oxidation (M) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endothelial, Rangap1, Calcific aortic valve stenosis, Actin cap, Nucleocytoplasmic transport, Palmdelphin

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Lena Claesson-Welsh
Uppsala University


