### Accession
PXD017903

### Title
The small protein CdrS is involved in cell division regulation

### Description
Recently the function and cellular importance of small proteins became more and more visible. Whereas many examples of small protein functions have been described in eukarya and bacteria, less is known about small protein functions in archaea. A previous determination of the proteome in the halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii by mass spectrometry confirmed the expression of several annotated genes for small proteins. One such protein is encoded by HVO_0582. To identify the biological function of the encoded small protein we attempted to generate a deletion strain. Since we were not successful in generating the deletion we repressed HVO_0582 using CRISPRi. The repression strain showed a severe growth defect as well as strong changes in morphology. ChIPSeq experiments revealed several binding sites for this putative transcription factor. Transcriptome and proteome analyses show a clear effect on RNA and protein expression in the CRISPRi strain. Based on our findings we conclude that the small protein CdrS is involved in regulation of cell division / cell morphology.

### Sample Protocol
Most experimental H. volcanii cultures were grown in Hv-min medium (Allers et al., 2004) with modification by containing an expanded trace elements solution (Duggin et al., 2015) , or Hv-Cab medium (Duggin et al., 2015) where indicated. Where necessary as auxotrophic requirements, media was supplemented with uracil (10 µg/ml or 50 µg/ml) (for ∆pyrE2), and leucine (50 µg/ml) (for ∆leuB), and L-tryptophan with the indicated concentration (for ∆trpA). Tryptophan in the media was also used to control gene expression of cas 5-8 via the tryptophan inducible promoter (P. tna). Cultures were incubated at 45°C in with rotary shaking (200 rpm), and were generally maintained in steady logarithmic growth (OD600 < 0.8) for at least 2 days prior to sampling (OD600 =0.2-0.8) for analysis, unless otherwise indicated. For analysis of the soluble protein fraction 50 µg protein were reduced with 2.5 mM TCEP (tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, Invitrogen) at 65 °C for 45 min before thiols were alkylated in 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at 25 °C in the dark. For protein digestion trypsin (Promega) was added in an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100 before incubation at 37 °C for 14 h. For digestion of proteins in the membrane fraction 20 µl StrataClean beads (Agilent), which bound 20 µg protein, were incubated with 2.5 mM TCEP at 65 °C for 45 min before 5 mM iodoacetamide was added. Samples were incubated for 15 min at 25 °C in the dark and subsequently digested with trypsin (enzyme to substrate ratio 1:100) for 14 h at 37 °C. To ensure the complete generation and removal of peptides from the beads, further trypsin (200 ng) was added and incubation at 37 °C was prolonged for additional 3 h. Peptides were eluted from the beads by incubation in a sonication bath for 2 min and transfer of the supernatant to a new vial. The beads were than washed sequentially with 100 µl solvent A (0.1% acetic acid in water) and 100 µl 60% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile diluted in solvent A). After each washing step peptides were again eluted sonication and supernatants were collected in the same vial as the initial elution. Subsequently peptides were dried by evaporation of the solvents and suspended in 10 µl solvent A before MS analysis. For MS analysis peptides were loaded on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 mm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Elution of peptides was executed with a nonlinear 180 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into an Orbitrap Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DIA mode. In each DIA cycle one survey scan at a resolution of R = 70,000 at m/z 200, 120 ms maximal IT, 3x106 automatic gain control target and mass range 300-1250 followed by 22 variable width DIA scans at a resolution of R = 35,000 at m/z 200, automatically set maximal IT, 2x105 automatic gain control target and a NCE of 27.5 were obtained. All scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with activated lock mass correction. The cycle time was 3.6 s ensuring at least 8 scans over the width of a typical LC peak (30 seconds).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Skyline (version 20.1.0.31) (Pino, LK, Searle, BC, Bollinger, JG, Nunn, B, MacLean, B and MacCoss, MJ (2017). The Skyline ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics. Mass Spectrom Rev) applying an in-house built spectral library of peptides identified from previous in-house analysis of H. volcanii. Exported transition peak areas were converted to protein quantities using the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in the iq R package (Pino, LK, Searle, BC, Bollinger, JG, Nunn, B, MacLean, B and MacCoss, MJ (2017). The Skyline ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics. Mass Spectrom Rev).

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptional regulators that integrate cellular and environmental signals to control cell division are well known in bacteria and eukaryotes, but their existence is poorly understood in archaea. We identified a conserved gene (<i>cdrS</i>) that encodes a small protein and is highly transcribed in the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii. The <i>cdrS</i> gene could not be deleted, but CRISPR interference (CRISPRi)-mediated repression of the <i>cdrS</i> gene caused slow growth and cell division defects and changed the expression of multiple genes and their products associated with cell division, protein degradation, and metabolism. Consistent with this complex regulatory network, overexpression of <i>cdrS</i> inhibited cell division, whereas overexpression of the operon encoding both CdrS and a tubulin-like cell division protein (FtsZ2) stimulated division. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-DNA sequencing (ChIP-Seq) identified 18 DNA-binding sites of the CdrS protein, including one upstream of the promoter for a cell division gene, <i>ftsZ1</i>, and another upstream of the essential gene <i>dacZ</i>, encoding diadenylate cyclase involved in c-di-AMP signaling, which is implicated in the regulation of cell division. These findings suggest that CdrS is a transcription factor that plays a central role in a regulatory network coordinating metabolism and cell division. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Cell division is a central mechanism of life and is essential for growth and development. Members of the <i>Bacteria</i> and <i>Eukarya</i> have different mechanisms for cell division, which have been studied in detail. In contrast, cell division in members of the <i>Archaea</i> is still understudied, and its regulation is poorly understood. Interestingly, different cell division machineries appear in members of the <i>Archaea</i>, with the <i>Euryarchaeota</i> using a cell division apparatus based on the tubulin-like cytoskeletal protein FtsZ, as in bacteria. Here, we identify the small protein CdrS as essential for survival and a central regulator of cell division in the euryarchaeon Haloferax volcanii. CdrS also appears to coordinate other cellular pathways, including synthesis of signaling molecules and protein degradation. Our results show that CdrS plays a sophisticated role in cell division, including regulation of numerous associated genes. These findings are expected to initiate investigations into conditional regulation of division in archaea.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Transcriptomics, Small proteins, Archaea, Cell division, Crispri, Membrane, Cytosol, Cell morphology

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


