### Accession
PXD038661

### Title
Systemwide disassembly and assembly of SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes

### Description
Cells adapt to ever-changing environmental cues by remodeling their inventories of multiprotein complexes. The cellular repertoire of modular multiprotein SCF (SKP1-CUL1-Fbox protein) E3 ligase complexes - which mediate much protein degradation - requires CAND1 to distribute the limiting CUL1 subunit as needed across the family of ~70 different Fbox proteins. Yet how a single assembly factor coordinately promotes dissociation of idling complexes and formation of numerous distinct multiprotein complexes as needed remains unknown.  Here, we address this by obtaining cryo-EM structures of CAND1-bound SCF complexes in multiple states, and correlating effects of mutations on the conformational ensembles and in biochemical and cellular assays. The data suggest CAND1 initially clasps catalytic domains of an inactive SCF, rolls around, and allosterically rocks and destabilizes the SCF interface. New SCF production proceeds in reverse, through SKP1 and the Fbox allosterically reducing interactions with CAND1.  The CAND1-SCF conformational ensemble fuels mixing-and-matching of SCF parts in response to substrate availability. Thus, our data reveal the biogenesis of a predominant family of E3 ubiquitin ligases, and the molecular basis for systemwide multiprotein complex assembly.

### Sample Protocol
We used Flp-InTM T-RExTM 293 containing endogenously tagged 3xFLAGCul1 as either WT and CAND1/2 DKO. Additional cell lines were generated by rescuing WT or mutant CAND1 in the CAND1/2 DKO cells via lentiviral transduction. Around 50 µL of compacted cells were lysed in 500 µl lysis buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL CA-63, 5% glycerol, 1x protease inhibitor, 1 µM MLN4924, 1 µM CSN5i-3 and 1.5 µM GST-CUL1-RBX1). Lysates were briefly sonicated (10s, 1s on/off, 10% amplitude , Bandelin Sonopuls HD 4200, TS 103) and cleared by centrifugation at ~20,000xg for 3 min at 4˚C followed by filtration using 0.22 µm spin filters. Afterwards, 9 µL of magnetic anti-FLAG beads were added to the soluble fraction and incubated for 45 min at 4˚C while rotating. The beads were washed 2x with lysis buffer, 2x with wash buffer (lysis buffer without IGEPAL CA-63 and GST-CUL1-RBX1) and 2 x with HBS (25mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl). After removing as much of the liquid as possible using a 200 µL tip under vacuum beads were resuspended in 45 µL denaturing lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% SDC) and boiled for 5 min at 98˚C. After addition of CAA and TCEP to final concentrations of 40 mM and 10 mM, respectively, samples were incubated at 45˚C for 5 min and then digested overnight at 37˚C using trypsin and LysC at 1:100 w/w. Samples were loaded onto SDB-RPS StageTips (Kulak et al., 2014) after being diluted in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol to a final volume of 200 µL. StageTips were washed 1x with 200 µL 1% TFA in isopropanol and 2x with 200 µL in 0.2% TFA/ 2% acetonitrile (ACN) before being eluted with 60 µL of 1.25% ammonium hydroxide in CAN and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA. 2% ACN) and peptide concentrations estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm and normalized to 0.1 mg/ml and then injected into the mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were processed using Spectronaut (Bruderer et al., 2015) using default settings for directDIA, which includes Carbamidomethyl (C)  as fixed modifications and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications . For data analysis the Perseus software package (version 1.6.7.0) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to environmental cues by remodeling their inventories of multiprotein complexes. Cellular repertoires of SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F box protein) ubiquitin ligase complexes, which mediate much protein degradation, require CAND1 to distribute the limiting CUL1 subunit across the family of &#x223c;70 different F&#xa0;box proteins. Yet, how a single factor coordinately assembles numerous distinct multiprotein complexes remains unknown. We obtained cryo-EM structures of CAND1-bound SCF complexes in multiple states and correlated mutational effects on structures, biochemistry, and cellular assays. The data suggest that CAND1 clasps idling catalytic domains of an inactive SCF, rolls around, and allosterically rocks and destabilizes the SCF. New SCF production proceeds in reverse, through SKP1-F box allosterically destabilizing CAND1. The CAND1-SCF conformational ensemble recycles CUL1 from inactive complexes, fueling mixing and matching of SCF parts for E3 activation in response to substrate availability. Our data reveal biogenesis of a predominant family of E3 ligases, and the molecular basis for systemwide multiprotein complex assembly.

### Keywords
Cand1, Ubiquitin, Ligase, Scf, Crl, Formation, Assembly, E3, Complex

### Affiliations
epartment of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
epartment of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


