### Accession
PXD037697

### Title
FAM69C functions as a kinase for eIF2α and promotes stress granule assembly

### Description
Stress granules are dynamic cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules that assemble in response to cellular stress. Aberrant formation of stress granules has been linked to neurodegenerative diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the initiation of stress granules remain elusive. Here we report that the brain-enriched protein kinase FAM69C promotes stress granule assembly through phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2α). FAM69C physically interacts with eIF2α and functions as a stress-specific kinase for eIF2α, leading to stress-induced protein translation arrest and stress granule assembly. Primary microglia derived from Fam69c knockout mice exhibit aberrant stress granule assembly in response to oxidative stress and ATP. Defective stress granule assembly in microglia correlates with the formation of ASC specks and NLRP3 inflammasome activation, whereas induction of stress granule precludes inflammasome formation. Consistently, increased NLRP3 levels, caspase-1 cleavage and Il18 expression corroborate microglia-associated neuroinflammation in aged Fam69c knockout mice. Our study demonstrates that FAM69C is critical for stress granule assembly and suggests its role in the regulation of microglia function.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing S-HA-tagged FAM69C were grown to confluency in a 150mm dish for S-tag pull-down. Cells were lysed for 30 minutes in 0.5% NP40 lysis buffer, and FAM69C was recognized and pulled down by the S-protein Agarose beads. The FAM69C-bounded S-protein Agarose beads were washed 3 times with 0.3% NP40 buffer, followed by a mass spectrometry assay.  Peptides were dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100 μm × 10 cm fused silica emitter made in our laboratory packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm and 120 Å;DR. Maisch). Samples were eluted for 50 min with linear gradients of 5–32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were acquired by LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) with a target value of 3,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against mouse database from the Uniprot protein sequence database. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. A maximum of missed cleavages was 2. The precursor ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Stress granules are dynamic cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules that assemble in response to cellular stress. Aberrant formation of stress granules has been linked to neurodegenerative diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the initiation of stress granules remain elusive. Here we report that the brain-enriched protein kinase FAM69C promotes stress granule assembly through phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2&#x3b1;). FAM69C physically interacts with eIF2&#x3b1; and functions as a stress-specific kinase for eIF2&#x3b1;, leading to stress-induced protein translation arrest and stress granule assembly. Primary microglia derived from Fam69c knockout mice exhibit aberrant stress granule assembly in response to oxidative stress and ATP. Defective stress granule assembly in microglia correlates with the formation of ASC specks and NLRP3 inflammasome activation, whereas induction of stress granule precludes inflammasome formation. Consistently, increased NLRP3 levels, caspase-1 cleavage and Il18 expression corroborate microglia-associated neuroinflammation in aged Fam69c knockout mice. Our study demonstrates that FAM69C is critical for stress granule assembly and suggests its role in the regulation of microglia function.

### Keywords
Eif2α; fam69c; inflammasome; stress response; stress granule.

### Affiliations
Peking University
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Fan Mei

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Mei
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China


