### Accession
PXD000206

### Title
4-plex iTRAQ comparative proteomics Anabaena circinalis

### Description
A comparative proteomics study to investigate a saxitoxin producing and non-toxic strains of Anabaena circinalis. Anabaena circinalis is a freshwater and bloom-forming cyanbacterium

### Sample Protocol
See details in reference PMID: 24460188

### Data Protocol
Please note: files with the name 'NaCl' are from the iTRAQ-N run, and files with 'phos' are from the iTRAQ-P run.

### Publication Abstract
In Australia, saxitoxin production is restricted to the cyanobacterial species Anabaena circinalis and is strain-dependent. We aimed to characterize a saxitoxin-producing and nontoxic strain of A. circinalis at the proteomic level using iTRAQ. Seven proteins putatively involved in saxitoxin biosynthesis were identified within our iTRAQ experiment for the first time. The proteomic profile of the toxic A. circinalis was significantly different from the nontoxic strain, indicating that each is likely to inhabit a unique ecological niche. Under control growth conditions, the saxitoxin-producing A. circinalis displayed a higher abundance of photosynthetic, carbon fixation and nitrogen metabolic proteins. Differential abundance of these proteins suggests a higher intracellular C:N ratio and a higher concentration of intracellular 2-oxoglutarate in our toxic strain compared with the nontoxic strain. This may be a novel site for posttranslational regulation because saxitoxin biosynthesis putatively requires a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase. The nontoxic A. circinalis was more abundant in proteins, indicating cellular stress. Overall, our study has provided the first insight into fundamental differences between a toxic and nontoxic strain of A. circinalis, indicating that they are distinct ecotypes.

### Keywords
Anabaena circinalis, Saxitoxin, Cyanobacteria, Paralytic shellfish toxins, Ecotypes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Paul D'Agostino

### Lab Head


