### Accession
PXD011123

### Title
In-vitro glutathionylation of SMYD2

### Description
Glutathionylation is an important post-translational modification and developing tools to identify which cysteine residues on proteins are glutathionylated in response to different physiological conditions is necessary. This project utilizes an approach consisting of azido-glutathione, a single purified protein, and an oxidant to form disulfide bonds between the azide modified glutathione and the cysteine residues of the protein. After this the reaction is quenched with iodoacetamide, subjected to a click reaction with a chemically cleavable alkyne conjugated biotin, and digested with trypsin. These peptide fragments are eluted from streptavidin beads and subjected to LC-MS/MS to determine which cysteine residues are glutathionylated in-vitro.

### Sample Protocol
The protein of interest, e.g. SMYD2, (50-100 ug), is reacted with azido-glutathione, in the presence of diamide to provide glutathionylated SMYD2. This is reacted with biotin-DDE-alkyne which is a biotin probe that can be cleaved with hydrazine. The protein is digested with trypsin overnight at 37 C, and the peptides were allowed to bind to streptavidin-agarose beads and then eluted with 2% hydrazine in PBS. The peptide samples were then desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, SanJose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discover 2.1.1.21) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1) Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search Uniprot_Hum_Compl_20170714.fasta assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the Uniprot_Hum_Compl_20170714 database also assuming trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, nethylmaleimide of cysteine and glutathione-azido-415-Ahn of cysteine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) contribute to the etiology of multiple muscle-related diseases. There is emerging evidence that cellular stress can lead to destabilization of sarcomeres, the contractile unit of muscle. However, it is incompletely understood how cellular stress induces structural destabilization of sarcomeres. Here we report that glutathionylation of SMYD2 contributes to a loss of myofibril integrity and degradation of sarcomeric proteins mediated by MMP-2 and calpain 1. We used a clickable glutathione approach in a cardiomyocyte cell line and found selective glutathionylation of SMYD2 at Cys13. Biochemical analysis demonstrated that SMYD2 upon oxidation or glutathionylation at Cys13 loses its interaction with Hsp90 and N2A, a domain of titin. Upon dissociation from SMYD2, N2A or titin is degraded by activated MMP-2, suggesting a protective role of SMYD2 in sarcomere stability. Taken together, our results support that SMYD2 glutathionylation is a novel molecular mechanism by which ROS contribute to sarcomere destabilization.

### Keywords
Human, Cysteine, Purified protein, Glutathionylation, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
Wayne state university
Chemistry, Wayne State University, United States

### Submitter
garrett vanhecke

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Hoon Ahn
Chemistry, Wayne State University, United States


