### Accession
PXD001694

### Title
Mass spectrometry based detergent-insoluble proteins of  human cell lysates

### Description
The PXD project contains a project which aimed to identify  protein evidences (missing proteins) from insoluble proteins from cell lysate by mass spectrometry. It  involves the analysis of 3 human lung cell line and 3 liver cell lines,including the identification information and quantitative information.The raw data, peak data and search data were all cataloged into this project.

### Sample Protocol
Detergent-insoluble proteins extracted from cell lysate by differential centrifugation and purified by sonication and NP-40 wash.Thendetergent-insoluble proteins pellets were soluble in rehydration buffer [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM DTT, 2 % CHAPS and 1 % SDS] and suffered from SDA-PAGE Gel-degistion or in-solution degistion by trypsin protesome or lys-c protesome.  Peptides were either analyzed by a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (parameters at scan range 350-1500 m/z,  30K fwhm resolution at 400m/z, ten most intense precursor ions) or a Triple TOF 5600 MS (parameters at spray voltage of 2.2 kV,150℃，scan range from400-1800 m/z with >30k fwhm, 40  most intense precursor ions)

### Data Protocol
MTD data_processing_protocol All database searches were against Uniprot-Swiss HUMAN.fasta (2014.11 Release, 20193 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified modification and fixed modifications. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus carbamidomethyl, with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM for Triple TOF 5600 MS data, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20.0 PPM for LTQ-Orbitrap data.The criteria for valid identifications included: false discovery rates (FDR) are less than 1% for both peptide and protein and the minimal number of unique peptides per protein is 1, and iron scores cut off at the threshold score after fitting target FDR<1%.

### Publication Abstract
Finding protein evidence (PE) for protein coding genes is a primary task of the Phase I Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Currently, there are 2948 PE level 2-4 coding genes per neXtProt, which are deemed missing proteins in the human proteome. As most samples prepared and analyzed in the C-HPP framework were focusing on detergent soluble proteins, we posit that as a natural composition the cytoplasmic detergent-insoluble proteins (DIPs) represent a source of finding missing proteins. We optimized a workflow and separated cytoplasmic DIPs from three human lung and three human hepatoma cell lines via differential speed centrifugation. We verified that the detergent-soluble proteins (DSPs) could be sufficiently depleted and the cytoplasmic DIP isolation was partially reproducible with Spearman r &gt; 0.70 according to two independent SILAC MS experiments. Through label-free MS, we identified 4524 and 4156 DIPs from lung and liver cells, respectively. Among them, a total of 23 missing proteins (22 PE2 and 1 PE4) were identified by MS, and 18 of them had translation evidence; in addition, six PE5 proteins were identified by MS, three with translation evidence. We showed that cytoplasmic DIPs were not an enrichment of transmembrane proteins and were chromosome-, cell type-, and tissue-specific. Furthermore, we demonstrated that DIPs were distinct from DSPs in terms of structural and physical-chemical features. In conclusion, we have found 23 missing proteins and 6 PE5 proteins from the cytoplasmic insoluble proteome that is biologically and physical-chemically different from the soluble proteome, suggesting that cytoplasmic DIPs carry comprehensive and valuable information for finding PE of missing proteins. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD001694.

### Keywords
Nextprot, Missing proteins, C-hpp, Detergent-insoluble protein

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University
Jinan university

### Submitter
LI Yaxing

### Lab Head
Dr Tong Wang
Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University


