### Accession
PXD012786

### Title
Synaptosome proteome IGF2 enhancer knockout mice

### Description
We identified an enhancer element near IGF2 locus that is possibly involved with dopamine function and schizophrenia. A knockout mouse was generated for the enhancer element in the IGF2 locus. We then characterized the striatal synaptosomes ( i.e. biological fraction representing pre- post synaptic nerve terminal)by mass spectometry from WT and Igf2 enhancer KO mice.

### Sample Protocol
Striatal synaptosomes from wild-type and Igf2enh-/- mice were compared (2 striatum pools per genotype, 3 mice per pool; n=6 wild-type and 6 Igf2enh-/- mice). Synaptosomes were isolated from frozen striatum. Striatal tissue was homogenized in 5 mL isolation buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0, and protease inhibitor cocktail) using 16 gentle strokes with a glass dounce homogenizer. Samples were then centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 x g. The resultant supernatant was then layered on 1.2 M sucrose and centrifuged at 160,000 x g for 15 min using SW-41-Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). The interface between sucrose layers was collected, layered on top of 0.8 M sucrose, and centrifuged again at 160,000 x g for 15 min. The resulting pellet was then dissolved in 100 μl RIPA buffer and concentration determined using a BCA assay. Purity of synaptosomes was verified by western blotting with anti-synaptophysin antibody, anti-histone 3 antibody, and anti-actin antibody. Each sample (70 µg per sample) were run 1 cm into a SDS-PAGE gel and stained using coomassie blue. Samples were then submitted to the Whitehead Mass Spectrometry Facility (MIT, Cambridge, MA) for subsequent proteome library preparation, iTRAQ-labelling, chromatographic separation, and MS. Briefly, samples excised from the SDS-PAGE gel were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight using buffers and reagents that were free of primary amines.  The resulting peptides were extracted, labeled with Sciex iTRAQ 4-plex isotopic tags, combined, purified, and concentrated by solid-phase extraction and injected onto a Shimadzu HPLC and fraction collector equipped with a self-packed Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 analytical column (10 cm by 2.1 mm, Phenomenex).  Peptides were eluted using standard reverse-phase gradients and pH=10 ammonium formate buffers with a total of 16 fractions collected across the analytical gradient.  The resulting fraction were reduced to a total of 8 fractions. After volume reduction the peptides in these eluents were separated using standard reverse-phase gradients using a Thermo EASY nLC chromatographic system. The effluent from the column was analyzed using a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (nanospray configuration) operated in a data dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the MS data using PEAKS Studio 8.5.  The mus Mus musculus Refseq protein FASTA entries were downloaded from NIH/NCBI and concatenated to a database of common contaminants. An FDR threshold of 1% for identification of peptides and protein positive identifications was used, and quantitation was based on the top three Total Ion Current (TIC) method. Relative ratios of the iTRAQ 4-plex reporter ions were used for quantitation. Significance was calculated by ANOVA, and the Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for multiple testing correction (significance q<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Impaired neuronal processes, including dopamine imbalance, are central to the pathogenesis of major psychosis, but the molecular origins are unclear. Here we perform a multi-omics study of neurons isolated from the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;55 cases and 27 controls). DNA methylation, transcriptomic, and genetic-epigenetic interactions in major psychosis converged on pathways of neurodevelopment, synaptic activity, and immune functions. We observe prominent hypomethylation of an enhancer within the insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) gene in major psychosis neurons. Chromatin conformation analysis revealed that this enhancer targets the nearby tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene responsible for dopamine synthesis. In patients, we find hypomethylation of the IGF2 enhancer is associated with increased TH protein levels. In mice, Igf2 enhancer deletion disrupts the levels of TH protein and striatal dopamine, and induces transcriptional and proteomic abnormalities affecting neuronal structure and signaling. Our data suggests that epigenetic activation of the enhancer at IGF2 may enhance dopamine synthesis associated with major psychosis.

### Keywords
Striatum, Synaptosome, Dopamine, Schizophrenia, Igf2

### Affiliations
Van andel institute
Department for Neurodegenerative Science Van Andel Institute Grand Rapids, MI

### Submitter
Bryan Killinger

### Lab Head
Dr Viviane Labrie
Department for Neurodegenerative Science Van Andel Institute Grand Rapids, MI


