### Accession
PXD019542

### Title
A primary human T-cell spectral library to facilitate large scale quantitative T-cell proteomics

### Description
A primary human T-cell spectral library to facilitate large scale quantitative T-cell proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were separated from three healthy volunteer blood donors using a Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare, USA) gradient centrifugation. These cells were sorted using pan human T-cell magnetic beads (MiltenyiBiotec, Germany) to obtain primary human T-cells. CD3+ T-cells were further purified using human CD4+ T-cell magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) to obtain untouched CD4+ T-cells with over 95% purity, as assessed by flow cytometry. An aliquot from each donor was taken as ex vivo (0 hour) sample. The remaining purified cells from each donor were in vitro activated and cultured using CD3/28 Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher, USA) at 1:1 cell to bead ratio in RPMI 1640 medium, 10% foetal calf serum (Gibco, USA) and 50 units/ml penicillin and 50μg/ml streptomycin (Gibco, USA) and collected at 6 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours, 3 days and 7 days of post activation. Collected cells were washed three times with PBS and the cell pellets stored at -800C for batch proteomics processing. T-cell pellets obtained from time series experiment containing~1x106CD4+ T-cells were thawed on ice, and lysed in 2% SDS in 100 mM TEAB in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. After assessing the protein quantity using pierce BCA protein assay kit, ~20 μg from each cell lysate was separated for reduction (10 mMtris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine/TCEP at 600C for 30 minutes) and alkylation (40 mM2-Chloroacetamide/2CAA at 370C in dark for 30 minutes). Protein co-precipitation with trypsin in cold (-200C) 100% methanol was used to obtain detergent free protein pellets. These protein pellets were washed sequentially using 90% and 100% methanol and digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin with final trypsin: protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 μl of 50 mM TEAB. StrataX C18 solid phase extraction 1.3 mL columns (Phenomenex, USA) were used to desalt peptides and microBCA (Thermo Fisher scientific, USA) protein assay was used to quantify the peptide concentration. Peptide samples were resuspended in 10 µL of MS grade water with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and spiked with the indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (1:100). For SWATH-MS data acquisition, ~1 µg of peptides from each sample was injected at a flow rate of 250 nL/ minute into Eksigent Nano Ultra 1D+ system. A ChromXP C18-CL Trap column (C18-CL, 5 µm, 120 Å, 0.3 x 10 mm) and a ChromXP C18-CL column (particle size 3 µm, 120 Å, 150mm x 0.075mm) were used to separate peptides in the same chromatographic gradient described above. Using 100-variable window method, the eluted peptides were analyzed over 400–1250 m/z mass range by the same mass spectrometer to obtain the SWATH-MS data. Both MS and MS/MS data were accumulated over a period of 25 milliseconds at total cycle time of 2.572 seconds. The variable window method was generated according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Analyst 1.7 TF software (SCIEX, USA).

### Data Protocol
PeakView v2.2.0 (SCIEX, USA) with the SWATH-MS acquisition MicroApp 2.0.1.2133 was used to extract SWATH-MS peak areas. Ion library parameters were set with 6 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptides, peptide confidence threshold of 99% and FDR threshold of 1%. The time window and width were set to 3 minute and 75 ppm, respectively in XIC manager. The data were analysed separately against both primary human T-cell spectral library and Pan-human spectral library reported by Rosenberger et al. in 2014. In the PeakView analysis, retention times for all SWATH-MS experiments were auto-recalibrated based on iRT peptide retention times. Quantitation table files for fragment ions, peptides and proteins were generated using PeakView and MarkerView v1.2.1.1 (SCIEX, USA) and the peptides quantified with peak areas of minimum two fragment ions were selected to obtain the area under the curves of peptides to calculate the relative intensities of proteins for normalization and differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Data independent analysis (DIA) exemplified by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) provides robust quantitative proteomics data, but the lack of a public primary human T-cell spectral library is a current resource gap. Here, we report the generation of a high-quality spectral library containing data for 4,833 distinct proteins from human T-cells across genetically unrelated donors, covering ~24% proteins of the UniProt/SwissProt reviewed human proteome. SWATH-MS analysis of 18 primary T-cell samples using the new human T-cell spectral library reliably identified and quantified 2,850 proteins at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). In comparison, the larger Pan-human spectral library identified and quantified 2,794 T-cell proteins in the same dataset. As the libraries identified an overlapping set of proteins, combining the two libraries resulted in quantification of 4,078 human T-cell proteins. Collectively, this large data archive will be a useful public resource for human T-cell proteomic studies. The human T-cell library is available at SWATHAtlas and the data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD019446 and PXD019542) and PeptideAtlas (PASS01587).

### Keywords
Proteomics, Swath-ms, Human t-cells

### Affiliations
Precision and Systems Biomedicine, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4006
Senior lecturer, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Saliyapura, Sri Lanka
Visiting Scientists, Precision and Systems Biomedicine group, QIMR Berghofer Medical Reserach Institute, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
Harshi Weerakoon

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Hill
Precision and Systems Biomedicine, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4006


