### Accession
PXD001493

### Title
YBX1 interacting protein -  C1QBP Negatively Regulates the Activation of Oncoprotein YBX1 in the Renal Cell Carcinoma As Revealed by Interactomics Analysis

### Description
The Y-box-binding protein 1 (YBX1) plays a critical role in tumorigenesis by promoting cell proliferation, overriding cell-cycle check points, and enhancing genomic instability. In this study, the interactome of YBX1 in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) was analyzed by coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to better understand its function and regulatory mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Coimmunoprecipitation was used to purify the interacting proteins of YBX1. Then the YBX1 immunoprecipitates were separated on SDS-PAGE and visualized using silver staining. The gel lane was divided into ten fractions and digested for mass spectrometric analysis. LC-MS/MS was performed for protein identification using a  LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against the uniprot human protein database containing 98778 sequence entries using the SEQUEST algorithm embedded in the Protein Discoverer 1.3 Software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The following parameters were applied during the database search: 10 ppm precursor mass error tolerance, 1 Da fragment mass error tolerance, static modifications of carbamidomethylation for all cysteine residues, flexible modification of oxidation modifications for methionine residues, and one missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 was used as filtering criteria for all identified peptides. In addition, only proteins identified with two or more unique peptides and with identification coverage >5% were considered, and proteins identified with the same set of peptides were grouped and treated as one.

### Publication Abstract
The Y-box-binding protein 1 (YBX1) plays a critical role in tumorigenesis by promoting cell proliferation, overriding cell-cycle check points, and enhancing genomic instability. In this study, the interactome of YBX1 in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) was analyzed by coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to better understand its function and regulatory mechanism. A total of 129 proteins were identified as potential YBX1 binding partners. The interaction between the complement component 1, q subcomponent binding protein (C1QBP), and YBX1 was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Knockdown of C1QBP enhanced the phosphorylation of YBX1and its nuclear translocation, indicating that C1QBP negatively regulated YBX1 activation. The clinical significance of these two proteins was analyzed in the tissues from 52 RCC patients by immunohistochemistry. Expression of YBX1 was markedly elevated in the carcinoma tissues, and its nuclear expression was associated with histological T stage and metastasis. Meanwhile, the level of C1QBP in the carcinoma tissues was significantly lower than that in the adjacent healthy tissues, which was negatively correlated with the nuclear localization of YBX1 in the RCC tissues (P = 0.011). These data suggest that C1QBP is a novel regulator of YBX1, and the expression of C1QBP and the nuclear expression of YBX1 could both be used as independent prognostic makers for cancer progression in the RCC patients. The proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001493.

### Keywords
Human, Renal cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Ybx1

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University
Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, China

### Submitter
Ruibing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, China


