### Accession
PXD034833

### Title
The histone acetyltransferase KAT6A is recruited to unmethylated CpG islands via a DNA-binding winged helix domainThe histone acetyltransferase KAT6A is recruited to unmethylated CpG islands via a DNA-binding winged helix domain

### Description
The lysine acetyltransferase KAT6A (MOZ, MYST3) belongs to the MYST family of chromatin regulators, facilitating histone acetylation. Dysregulation of KAT6A has been implicated in developmental syndromes and the onset of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Previous work suggests that KAT6A is recruited to its genomic targets by a combinatorial function of histone binding PHD fingers, transcription factors and chromatin binding interaction partners. Here, we demonstrated that a winged helix domain at the N-terminus of KAT6A specifically interacts with unmethylated CpG motifs. This DNA binding function leads to the association of KAT6A to unmethylated CpG islands (CGIs) genome wide. Mutation of the essential amino acids completely abrogates the enrichment of KAT6A at CGIs. Overexpression of a KAT6A WH1 mutant has a dominant negative effect on H3K9 histone acetylation, which is comparable to the effects upon overexpression of a KAT6A HAT domain mutant. Taken together, our work revealed a previously unrecognized chromatin recruitment mechanism of KAT6A, offering a new perspective on the role of KAT6A in gene regulation and human diseases

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-HA-tagged human KAT6A wildtype, the WH1 KQ-AA mutant, as wells as FLAG-HA-GFP as a control were stably expressed in HEK293 cells. Whole cell extracts were prepared from around 1 x 108 cells with NP-40 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 300 mM KCl, 12.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 % NP-40, 10 % glycerol, and protease inhibitors). Immunoprecipitation was performed using Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma) with around 5 mg of total protein per IP in NP-40 lysis buffer containing 150 mM KCl and 0.25% NP-40 for 3 hours at 4°C. After 3 washes with TBS, 0.25% NP-40, bound proteins were eluted by addition of Laemmli buffer or 0.2 mg/mL FLAG peptide and subsequently analyzed by western blotting or silver staining. For mass spectrometric analysis, beads were washed additional 3 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin after reduction and alkylation. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, uniprot_P000005640_Hsapiens_20191126.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Results were analyzed in Perseus 1.6.15.0.

### Publication Abstract
The lysine acetyltransferase KAT6A (MOZ, MYST3) belongs to the MYST family of chromatin regulators, facilitating histone acetylation. Dysregulation of KAT6A has been implicated in developmental syndromes and the onset of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Previous work suggests that KAT6A is recruited to its genomic targets by a combinatorial function of histone binding PHD fingers, transcription factors and chromatin binding interaction partners. Here, we demonstrate that a winged helix (WH) domain at the very N-terminus of KAT6A specifically interacts with unmethylated CpG motifs. This DNA binding function leads to the association of KAT6A with unmethylated CpG islands (CGIs) genome-wide. Mutation of the essential amino acids for DNA binding completely abrogates the enrichment of KAT6A at CGIs. In contrast, deletion of a second WH domain or the histone tail binding PHD fingers only subtly influences the binding of KAT6A to CGIs. Overexpression of a KAT6A WH1 mutant has a dominant negative effect on H3K9 histone acetylation, which is comparable to the effects upon overexpression of a KAT6A HAT domain mutant. Taken together, our work revealed a previously unrecognized chromatin recruitment mechanism of KAT6A, offering a new perspective on the role of KAT6A in gene regulation and human diseases.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Winged helix, Kat6a, Histone acetylation, Cpg islands

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT)Philipps University of Marburg,  Marburg, 35043, Germany  and  Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Immunology,  University Hospital Giessen and Marburg,  Marburg, 35043, Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Robert Liefke
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT)Philipps University of Marburg,  Marburg, 35043, Germany  and  Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Immunology,  University Hospital Giessen and Marburg,  Marburg, 35043, Germany


