### Accession
PXD031792

### Title
1 Structure of the peroxisomal retro-translocon formed by a heterotrimeric ubiquitin ligase 2 complex

### Description
Peroxisomes are ubiquitous organelles that house various metabolic reactions and are essential for human health. Luminal peroxisomal proteins are imported from the cytosol by mobile receptors, which then recycle back to the cytosol by a poorly understood process. Recycling requires receptor modification by a membrane-embedded ubiquitin ligase complex comprised of three RING finger (RF) domain-containing proteins (Pex2, Pex10, and Pex12). Here, we report a cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of the ligase complex, which together with biochemical and in vivo experiments reveals its function as a retro-translocon for peroxisomal import receptors. Each subunit of the complex contributes five transmembrane segments that co-assemble into an open channel. The three RFs form a cytosolic tower, with RF2 positioned above the channel pore. We propose that the N-terminus of a recycling receptor is inserted from the peroxisomal lumen into the pore and modified by RF2 to enable extraction into the cytosol. If recycling is compromised, receptors are polyubiquitinated by the concerted action of RF10 and RF12 and degraded. This polyubiquitination pathway also maintains the homeostasis of other peroxisomal import factors. Our results clarify a crucial step during peroxisomal protein import and reveal why mutations in the ligase complex cause human disease.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared and analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). In brief, yeast cells were cultured in 50ml YNBG medium (0.3% yeast extract, 0.5% peptone, 0.67% yeast nitrogen base with amino acid, 0.5% glucose, pH 6.0) overnight until log phase and then switched into YNBO medium (0.3% yeast extract, 0.5% peptone, 0.67% yeast nitrogen base without amino acid, 0.5% glucose, 0.05% Tween40, 0.1% oleic acid, pH 6.0) for another 18 h to induce peroxisome proliferation. Cells pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, protease inhibitors (Pierce)) and then lysed using a BioSpec Beadbeater for 5 cycles, 30s on/60s off per cycle. The homogenate was centrifuged at 2,000g for 10 mins to remove the cell debris and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and then quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. Streamlined–TMT labeling and LS-MS were all done following the protocol (Navarrete-Perea et al, 2018).

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2019), Uniprot entries for S. pombe (December 2019), and Uniprot entries for E. coli (December 2019). Each database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis,  and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes are ubiquitous organelles that house various metabolic reactions and are essential for human health<sup>1-4</sup>. Luminal peroxisomal proteins are imported from the cytosol by mobile receptors, which then recycle back to the cytosol by a poorly understood process<sup>1-4</sup>. Recycling requires receptor modification by a membrane-embedded ubiquitin ligase complex comprising three RING finger domain-containing proteins (Pex2, Pex10 and Pex12)<sup>5,6</sup>. Here we report a cryo-electron microscopy structure of the ligase complex, which together with biochemical and in vivo experiments reveals its function as a retrotranslocation channel for peroxisomal import receptors. Each subunit of the complex contributes five transmembrane segments that co-assemble into an open channel. The three ring finger domains&#xa0;form a cytosolic tower, with ring finger 2 (RF2) positioned above the channel pore. We propose that the N terminus of a recycling receptor is inserted from the peroxisomal lumen into the pore and monoubiquitylated by RF2 to enable extraction into the cytosol. If recycling is compromised, receptors are polyubiquitylated by the concerted action of RF10 and RF12 and degraded. This polyubiquitylation pathway also maintains the homeostasis of other peroxisomal import factors. Our results clarify a crucial step during peroxisomal protein import and reveal why mutations in the ligase complex cause human disease.

### Keywords
Peroxisomes, Yeast, Cryo-em, Polyubiquitination, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Rapoport
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


