### Accession
PXD024005

### Title
Proteome Differences between Daptomycin-Resistant and WT MRSA Biofilms after Elasnin Treatment

### Description
A recent study reported that daptomycin-resistant MRSA (DAPR) strain biofilm is more resistant to daptomycin and vancomycin, as compared to the WT strain biofilm. This pose a great danger since DAPR MRSA is prevalent in clinics and they often form biofilms in medical devices. In this study, we investigate the anti-biofilm activity of elasnin against DAPR MRSA biofilms, and we observed that elasnin is not only effective to eradicate the biofilm of the DAPR strain, but it shows a superior activity compared to the susceptible WT strain. Using proteomics, we compared the proteome profile of the DAPR and the WT strain biofilm cells under elasnin treatment to reveal why elasin is superior against the DAPR strain. Besides, we also employed adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiment by repetitively treating MRSA culture with high dose of elasnin, and generated evolved MRSA strain with increased elasnin tolerance. Using quantitative proteomics, we compared the proteome differences in the elasnin-susceptible WT MRSA and elasnin-tolerant evolved strain.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis of the WT and DAPR MRSA biofilms under elasnin treatment, WT and DAPR MRSA was incubated for 24 h in 96-well cell culture plates to form biofilms. The formed biofilm was rinsed twice with 1×PBS and treated with elasnin (0.625 µg/ml) for 18 h. Biofilm cells that were not treated with elasnin were also collected as control. For proteomics analysis of the ancestral WT and elasnin-tolerant evolved strain under elasnin treatment, ancestral and evolved strain was grown to exponential phase and treated with elasnin (50 µg/ml) for 5 h. Untreated ancestral and evolved populations were also collected as control. For all proteomics experiments, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample. The cell pellet was suspended in 350 µL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), froze in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated for 12 min. The sample was centrifuged to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. Aliquot of the sample was taken for BCA protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). After protein quantification, the sample was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 M final concentration) at 37 ⁰C for 1 h. For shotgun proteomics, 100 µg of proteins were mixed with up to 250 µl of the exchange buffer (6M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 600 mM guanidine HCl), transferred to Amicon® filter device and centrifuged for 20 min. The proteins in the filter device was alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 mM in exchange buffer) in dark for 20 min, and then centrifuged for 20 min. To dilute the urea concentration, 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter device and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). This step was repeated once. Proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:50 w/w) for 12 h at 37 ⁰C. Then, the sample was acidified with 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and centrifuged for 16,000 ×g for 5 min. Finally, the samples were desalted by C18 reverse-phase ZipTip and dried with SpeedVac for 20 min.  The samples were reconstituted in 25 µl water:acetonitrile:formic acid in a 97.9:2:0.1 ratio (v/v/v), and processed through Bruker nanoElute Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TimsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). A volume of 1 µl (approximately 200 ng of the protein digest) was injected to the UHPLC system and separated on an IonOpticks 25cm Aurora Series Emitter column with Captive Spray Insert (250 mm × 75 µm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 µm particle size C18) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied from 2 to 5% of solvent B for 0.5 min, from 5 to 30% of solvent B for 26.5 min, and then from 30 to 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min. At the end, the mobile phase was kept at 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, and then decreased to 2% of solvent B for 0.1 min. 2 minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed together in a single run by MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 with default parameters except the following: Discard unmodified counterpart peptides was set to false, write msScans table was set to true, and match between runs was set to true. For label-free quantification (LFQ), the minimum ratio count was set to 2, and separate LFQ in parameter groups were set to true. Database searches are performed using the Andromeda search engine, which was integrated in MaxQuant, using a custom database. Briefly, the genome sequence of MRSA ATCC 43300 was converted into protein database using GeneMark (version 3.25) gene prediction tool. The proteins were then annotated using BLASTp (version 2.7.1) from NCBI using MRSA NCTC 8325 as the protein database. The sequences of common contaminants such as trypsin and human keratins were added to the database.  Data processing is performed using Perseus v1.6.15.0. MaxQuant employs the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantification (LFQ), and quantification will be performed using both unique peptides and razor peptides (peptides that match multiple protein groups, which are assigned to the protein group with the most unique peptides), including those modified by acetylation (protein N-terminal) and oxidation (Met). Briefly, protein group LFQ intensities are log2-transformed to reduce the effect of outliers. To overcome the obstacle of missing LFQ values, missing values are imputed from the normal distribution. Log ratios are calculated as the difference in the average log2 LFQ intensity values between experimental and control groups. Two-tailed Student’s t-test calculations are used in statistical tests. A protein is considered as differentially expressed if its fold change is higher or lower than ± 2-folds and permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.05. All the differentially expressed proteins are used in the subsequent protein network and pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Elasnin is a recently reported antibiofilm agent that is effective against Gram-positive bacteria including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Remarkably, we observed that elasnin has a superior activity in eradicating daptomycin-resistant MRSA strain biofilm, with a lower minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) value of 0.625&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/mL, compared to 2.5&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/mL for the wild type. Confocal microscopy further confirmed the higher biofilm eradication on the daptomycin-resistant strain, displaying &#x223c;53% decrease in cell density upon elasnin treatment, while the wild-type strain was only decreased by &#x223c;15%. Quantitative proteomics revealed that the daptomycin-resistant strain has a lower expression of the membrane, cell wall, and extracellular proteins, and also proteins involved in the arginine biosynthesis, pathogenesis, and cell adhesion compared to the wild type, which may result in weaker biofilm development. This study highlights the potential clinical application of elasnin through its superior biofilm eradication activity against a daptomycin-resistant MRSA strain, and revealed the associated processes governing this superior activity through proteomics analysis. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Due to the increased use of daptomycin for the treatment of MRSA infections, the emergence of daptomycin-resistant strains has become prevalent in recent years. In this study, we discovered that elasnin, a newly reported antibiofilm compound, has a superior activity in eradicating daptomycin-resistant MRSA strain biofilms compared to the wild type. Follow-up analysis revealed the reason behind this superior activity, which is the lower expression of key proteins that play a role in pathogenesis and cell adhesion in the daptomycin-resistant strain, leading to weaker biofilm development. This showcases the potential use of elasnin in clinical settings where daptomycin-resistant strains and biofilm formation are prevalent. Altogether, our study provides new insights into the mechanism of elasnin in MRSA biofilm cells and identified its superior biofilm eradicating activity in the daptomycin-resistant strain.

### Keywords
Biofilms, Mrsa, Elasnin, Daptomycin-resistant

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


