### Accession
PXD006255

### Title
Rapid processing of archival tissue samples for proteomic analysis using pressure-cycling technology

### Description
Advent of mass spectrometry based proteomics has revolutionized our ability to study proteins from biological specimenin a high-throughput manner. Unlike cell line based studies, biomedical research involving tissue specimen is often challenging due to limited sample availability. In addition, investigation of clinically relevant research questions often requires enormous amount of time for sample collection prospectively. Formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) archived tissue samples are a rich source of tissue specimen for biomedical research. However, there are several challenges associated with analysing FFPE samples. Protein cross-linking and degradation of proteins particularly affects proteomic analysis We demonstrate that barocycler that uses pressure-cycling technology enables  efficient protein extraction and processing of small amounts of FFPE tissue samplesfor proteomic analysis. We identified 3,525 proteins from six 10µm esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) tissue sections. Barocycler allows efficient protein extraction and proteolytic digestion of proteins from FFPE tissue sections where conventional methods have limited success

### Sample Protocol
Six FFPE tissue sections of 10µm thickness (esophageal squamous cell carcinoma)were obtained. FFPE sections were deparaffinized using 3 cycles of xylene treatment of 2 min each. FFPE sections were rehydrated by consecutive incubations in 90% and 70%ethanol followed by water for 1 minute. Rehydrated tissue sections were scraped off the glass slide and minced into small pieces using sterile blade. Around 150µl of tissue lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM DTT and 50mM TEABC) was added to the tissue and transferred to PCT microtubes. Protein extraction was carried out using barocycler at 95ºC and 60 cycles of alternating pressure (1cycle= 40000psi for 50sec and 5000psi for 10sec). Protein lysate was clarified at 12000rpm for 20min and supernatant was separated. Protein concentration was estimated using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Around 250ug of protein was reduced using 10mM DTT at 60ºC for 30 min followed by alkylation using 20mM iodoacetamide in dark for 10min. Buffer exchange of protein was carried out to remove SDS using 30kDa filters followed by proteolytic digestion using barocycler. Briefly, Lys-C was added to the protein lysate at 1:100enzyme to substrate ratio and transferred to PCT microtubes. Total volume of lysate after addition of enzyme was maintained at 100µl and digestion was carried out at 32ºC for 45 cycles with alternating pressure (1cycle= 20000psi for 50sec and 5000psi for 10sec). Following Lys-C digestion, trypsin was added at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio and digestion step was repeated using barocycler.Peptides were fractionated to 6 fractions  each using stage-tip based Strong cation exchange (SCX) and reverse phase (SDB-RPS) method to reduce the complexity of the sample.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Mascot and Sequest search algorithms against Human RefSeq75 protein database supplemented with frequently observed contaminants through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Search parameters included trypsin as the protease,precursor mass tolerance was set at 20ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.1Da. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation at methionine along with deamidation at asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. MS data was simultaneously searched against a decoy database and the results were filtered using 1% FDR threshold for peptide identifications.  Following parameters were common to all searches - 1) Precursor mass error set at 20 ppm, 2) Fragment mass error set at 0.1 Da, 3) carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification, 4) Oxidation of methionine was defined as variable modification. 5) Only tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered. The sequences of common contaminants including trypsin used as protease were appended to the database engine installed locally.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pressure cycling technology, Barocycler, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Harsha Gowda, Institute of Bioinformatics, Discoverer, 7th floor, International tech park, whitefield road, Bengaluru. 560066
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Harsha Gowda, Institute of Bioinformatics, Discoverer, 7th floor, International tech park, whitefield road, Bengaluru. 560066


