### Accession
PXD021426

### Title
Can cheese mites, maggots and molds enhance bioactivity? Peptidomic investigation of functional peptides in four traditional cheeses

### Description
Aside from their amino acid content, dairy proteins are valuable for their ability to carry encrypted bioactive peptides whose activities are latent until released by digestive enzymes or endogenous enzymes within the food. Peptides can possess a wide variety of functionalities, such as antibacterial, antihypertensive, and antioxidative properties, as demonstrated by in vitro and in vivo studies. This phenomenon raises the question as to what impact various traditional cheese-making processes have on the formation of bioactive peptides in the resulting products. In this study, we have profiled the naturally-occurring peptides in two hard and two soft traditional cheeses and have identified their known bioactive sequences. While past studies have typically identified fewer than 100 peptide sequences in a single cheese, we have used modern instrumentation to identify between 2900 and 4700 sequences per cheese, an increase by a factor of about 50. We demonstrated substantial variations in proteolysis and peptide formation between the interior and rind of each cheese, which we ascribed to the differences in microbial composition between these regions. We identified a total of 111 bioactive sequences among the four cheeses, with the greatest number of sequences, 89, originating from Mimolette. The most common bioactivities identified were antimicrobial and inhibition of the angiotensin-converting enzyme. This work revealed that cheese proteolysis and the resulting peptidomes are more complex than originally thought in terms of the number of peptides released, variation in peptidome across sites within a single cheese, and variation in bioactive peptides among cheese-making techniques.

### Sample Protocol
The rind and interior of each cheese were prepared and analyzed separately using the following protocol: 100 mg of cheese were cut into fine pieces and combined with 1 mL of Milli-Q water. The mixture was shaken at 40 °C for one hour with a Thermomixer C (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany),  agitated via an ultrasonic bath (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) for 15 minutes at 40 °C, and finally shaken at 40 °C for one more hour. To eliminate lipids and large particles, the solution was centrifuged at 3,080 × g at 4 °C for 30 min. The peptide-containing supernatant was collected (approx. 0.9 mL) and purified by Folch extraction and C18 solid phase extraction (SPE). Briefly, the aqueous samples were combined with 3.6 mL (4 volumes) 2:1 chloroform:methanol. The mixture was vortexed and then centrifuged at 4,200 × g for 10 min. The upper (methanol/water) layer was collected, dried by vacuum centrifugation and the dried samples were re-dissolved in Milli-Q water. The peptides were further purified by microplate C18 SPE (Glygen, Columbia, MD, USA). The microplate wells were activated with 99.9% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and equilibrated with 1% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded, and the solid phase was washed with 1.2 mL 1% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 600 μL 65% ACN/0.1% TFA. The peptides were dried and re-dissolved in 100 µL Milli-Q water. Samples were filtered through 0.2-µm polyethersulfone syringe filters. Each extraction was performed in duplicate for each cheese rind and interior.  Peptides were separated using a Waters Nano Acquity Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatograph equipped with a 100 µm x 25 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U trapping column and a 75 µm x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U analytical column, followed by ionization with a Proxeon nanospray source. Compounds were eluted from the analytical column using a gradient composed of 0.1% formic acid (FA) (A) and ACN (B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The 60-min gradient was ramped from 5–35% B, 0–50 min; followed by 35–80% B, 50–53 min; 80% B, 53–54 min; 80–5% B, 54–55 min; and 5% B; 55–60 min.  Mass spectra were collected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using data-dependent acquisition, with 15 tandem-MS (MS/MS) scans following each MS scan. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds was applied. MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000 and a target of 1 x 106 ions or 30 ms maximum injection time. MS/MS spectra were collected with a resolution of 17,500 and an ion count target of 5 x 104, or a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation was performed on ions having a charge in the range of +1 to +4 using higher-energy collision dissociation, with a normalized collision energy value of 27.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectral files were exported in mgf file format and analyzed with X!Tandem peptide identification software. The peptide search was performed with the allowable mass error set to 20 ppm for both precursor and fragment ions, and with a log(e) < -2 threshold (corresponding to a 99% minimum match confidence). Isotope errors were allowed, allowing the software to recognize peptides from MS/MS spectra that resulted from the fragmentation of the M+1 isotope rather than the monoisotope. Oxidation of methionine was allowed as a potential modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and phosphorylation of serine and threonine were used as potential modifications during a secondary refinement search. No complete modifications were allowed. The data was searched against the entire animal proteome specific to each cheese (bovine for Stilton, Mimolette, and Taleggio; sheep for Casu Marzu, downloaded from www.uniprot.org) with a non-specific ([X]|[X]) proteolytic cleavage pattern. When calculating the number of unique peptides identified in each sample, amino acid sequence, number of modifications, and type of modifications were taken into consideration. Thus, two peptide sequences which appeared to have differing locations for the same type(s) of modification(s) were considered duplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Aside from their amino acid content, dairy proteins are valuable for their ability to carry encrypted bioactive peptides whose activities are latent until released by digestive enzymes or endogenous enzymes within the food. Peptides can possess a wide variety of functionalities, such as antibacterial, antihypertensive, and antioxidative properties, as demonstrated by in vitro and in vivo studies. This phenomenon raises the question as to what impact various traditional cheese-making processes have on the formation of bioactive peptides in the resulting products. In this study, we have profiled the naturally-occurring peptides in two hard and two soft traditional cheeses and have identified their known bioactive sequences. While past studies have typically identified fewer than 100 peptide sequences in a single cheese, we have used modern instrumentation to identify between 2900 and 4700 sequences per cheese, an increase by a factor of about 50. We demonstrated substantial variations in proteolysis and peptide formation between the interior and rind of each cheese, which we ascribed to the differences in microbial composition between these regions. We identified a total of 111 bioactive sequences among the four cheeses, with the greatest number of sequences, 89, originating from Mimolette. The most common bioactivities identified were antimicrobial and inhibition of the angiotensin-converting enzyme. This work revealed that cheese proteolysis and the resulting peptidomes are more complex than originally thought in terms of the number of peptides released, variation in peptidome across sites within a single cheese, and variation in bioactive peptides among cheese-making techniques.

### Keywords
Peptides, Cheese, Bioactive, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Food Science & Technology University of California, Davis Davis, CA, USA
UC Davis

### Submitter
Randall Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Barile
Department of Food Science & Technology University of California, Davis Davis, CA, USA


