### Accession
PXD041329

### Title
Fasting-sensitive SUMO-switch on Prox1 controls hepatic cholesterol metabolism

### Description
Accumulation of excess nutrients hampers proper liver function and is linked to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in obesity. However, the signals responsible for an impaired adaptation of hepatocytes to obesogenic dietary cues remain still largely unknown.  Post-translational modification by the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO), allows for adynamic regulation of numerous processes including transcriptional reprograming.  We demonstrate that specific SUMOylation of transcription factor Prox1 represents a nutrient-sensitive determinant of hepatic fasting metabolism. Prox1 was highly SUMOylated on lysine 556 in the liver of ad libitum and re-fed mice, while this modification was abolished upon fasting. In the context of diet-induced obesity, Prox1 SUMOylation became less sensitive to fasting cues. The hepatocyte-selective knock-in of a SUMOylation-deficient Prox1 mutant into mice fed a high-fat/high-fructose diet led to a reduction of systemic cholesterol levels, associated with the induction of liver bile acid detoxifying pathways during fasting. The generation of tools to maintain the nutrient-sensitive SUMO-switch on Prox1 may thus contribute to the development of “fasting-based” approaches for the preservation of metabolic health.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography (LC)- mass spectrometry (MS) of immuno-purified proteins SUMO immunoprecipitation from liver tissue samples was performed as described (Barysch et al., 2014; Becker et al., 2013). Eluted proteins from control immunoprecipitation, SUMO1 immunoprecipitation and SUMO2 immunoprecipitation each derived from re-fed or fasted cells were separated with 1D SDS-PAGE.  Each lane was cut into equal pieces before undergoing in-gel digestion of proteins in each gel slide with trypsin over might. Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and dissolved and further processed as described in Becker et al. (2014). LC-MS/MS analyses was done as described in Becker et al (2014).

### Data Protocol
Database search of MS data was performed with Mascot against the NCBI non-redundant database of Mus musculus (ipi.MOUSE.v3.80.fasta). For databases search two missed cleavages were allowed, methionine oxidation and carbamidomethyl at cysteine were set as variable modifications.  The precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance to 0,6 Da. Data were visualized with Scaffold software (version 3, Proteomesoftware.com) and proteins identified In the different samples were ranked according to their total spectrum count (Supplmentary Table Sx).

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of excess nutrients hampers proper liver function and is linked to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in obesity. However, the signals responsible for an impaired adaptation of hepatocytes to obesogenic dietary cues remain still largely unknown. Post-translational modification by the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) allows for a dynamic regulation of numerous processes including transcriptional reprogramming. We demonstrate that specific SUMOylation of transcription factor Prox1 represents a nutrient-sensitive determinant of hepatic fasting metabolism. Prox1 is highly SUMOylated on lysine 556 in the liver of ad libitum and refed mice, while this modification is abolished upon fasting. In the context of diet-induced obesity, Prox1 SUMOylation becomes less sensitive to fasting cues. The hepatocyte-selective knock-in of a SUMOylation-deficient Prox1 mutant into mice fed a high-fat/high-fructose diet leads to a reduction of systemic cholesterol levels, associated with the induction of liver bile acid detoxifying pathways during fasting. The generation of tools to maintain the nutrient-sensitive SUMO-switch on Prox1 may thus contribute to the development of "fasting-based" approaches for the preservation of metabolic health.

### Keywords
Bile acids, Liver, Sumoylation, Prox1, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
MPInat AG16080
1 Institute for Diabetes and Cancer, Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany  2 Joint Heidelberg-IDC Translational Diabetes Program, Inner Medicine 1, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany 3 German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), and German Center for Cardiovascular Disease (DZHK), Neuherberg, Germany 4 Chair Molecular Metabolic Control, Technical University Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Ralf Pflanz

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Herzig
1 Institute for Diabetes and Cancer, Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany  2 Joint Heidelberg-IDC Translational Diabetes Program, Inner Medicine 1, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany 3 German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), and German Center for Cardiovascular Disease (DZHK), Neuherberg, Germany 4 Chair Molecular Metabolic Control, Technical University Munich, Germany


