### Accession
PXD016198

### Title
A CSB-PAF1 axis activates RNA polymerase II from promoter-proximal sites and restores efficient transcription elongation after DNA damage repair

### Description
The coordinated transcription of genes involves RNA polymerase II enzymes (RNAPII), which pull DNA through their active sites. DNA lesions in transcribed strands block RNAPII elongation and induce a strong transcriptional arrest. The transcription-coupled repair (TCR) pathway ensures the efficient removal of transcription-blocking DNA lesions, but this is not sufficient to overcome this arrest and resume transcription. Through proteomics screens, we find that the TCR-specific CSB protein loads the evolutionary conserved PAF1 complex (PAF1C) onto RNAPII in promoter-proximal regions specifically in response to DNA damage. PAF1C is dispensable for TCR-mediated repair,but is essential to resume RNA synthesis after UV irradiation, suggesting an unexpected uncoupling between DNA repair and transcription restart. Moreover, we find that PAF1C promotes RNAPII pause release in promoter-proximal regions and subsequently acts as a processivity factor that stimulates transcription elongation waves throughout genes. Our findings expose the molecular basis for a non-canonical PAF1C-dependent pathway that restores transcription throughout the human genome after genotoxic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for Co-IP. For endogenous RNAPII immunoprecipitation, cells were subjected to chromatin fractionation prior to immunoprecipitation. Cells were lysed in EBC-150 buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)) for 20 minutes at 4°C, followed by centrifugation to remove cytoplasmic proteins. Subsequently, the chromatin fraction was solubilized in EBC-150 buffer with 500 U/mL Benzonase and 2 ug of antibody directed to endogenous RNAPII-S2 (Abcam; ab5095) or RNAPII-S5 (Abcam; ab5408) for 1 hr at 4°C under rotation. Next, the NaCl concentration of the lysis buffer was increased to 300 mM by adding concentrated (5M) NaCl, and lysates were incubated for another 30 min at 4°C. The lysates were cleared from insoluble chromatin and were subjected to immunoprecipitation with protein A agarose beads (Millipore) for 1.5 hrs at 4°C. The beads were then washed 4-6 times with EBC-300 buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA) and boiled in sample buffer. Bound proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies.  Immunoprecipitation of GFP-tagged proteins was performed using a similar protocol with the following exceptions: Cell pellets were directly solubilized in EBC-150 supplemented with 500U Benzonase, without chromatin fractionation, and pulldown was not dependent on antibody-mediated pulldown, but was performed using GFP Trap beads (Chromotek).   Generation of mass spectrometry samples. For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) labeling, CS1AN-SV expressing GFP-CSB were cultured for 14 days in media containing ‘heavy’ (H) and ‘light’ (L) labeled forms of the amino acids arginine and lysine respectively. SILAC-labeled cells were mock-treated (L) or exposed to 20 J/m2 UV-C light and allowed to recover for 1 hr (H). Label-free mass spectrometry samples were also either kept untreated or exposed to 20 J/m2 UV-C light and allowed to recover for 1 hr. A pool of equal amounts of H- and L-labelled cells (SILAC) or individual label-free mass spectrometry samples, were subsequently subjected to immunoprecipitation using GFP Trap beads as described above. After pulldown, the beads were washed 2 times with EBC-300 buffer and 2 times with 50 mM (NH4)2CO3 followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. Peptides of the H and L precipitates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge by washing with 0.1 % acetic acid. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1 % acetic acid/60 % acetonitrile and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis. RAW mass spectrometry data was further analysed in MaxQuant v 1.5.3.30 according to (Tyanova et al. 2016a) using standard settings with the following modifications, For the SILAC-labelled GFP-CSB samples, multiplicity was set to 2, marking Arg10 and Lys8 as Heavy Labels. Max. missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 4. Search was performed against an in silico digested database from the human proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 18th June 2018). Minimum peptide length was set to 6 and Max peptide mass was set to 5 kDa. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. The Match between runs feature was activated. Minimum ratio count for quantification was set to 1. For the label-free GFP-LEO1 and GFP-RBP1 samples, Max. missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 4. Label-free quantification was activated not enabling Fast LFQ. Search was performed against an in silico digested database from the human proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 18th June 2018). Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. The Match between runs feature was activated and iBAQ quantification was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Bulky DNA lesions in transcribed strands block RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) elongation and induce a genome-wide transcriptional arrest. The transcription-coupled repair (TCR) pathway efficiently removes transcription-blocking DNA lesions, but how transcription is restored in the genome following DNA repair remains unresolved. Here, we find that the TCR-specific CSB protein loads the PAF1 complex (PAF1C) onto RNAPII in promoter-proximal regions in response to DNA damage. Although dispensable for TCR-mediated repair, PAF1C is essential for transcription recovery after UV irradiation. We find that PAF1C promotes RNAPII pause release in promoter-proximal regions and subsequently acts as a processivity factor that stimulates transcription elongation throughout genes. Our findings expose the molecular basis for a non-canonical PAF1C-dependent pathway that restores transcription throughout the human genome after genotoxic stress.

### Keywords
Csb, Tc-ner, Transcription recovery

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred CO Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


