### Accession
PXD017780

### Title
Common and strain-specific post-translational modifications of the potyvirus Plum pox virus coat protein in different hosts

### Description
Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are widespread post-translational modifications (PTMs) often sharing protein targets. Numerous studies have reported phosphorylation of plant virus proteins. In plants, research on O-GlcNAcylation lags behind regarding other eukaryotes and information about O-GlcNAcylated plant viral proteins is extremely scarce. The potyvirus Plum pox virus (PPV) causes sharka disease in Prunus trees, and also infects a wide range of experimental hosts. Capsid protein (CP) from virions of the PPV-R isolate purified from herbaceous plants can be extensively modified by O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation. In this study, a combination of proteomics and biochemical approaches has been employed to broaden knowledge of PPV CP PTMs. CP proved to be modified regardless it is assembled or not in mature particles. PTMs of CP occur in the natural host Prunus persica, similar to what happens in herbaceous plants. Additionally, we observe O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation are general features of different PPV strains, suggesting that roles of these modifications are part of overall strategies deployed during plant-virus interactions. Interestingly, phosphorylation at a casein kinase II motif conserved among potyviral CPs exhibits strain specificity in PPV; however, it does not display the critical role attributed to same modification in the CP of another potyvirus, Potato virus A.

### Sample Protocol
PPV virions were methanol–chloroform precipitated, reconstituted in a buffer containing 8 M urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and, after reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, were proteolysed with Lys-C/trypsin. For phosphopeptide enrichment, two in-house-packed micro-columns, IMAC and Oligo R3 reverse-phase, were concatenated for selective purification and sample clean-up before liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis (Navajas et al., 2011). Phosphopeptide-enriched fractions were subjected to nano LC-MS/MS Triple Tof system in a data-dependent acquisition mode, where up to 15 precursor ions were monitored and selected for fragmentation, per MS cycle (same nano LC-MS/MS Triple Tof system and parameters as described in (Martínez-Turiño et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were converted to MGF files which were also searched against a PPV protein database, containing 13 protein-coding genes and using the Mascot Server v.2.6.1 (Matrix Science). In addition to Mascot, Peaks Search engine (BSI Peaks Studio 7.5) was used. Search parameters were set as follows: no enzyme restriction; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation and glycosylation (HexNAc) of serine and threonine and phosphorylation of tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation and <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation are widespread post-translational modifications (PTMs), often sharing protein targets. Numerous studies have reported the phosphorylation of plant viral proteins. In plants, research on <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation lags behind that of other eukaryotes, and information about <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated plant viral proteins is extremely scarce. The potyvirus <i>Plum pox virus</i> (PPV) causes sharka disease in <i>Prunus</i> trees and also infects a wide range of experimental hosts. Capsid protein (CP) from virions of PPV-R isolate purified from herbaceous plants can be extensively modified by <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation. In this study, a combination of proteomics and biochemical approaches was employed to broaden knowledge of PPV CP PTMs. CP proved to be modified regardless of whether or not it was assembled into mature particles. PTMs of CP occurred in the natural host <i>Prunus persica</i>, similarly to what happens in herbaceous plants. Additionally, we observed that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation were general features of different PPV strains, suggesting that these modifications contribute to general strategies deployed during plant-virus interactions. Interestingly, phosphorylation at a casein kinase II motif conserved among potyviral CPs exhibited strain specificity in PPV; however, it did not display the critical role attributed to the same modification in the CP of another potyvirus, <i>Potato virus A</i>.

### Keywords
Capsid protein; o-glcnacylation; phosphorylation; sharka; potyvirus

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Department of Plant Molecular Genetics, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC),Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Antonio García
Department of Plant Molecular Genetics, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC),Madrid, Spain.


