### Accession
PXD018316

### Title
Vigilin/HDLBP promotes translation of endoplasmic reticulum-targeted mRNAs

### Description
Nascent peptide chain targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane is required for correct localization and efficient translation of membrane-bound and secreted proteins. However, little is known about the contribution of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to the recognition, localization and translation of ER-localized mRNAs. In this work we used biochemical, transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to delineate the role of human HDLBP. PAR-CLIP analysis revealed that HDLBP directly and specifically interacted with more than 80% of all expressed ER-localized mRNAs. Interestingly, the binding to the coding sequence was most prominent for ER-localized mRNAs, while cytosolic mRNAs showed higher binding in the 3’UTR. HDLBP crosslinked strongly to long CU-rich motifs that resided more frequently in coding sequences of ER-localized but not in cytosolic mRNAs. This indicated that the primary sequence composition determines the basis for HDLBP binding specificity and its multivalent interactions with ER-bound mRNAs. PAR-CLIP analysis also revealed direct interactions of HDLBP with the RNA components of the translational apparatus, while in vivo proximity proteomics detected proteins involved in translation and components of the signal recognition particle (SRP). Functional studies using CRISPR-Cas9 HDLBP knockout cell lines in combination with ribosome profiling, pSILAC, and luciferase assays showed decreased translation efficiency of HDLBP target mRNAs, impaired protein synthesis and secretion in the knockout conditions. Finally, HDLBP absence resulted in decrease of lung tumor formation capacity in vivo. These results highlight a general function for HDLBP in the translation of ER -localized mRNAs via the secretory pathway and discover its relevance for cell profileration and tumor progression

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were ressuspended in 6M urea, 2M Thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8 solution. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. For lysis, proteins were incubated with 1% (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperature for 3 hours; diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution for final urea concentration of 2M; and incubated with 1% (w/w) trypsin (Promega) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 hours. Peptides were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, and desalted with C18 Stage Tips (PMID: 12585499). Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, dried and ressuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). Peptide concentration was measured based on 280nm UV light absorbance. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed employing an EASY nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made C18 microcolumns (75 µm ID, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm resin, Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Denmark) of both an Orbitrao HF-X or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer with the FAIMS module installed and in application mode “Peptide” (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 2 or 4 hours with a stepwise increasing gradient of 4.74% to 81.3% acetonitrile in constant 0.1% formic acid. Settings for data dependent analysis on Orbitrap HF-X were: positive polarity, full scan (resolution, 60000; m/z, 350-1800, AGC target, 3e6; injection time, 10ms) followed by top20 MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 15000; m/z, 200-2000; AGC target, 1e5. injection time, 22 ms; isolation width, 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 26). Settings for data dependent analysis on Exploris were: positive polarity, 1 second cycle time, full scan (resolution, 60000; m/z, 350-1800, AGC target, 300%; injection time, 30ms; FAIMS CV, -40, -55 or -70 mV) followed by MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 7500; m/z, 200-2000; AGC target, 100%. injection time, 25 ms; isolation width, 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 28). Ions with an unassigned charge state, singly charged ions, and ions with charge state higher than five were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded.

### Data Protocol
All samples were measured in technical duplicates. Raw files were analyzed together with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (PMID: 19029910) with default parameters. Files measured by Q-exactive HF-X or Exploris machines were grouped in same experimental group, while technical and biological replicates were kept separated. Briefly, search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation (only identification) as variable modifications. Triple multiplicity was used for search of light (Lys0, Arg0), medium-heavy (Lys4, Arg6) and heavy (Lys8, Arg10) peptides. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main search, respectively. Database search was performed with Andromeda embed in MaxQuant (PMID: 21254760) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on January 2019) with common contaminant sequences provided by MaxQuant. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. Match between runs was turned on. Search was performed with Requantify turned on, and again with option turned off. For analysis, potential contaminants, reverse database hits and peptides only identified by modification were excluded. Unscrupulous ratios, defined as a SILAC pair quantified from both requantified intensities, were removed from further analysis. These were rare and constituted only a small fraction of requantified SILAC ratios. MaxQuant normalized SILAC ratios were used for analysis. For average calculations, only proteins with one or more values in at least one replicate from both forward and reverse SILAC label experiments were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdlbp; vigilin; rna-binding protein; kh-domain; endoplasmic reticulum; translation

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft (MDC), Proteome Dynamics, Berlin, Germany
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft (MDC), Proteome Dynamics, Berlin, Germany


