### Accession
PXD025548

### Title
Stable isotope-resolved metabolomics reveals the abnormal brain glucose catabolism in depression based on chronic unpredictable mild stress rats

### Description
The severe harm of depression to human life has attracted great attention to neurologists, but its pathogenesis is extremely complicated and has not yet been fully elaborated. Here, we provided a new strategy for revealing the specific pathways of abnormal brain glucose catabolism in depression, which from the supply of energy substrates and the evaluation of mitochondrial structure and function. By using stable isotope-resolved metabolomics technique, we discovered the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) is blocked and the gluconeogenesis is abnormally activated in chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rats. In addition, our results showed an interesting phenomenon that the brain attempted to activate all possible metabolic enzymes in energy-producing pathways, but CUMS rats still exhibited a low TCA cycle activity due to impaired mitochondria. Depression caused mitochondrial structure and function impaired, and then led to abnormal brain glucose catabolism. The combination of the stable isotope-resolved metabolomics and mitochondrial structure and function analysis can accurately clarify the mechanism of depression. The mitochondrial pyruvate carrier and acetyl-CoA maybe the key targets for depression treatment. The strategy provides a unique insight for exploring the mechanism of depression, the discovery of new targets, and the development of ideal novel antidepressants.

### Sample Protocol
Separation of hydrophilic metabolites was achieved on a SeQuant ZIC-cHILIC column (2.1 mm×150 mm, 3 μm, Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) at a constant flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The mobile phase A is ammonium acetate solution (pH=3.25; 10 mM) and B is acetonitrile. The injection volume is 5 μL. The column temperature is 35°C. The eluting gradient is 0 min, 95% B; 0~8 min, 95%~85% B; 8~10 min, 85%~81% B; 10~22 min, 81%~60% B; 22~25 min, 60%~95% B; 22~25 min, 95% B. The ion source adopted HESI and detected in negative ion mode. The mass spectrometry parameters are as follows: sheath gas = 55 arbitrary units, auxiliary gas = 15 arbitrary units, sweep gas = 3 arbitrary units, spray voltage (-) = 2.5 kV, capillary temperature = 320°C, S-lens RF level = 65.0, auxiliary gas heater temperature = 450°C, full scan range = 60~900 (m/z); resolution = 35,000; maximum injection time = 120 ms; automatic gain control (AGC) = 1e6 ions. Separation of hydrophobic metabolites was achieved on a Waters ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 column (2.1 mm×100 mm, 1.8 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at a constant flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The mobile phase A is water containing 0.1% formic acid and B is acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The injection volume is 5 μL. The column temperature is 35°C. The eluting gradient is 0~2 min, 2% B; 2~3 min, 2%~35% B; 3~28 min, 35%~98% B; 28~30 min, 98% B; 30~32 min, 98%~2% B; 32~34 min, 2% B. The ion source adopted HESI and detected in positive and negative ion switching acquisition mode. The mass spectrometry parameters are as follows: sheath gas = 35 arbitrary units, auxiliary gas = 10 arbitrary units, spray voltage (+) = 3.0 kV, spray voltage (-) = 2.7 kV, capillary temperature = 300°C, S-lens RF level = 55.0, auxiliary gas heater temperature = 300°C, full scan range = 100~1500 (m/z); resolution = 35,000; maximum injection time = 120 ms; automatic gain control (AGC) = 1e6 ions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed through Compound Discoverer 3.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany), using the workflow “Stable Isotope Labeling w Metabolika Pathways and ID using Online Databases and Local Database” with slight modification. After retention time alignment, compounds detection, background compounds marked, unknown metabolites were identified based on the online databases (e.g., HMDB, KEGG, mzCloud, etc.) and the local database established in our laboratory. Immediately following the compound annotation and labeled compounds analysis. Then data were exported into an Excel file for further analysis. The fractions list of isotopologue of each metabolite were extracted from the data matrix based on the enumeration method, which encoded by Python 3.7. The isotopic distribution of labeled metabolites was plotted via GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, USA).

### Publication Abstract
The severe harm of depression to human life has attracted great attention to neurologists, but its pathogenesis is extremely complicated and has not yet been fully elaborated. Here, we provided a new strategy for revealing the specific pathways of abnormal brain glucose catabolism in depression, based on the supply of energy substrates and the evaluation of the mitochondrial structure and function. By using stable isotope-resolved metabolomics, we discovered that the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) is blocked and gluconeogenesis is abnormally activated in chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rats. In addition, our results showed an interesting phenomenon that the brain attempted to activate all possible metabolic enzymes in energy-producing pathways, but CUMS rats still exhibited a low TCA cycle activity due to impaired mitochondria. Depression caused the mitochondrial structure and function to be impaired and then led to abnormal brain glucose catabolism. The combination of the stable isotope-resolved metabolomics and mitochondrial structure and function analysis can accurately clarify the mechanism of depression. The mitochondrial pyruvate carrier and acetyl-CoA may be the key targets for depression treatment. The strategy provides a unique insight for exploring the mechanism of depression, the discovery of new targets, and the development of ideal novel antidepressants. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025548.

### Keywords
Stable isotope-resolved metabolomics, Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Mitochondrial structure and function, Brain glucose catabolism, Depression

### Affiliations
Shanxi Medicine University
Modern Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China

### Submitter
Ting Linghu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuemei Qin
Modern Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China


