### Accession
PXD016803

### Title
Global characterization of miR-574-5p decoy to CUGBP1 in human lung cancer using a mass spectrometry proteomics approach

### Description
We  aimed to characterize decoy to the RNA-binding protein CUG-RNA binding protein 1 (CUGBP1 mechanism in A549 lung cancer cells. We identified several new canonical targets of CUGBP1 but those were not regulated by miR-574-5p via the decoy mechanism. This can be explained by the localization of CUGBP1 and miR-574-5p in the nucleus, where CUGBP1 regulates alternative splicing. Next, we analyzed the 3’UTRs of potential targets and found that the decoy-dependent regulation of mPGES-1 splicing is unique. Therefore, we postulate that in A549 cells mPGES-1 is the only protein regulated by the decoy mechanism of CUGBP1 and miR-574-5p which suggests that the decoy mechanism allows the specific regulation of the expression of distinct targets.

### Sample Protocol
The human lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549 was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium with 10% (v/v) fetal bovineserum, 100U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. A previously published anti-CUGBP1 siRNA (5´-GCUGUUUAUUGGUAUGAUU-3´) was used for transient knockdown (Δ) of CUGBP1. As control, a scramble siRNA with an unspecific sequence (5´-UCUCUCACAACGGGCAUUU-3´) was used. 24 h after transfection, A549 cells were incubated with 5 ng/ml of Interleukin (IL)-1β for further 24 h. For overexpression of miR-574-5p, 100 pmol miRIDIAN miR-574-5p mimics or negativecontrol mimic were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000® according to the manufacturer´s instructions. In the same way,the A549 cells were transfected with 200 pmol miR-574-5p-LNA™ inhibitor or negative control LNA for the knockdown of miR-574-5p. 24 h after transfection, A549 cells were incubated with 5 ng/ml of IL-1β for further 24 h. In order to find compartment specific regulations, soluble and microsomal proteins of A549 cells were separately analyzed. The protein amount was determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay. The protein pellets were solubilized in 50 μl buffer containing 0.05 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 4 M Urea, 0.01 % SDS and 2% RapiGest SF Surfactant. Disulfide reduction was performed by adding 5 μl 1 M DTT (in H2O) for 30 min at 56°C followed by sulfhydryl alkylation performed by adding 4 μl iodoacetamide solution (1 M in H2O) and incubation at RT for 1 h in the dark. Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:30 (trypsin: protein) and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptide labeling was performed using tandem mass tags (TMT 6-plex) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Labeled peptide samples were pooled to final soluble and microsomal fractions and excess reagents were removed by solid phase extraction). TMT-labeled protein digests were separated over a 60 min gradient (3-55 % B-buffer) on a 2.1 × 250 mm XBridge BEH300 C18 column (Waters) using a flow rate of 200 µL/min. A- and B-buffers consisted of 20 mM ammonia in MilliQ-grade water or 20 mM ammonia in 80 % acetonitrile, respectively. Individual fractions were collected per minute and the fractions covering the peptide elution range were concatenated to yield 12 final pooled fractions. Online LC-MS was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap trap column (C18, 3 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 20 mm), and separated on a 15-cm long C18 picofrit column (100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm bead size) installed on to the nano-electrospray ionization source. Solvent A was 97% water, 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl/min, the curved gradient went from 3% B up to 48% B in 50 min. FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 400-1200 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (17,500 resolution) on the top 10 precursor ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 31% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 3e6 for MS1 and 2e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 250 ms for MS1 and 200 ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was used with 20 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against human Uniprot database (release 01.12.2015) and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off. We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6-plex (K, N-term) as fixed modifications and oxidation (M) as dynamic modifications. Quantification of reporter ions was done by Proteome Discoverer on HCD-FTMS tandem mass spectra using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. Only unique peptides in the data set were used for quantification. Fold values were calculated comparing proteins from ΔCUGBP1 to Scramble, ΔmiR-574-5p to negative control LNA and miR-574-5p oe to negative control mimic. Fold values of +1.5/-1.5 were considered up-/downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRs) are one of the most important post-transcriptional repressors of gene expression. However, miR-574-5p has recently been shown to positively regulate the expression of microsomal prostaglandin E-synthase-1 (mPGES-1), a key enzyme in the prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>) biosynthesis, by acting as decoy to the RNA-binding protein CUG-RNA binding protein 1 (CUGBP1) in human lung cancer. miR-574-5p exhibits oncogenic properties and promotes lung tumor growth <i>in vivo</i> via induction of mPGES-1-derived PGE<sub>2</sub> synthesis. In a mass spectrometry-based proteomics study, we now attempted to characterize this decoy mechanism in A549 lung cancer cells at a cellular level. Besides the identification of novel CUGBP1 targets, we identified that the interaction between miR-574-5p and CUGBP1 specifically regulates mPGES-1 expression. This is supported by the fact that CUGBP1 and miR-574-5p are located in the nucleus, where CUGBP1 regulates alternative splicing. Further, in a bioinformatical approach we showed that the decoy-dependent mPGES-1 splicing pattern is unique. The specificity of miR-574-5p/CUGBP1 regulation on mPGES-1 expression supports the therapeutic strategy of pharmacological inhibition of PGE<sub>2</sub> formation, which may provide significant therapeutic value for NSCLC patients with high miR-574-5p levels.

### Keywords
Human, Lung cancer, Mir-574-5p, Cugbp1, Mpges-1

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institute
Department of Biology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt/M., Germany

### Submitter
Elena Ossipova

### Lab Head
Dr Meike J. Saul
Department of Biology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt/M., Germany


