### Accession
PXD001932

### Title
p65-HaloTag copurifying proteins in human 293T cells

### Description
In effort to develop methodology for targeted top down mass spectrometry of NF kappa B p65 from human cells, we evaluated the utility of HaloTag for purification and analysis of recombinant protein. During our study, two datasets of bottom up LC-MS/MS were generated: one from in-gel digestion of the predominant band following p65-HaloTag purification, another from in-solution digestion of all the proteins present in a p65-HaloTag purification. p65-HaloTag copurifying proteins identified in our datasets include the known interactors c-Rel, NF-kappaB p105, NF-kappaB p100, and NF-kappaB inhibitor beta. Over 100 proteins were identified by at least two peptides using a Mascot ion cut-off score of 30.

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel digestion, p65-HaloTag purification was performed on transfected 293T cells. The resulting protein sample was resolved by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie stained. A small piece of the gel spanning the width of the lane and approximately 5 mm in height was excised and chopped into smaller pieces. In-gel trypsin digestion was then performed following standard proceedure. Replicate LC-MS/MS injections were performed using nanoflow C18 reverse phase chromatography and a hybrid linear trap-7 Tesla FT-ICR mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were eluted by ramping Buffer B (5% water, 95% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Data dependent acquisition with MS2 of the 8 most abundant ions from each precursor scan was performed with the following settings: MS1 = FTMS, 400 – 1600 m/z, 50,000 resolving power, 1 µscan, AGC 1e6; MS2 = Ion Trap, CID at 35 NCE, 2 m/z isolation width, 2 µscans, AGC 1e4; dynamic exclusion = repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 45 s, exclusion duration of 120 s. For in-solution digestion, samples were acetone precipitated following HaloTag purification. The proteins were processed following standard in-solution digestion protocol. Peptides were analyzed using a VelosPro Oribitrap and 200 min. reverse phase gradient with the following instrument settings: MS1 = FTMS, 400 – 2000 m/z, 60,000 resolving power, 1 µscan, AGC 1e6; MS2 = Ion Trap, CID at 35 NCE, 1.5 m/z isolation width, 1 µscans, AGC 1e4; dynamic exclusion = repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 9 s, exclusion duration of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur .raw files were converted to Mascot .mgf using COMPASS 1.0.4.0 and .mgf files were searched against the SwissProt Human database using Mascot with the following search parameters: enzyme was Trypsin, no missed cleavages were allowed, variable modifications were carbamidomethyl of Cysteine and oxidation of Methionine, peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da, monoisotopic mass values were used. The resulting identifications were filtered using an ion score cut-off of 30.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Nf kappa b, Rela, P65, 293t

### Affiliations
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
Northwestern University

### Submitter
John Savaryn

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Kelleher
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA


