### Accession
PXD022126

### Title
Damaged Brain Accelerates Bone Healing by Releasing Exosomes that Target Osteoprogenitors

### Description
Clinical evidence has established that concomitant traumatic brain injury accelerates bone healing, but the underlying mechanism is unclear. This study showed that after TBI, injured neurons, mainly those in the hippocampus, released osteogenic microRNA (miRNA)-enriched exosomes, which targeted osteoprogenitors in bone to stimulate bone formation.  Importantly, increased fibronectin expression on exosomal surface contributed to targeting of osteoprogenitors in bone by TBI exosomes, thereby implying that modification of the exosome surface fibronectin could be used in bone-targeted drug delivery. Together, our findings have established a novel role of central regulation in bone formation and a clear link between injured neurons and osteogenitors, both in animals and clinical settings.

### Sample Protocol
In brief，total protein was extracted from Plasma exosomes by using a urea lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 1% SDS) with a protease  inhibitor. Protein concentrations were detected with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce,Thermo, USA). Protein digestion was performed according to the standard procedure and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 10-plex TMT reagent (Thermo fisher, Art.No.90111) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly，total protein (100 μg) taken from each sample was mixed with 100 μL of the lysate. TCEP (10 mM) was added and then it was stored at 37 ℃. 60 min later, iodoacetamide (40 mM) was added and stored in dark at room temperature for 40 mins.

### Data Protocol
After high pH RPLC separation,labeled peptides were were analyzed by online nano flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosomes，bone healing，injured neurons

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China

### Submitter
Wei Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao-Chun Bai
Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China


