### Accession
PXD025558

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of rattus norvegicus colonic mucosa following acupuncture treatment for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea by label-free LC–MS/MS

### Description
To investigate the molecular pathological mechanisms of irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea (IBS-D) and elucidate the effects of acupuncture on IBS-D colonic mucosa protein abundance in rats, a label-free high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics analysis was used to survey the global changes of colonic mucosa proteins between different groups. A Nano flow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex Corp, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used in this project.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of the acupuncture treatment, rats from four groups were fasted overnight: the control group (K); the IBS-D model group (M); the syndrome differentiation acupuncture group (N) and the traditional acupuncture group (E) . Then all the rats were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and 2-cm segments of the proximal colon from descending colon were cut, washed with PBS containing the protease inhibitor and opened longitudinally. Mucosa were obtained using a sharp blade to avoid contamination from the muscle layer, frozen in the liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ for protein extraction. About 20 mg tissues in each sample were used for protein extraction. All the protein samples were desalted using the C18 column before the LC-MS/MS analysis.After desalting, the peptides were separated by a Nano flow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex Corp, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The eluted peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column. Eluted peptides were analyzed by DDA method. A wash column method was executed between samples to avoid protein retaining in the column. Data acquisition was achieved in a positive polarity mode with a survey scan 200-2000 m/z and the survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 while for MS/MS spectra this was set to 17,500. Automatic gain control was used to ensure that the Orbitrap mass analyzer always filled with the optimum number of ions for generation of MS/MS spectra. The intensity threshold, which defines the minimum precursor intensity to trigger an MS2 scan, was set to 1.6×105. In order to increase the likely coverage of lower abundant precursor ions, a 10 s dynamic exclusion list was employed.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version1.6.1.0). The peak lists were searched against the UniProt Rattus norvegicus protein database. The Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) was used to identify proteins differentially expressed between different samples. Comparative bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) was then performed in a stepwise manner as following. The Reference Sequence (RefSeq) IDs obtained after the proteomics search by maxquant software were converted into gene symbol using online tool DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 [Nature Protocols 2009; 4(1):44 & Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37(1):1.]. Venn diagram was obtained using VENNY to compare the number and overlapping relationships of DE proteins between different groups. Subsequently, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes was implemented by DAVID [Nature Protocols 2009; 4(1):44 & Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37(1):1.]. GO terms and enriched pathways with corrected Pvalue less than 0.05 were considered significantly enriched by differential expressed proteins. The pathway analysis results were visualized using heatmaps generated by Heml heat map illustrator program. Protein-protein interaction networks were analyzed by the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) system 11.0 (http://stringdb.org/) and Cytoscape software (version 3.7.1).

### Publication Abstract
To investigate the molecular pathological mechanisms of irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea (IBS-D) and elucidate the effects of acupuncture on IBS-D colonic mucosa protein abundance in rats, a label-free high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics analysis was used to survey the global changes of colonic mucosa proteins between different groups. Sixteen Sprague-Dawley (SD) male rats were randomly divided into four groups: the control group (C); the IBS-D model group (M); the syndrome differentiation acupuncture group (SD) and the traditional acupuncture group (T). IBS-D model rats were obtained using the CAS (chronic acute combining stress model) method. Comparative bioinformatics analysis of the proteomic data was analyzed using MaxQuant software, Perseus software, online tools DAVID, VENNY and STRING. Functional enrichment and network analyses revealed a close relationship between IBS-D and several biological processes including energy metabolism, muscular excitation/contraction, and both traditional acupuncture and syndrome differentiation acupuncture can reverse the impairments of normal energy metabolism. Moreover, the syndrome differentiation acupuncture can regulate the protein cluster relating inflammation, wound repair and cell protection against oxidative stress which is associated with acupuncture analgesic effect. Differentially expressed proteins Atp5a1 and Bpnt1 were selected as representative proteins and subjected to western blotting. In conclusion, our study provides further insight into the pathological and molecular mechanisms of IBS-D and acupuncture treatments, and serves as an experimental basis for clinical applications.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Colonic mucosa, Acupuncture

### Affiliations
Acupuncture-moxibustion and Orthopedic College, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China
Hubei University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jia Li
Acupuncture-moxibustion and Orthopedic College, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, China


