### Accession
PXD015352

### Title
PTPRR interactome detection using PUP-IT (pupylation-based interaction tagging) Mass Spectrometry

### Description
To further stably express PTPRR (WT)-PafA or PTPRR (DA)-PafA in iPUP OVCAR5 cell, we subcloned PTPRR-WT or DA, respectively, into the PafA-IRES-EGFP plasmid. Each plasmid was packed into a lentivirus and then transduced into iPUP OVACR5 cells for 48 h. GFP-positive cells were sorted by flow cytometry. The expression of PTPRR (WT)-PafA and PTPRR (DA)-PafA was confirmed by western blotting analysis.  PTPRR (WT)-PafA or PTPRR (DA)-PafA expressed iPUP OVCAR5 cells were grown to a cell density of about 75% on 10 cm dishes. We followed the protocol established previous. To prepare PUP-IT samples for mass spectrometry analysis, including doxycycline induction, biotin labeling, cell lysis, streptavidin magnetic beads pull-down, trypsin digestion, and peptide cleaning.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated and analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (both - Thermo Scientific). About 1 µg of peptides were separated in an Easy-Spray C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min at 50 oC. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 98% ACN) were used to establish a 60 min gradient comprised of 1 min of 4% B, 48 min of 4-26% B, 1 min of 26-30% B, 1 min of 30-70% B and 9 min of 70% B. Peptides were then ionized by electrospray at 2.35 kV. A full MS spectrum (300-1400 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 20 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Resolution for HCD MS/MS spectra was set to 30,000 at m/z 200. The AGC setting of MS and MS2 were set at 3E6 and 1E5, respectively. The 20 most intense ions above a 3.3E4 counts threshold were selected for fragmentation by HCD with a maximum ion accumulation time of 60 ms. Isolation width of 1.6 m/z units was used for MS2. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, normalized collision energy was set to 25%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed and searched with MaxQuant 1.5.4.1 with MS tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The UniProt human protein database (release 2016_07, 70630 sequences) and database for proteomics contaminants from MaxQuant were used for database searches. Reversed database searches were used to evaluate false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identifications. Two missed cleavage sites of trypsin were allowed. Oxidation (M), pyro-Glu (Gln at peptide N-terminus), Acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ) and GGE (K) were set as variable modifications. The FDR of both peptide identification and protein identification is set to be 1%.  The option of “Second peptides”, “Match between runs” and “Dependent peptides” was enabled. Label-free quantification was used to quantify the difference of protein abundances between different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Despite a lack of mutations, accumulating evidence supports an important role for the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway in ovarian tumorigenesis. However, the molecular mechanism that contributes to the aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling cascade in ovarian cancer has not been fully elucidated. Here, we found that protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type R (PTPRR) suppressed the activation of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway in ovarian cancer. We performed an shRNA-based biochemical screen, which identified PTPRR as being responsible for tyrosine dephosphorylation of &#x3b2;-catenin on Tyr-142, a key site controlling the transcriptional activity of &#x3b2;-catenin. Of note, PTPRR was down-regulated in ovarian cancers, and ectopic PTPRR re-expression delayed ovarian cancer cell growth both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> Using a proximity-based tagging system and RNA-Seq analysis, we identified a signaling nexus that includes PTPRR, &#x3b1;-catenin, &#x3b2;-catenin, E-cadherin, and AT-rich interaction domain 3C (ARID3C) in ovarian cancer. Immunohistochemistry staining of human samples further suggested that PTPRR expression is inversely correlated with disease prognosis. Collectively, our findings indicate that PTPRR functions as a tumor suppressor in ovarian cancer by dephosphorylating and inactivating &#x3b2;-catenin. These results suggest that PTPRR expression might have utility as a prognostic marker for predicting overall survival.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ptprr

### Affiliations
shanghaitech university

### Submitter
Yuetong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Gaofeng Fan
shanghaitech university


