### Accession
PXD005824

### Title
Quantitative proteomic characterization of senile plaques from Alzheimer's disease and non-demented brain

### Description
The deposition of amyloid senile plaques (SPs) play a central role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but the mechanisms by which SPs induce neural toxicity are disputed. Genetically engineered mouse models emphasising SPs have had limited success in reproducing the neuropathology of AD, and have also failed to be good indicators of successful amyloid-targeting therapies. Moreover, elderly people with a heavy plaque burden can show normal cognition. Therefore, it is fundamentally important to fully characterize and distinguish the pathological changes elicited by SPs in human and mouse brains. Using laser capture microdissection (LCM) combined with high-throughput mass spectrometry, we quantified ~5000 proteins with high confidence in SPs and non-plaque regions from AD and non-AD human postmortem brain. We found proteomic alteration in SPs is more evident than in non-plaque regions, and identified more than 30 human that are significantly enriched in SPs. We found that AD SPs elicited much more extensive proteomic alterations compared to non-AD SPs. Together, our findings represent the most systematic analysis of sub-proteome of senile plaques and provide a framework for future studies on plaque pathology and AD progression.

### Sample Protocol
For plaque capture, small blocks of human HC or mouse brain were embedded (Tissue-Tek® O.C.T , Sakura, Netherland), frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C. Brain sections (35 µm thick) were cut using a Leica CM 3050 cryostat (Leica Microsystems Inc. Bannockburn, IL) and mounted on Zeiss Membrane Slides 1.0 PET (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany). The frozen brain sections were thawed at room temperature and stained by Amylo-Glo®RTD™ Amyloid Plaque Stain Reagent (Biosensis, Thebarton, South Australia) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LCM was performed on the same day using the PALM MicroBeam ZEISS LCM system (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany) with the following settings: cut energy, 55-60; delta energy, 20-30 milliwatt; cut speed, 60-70 µm/sec. Regions with diameters of 80-100 µm centred on an amyloid plaque were collected as senile plaque regions (SPRs). Approximately 3,000 SPRs from each sample were procured, and non-plaque regions (NPRs) surrounding the plaques were captured as controls. For WT mouse control, exactly the same number of brain regions were captured. Three SPR and three NPR samples were pooled from each group for protein extraction. Captured tissues were briefly centrifuged and then homogenised with ice-cold homogenisation buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0; with 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride). The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was kept as a protein extract and stored at -80°C for later analysis. Extracts were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 55°C for 1 h, then with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. They were then digested with 1:100 w/w endopeptidase Lys-C at 37°C overnight. The digested extracts were diluted with PBS (pH 8.0) to a final urea concentration of 1.0 M, and further digested with 1:50 w/w trypsin at 37°C overnight. Digested extracts were acidified with 1% formic acid, and then desalted with a reverse-phase column (Oasis HLB; Waters, MA, USA). The extracts were dried with a vacuum concentrator and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer for labelling with TMT reagents. Plaque samples were labelled with two sets of TMTs. For human samples, we used the following TMTs: TMT-128 for AD SPRs; TMT-129 for AD NPRs; TMT-130 for non-AD SPRs; and TMT-131 for non-AD NPRs. The prepared TMT reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl of 99.9% acetonitrile) were added to the prepared extracts, and the labelling reaction was allowed to progress at room temperature. The reactions were stopped after 1 h by the addition of 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 5 min. All of the labelled extracts were mixed, desalted, and dried as previously described and dissolved in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid. The TMT labelled peptides (100 μl in 0.1% formic acid) were first transferred to MS tubes for HPLC analysis (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC; Thermo Scientific), using an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 µm; Waters, MA, USA) maintained at 45°C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min for further fractionation. Detection of UV absorbance was set to 214 nm. The gradient elution buffer consisted of methanol (phase A; pH 10.0) and acetonitrile (phase B; pH 10.0). Fractions were collected every 1.5 min into 50 tubes, then dried and combined into 20 tubes. Finally, they were dissolved with 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). The fractions were separated with a 120 min gradient elution (Phase A: ddH2O with 0.1% fluoroacetic acid; Phase B: 20% ddH2O, 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% fluoroacetic acid) at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. The UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was interfaced with the mass spectrometer. The column used for analysis was a silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch Scientific, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm; Varian, Lexington, MA). To set the mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode, we used the Xcalibur 2.1.2 software. Using an Orbitrap (400-1,800 m/z; 60,000 FWHM resolution), a single full-scan mass spectrum was conducted before collecting ten data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalised collision energy (higher energy C-trap dissociation, HCD).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software package (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was used to analyse MS/MS spectra. Spectra were searched against the human or mouse proteome in the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (released August 22nd, 2016).  The criteria for searching was set according to the software recommendations, with the following modifications: full tryptic specificity with no more than two missed cleavages permitted; carbamidomethylation (Cysteine, C) and TMT plex (lysine, K and any N-terminal) as static modifications; and oxidation (methionine, M) and deamination (asparagine, N and glutamine, Q) as dynamic modifications. The fragment ion mass tolerance was corrected to 20 mmu (all MS2 spectra) and the precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyser). The FDR of peptide and protein identification were both set to 0.01 (1%). Based on the reporter ion intensities per peptide, relative protein intensities were quantified. Normalised protein abundance was calculated by summing the intensities of associated peptides, followed by normalisation to the total peptide amount in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Amyloid plaque, Brain, Senile plaque, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Department of immunology, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Department of immunology, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China


