### Accession
PXD024458

### Title
Preparation of a high expression yield bacterial cell extract via lysozyme-assisted sonication

### Description
One of the central goals for the development of cell-free (CF) gene expression systems is to ensure reproducible expression of proteins at high quality and yield. Over the past decades, starting from crude cell extracts, a variety of successful preparation protocols have been developed and optimized reaction conditions have been established. One of the crucial steps during the preparation of cell extract-based expression systems, however, is the cell lysis procedure itself, which largely determines the quality of the active components of the extract. Here, we demonstrate for an E. coli based system that a lysis procedure combining incubation of the cells with lysozyme with a gentle sonication step results in highly active cell extracts. As examples for the capabilities of our extract, we demonstrate the production of several fluorescent proteins as well as the production and assembly of T7 bacteriophages. Compared to other cell-free expression systems, our method achieved the highest phage titers in our plaque assays. Stateof-the-art quantitative proteomics revealed that enzymes of the energy regeneration pathway were enriched in our extract compared to a widely used commercial cell extract. On the other hand, ribosomal proteins were found to be more abundant in the commercial product.

### Sample Protocol
All cell extracts were dried to completeness using a centrifugal evaporator (Centrivap Cold Trap -50, Labconco, US). The resulting pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NH4HCO3) to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL. Next, 45 µg of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (30 min at 30°C) and alkylated with 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) (30 min in the dark at 25°C). The samples were diluted 1:4 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and double-digested with trypsin (1 h and 13 h at 30°C, Trypsin gold Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega), which was added twice at a ratio of trypsin:protein = 1:100 (by mass). The reaction was stopped with 1% formic acid (FA) and the resulting peptides were purified. For that in-house built C18 tips (5 disks of Sep-Pak Vac C18 material, Waters, US) were equilibrated with 250 μl 100% acetonitrile (ACN), 250 µl elution solution (40% ACN, 0.1% FA) and 250 μl washing solution (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 1500 g. The samples were loaded into the tips (centrifugation for 2 min at 500 g) and washed three times with washing solution for 2 min at 1500 rcf. Finally, the peptides were eluted with 100 µl elution solution for 2 min at 500g. The samples were dried to completeness and resuspended in washing solution 45 µl right before the MS measurement.   Generated peptides were analyzed on an Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GER). For each analysis an injection amount of ≈ 0.1 μg of peptides was delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm x 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm x 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO. The Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. After peptide fragmentation using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD), MS2 spectra of up to 20 precursor peptides were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5 × 104 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 22 ms. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z and normalized collision energy to 30%.Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 20 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm). MS/MS spectra of species that were singly-charged, unassigned or with charge states > 6+ were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda26, 27. MS2 spectra were searched against the E. coli (strain B / BL21-DE3) reference proteome from Uniprot (UP000002032, 4156 protein entries), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. For full proteome analyses carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past decades, starting from crude cell extracts, a variety of successful preparation protocols and optimized reaction conditions have been established for the production of cell-free gene expression systems. One of the crucial steps during the preparation of cell extract-based expression systems is the cell lysis procedure itself, which largely determines the quality of the active components of the extract. Here we evaluate the utility of an E. coli cell extract, which was prepared using a combination of lysozyme incubation and a gentle sonication step. As quality measure, we demonstrate the cell-free expression of YFP at concentrations up to 0.6&#x2005;mg/mL. In addition, we produced and assembled T7 bacteriophages up to a titer of 10<sup>8</sup> &#x2005;PFU/mL. State-of-the-art quantitative proteomics was used to compare the produced extracts with each other and with a commercial extract. The differences in protein composition were surprisingly small between lysozyme-assisted sonication (LAS) extracts, but we observed an increase in the release of DNA-binding proteins for increasing numbers of sonication cycles. Proteins taking part in carbohydrate metabolism, glycolysis, amino acid and nucleotide related pathways were found to be more abundant in the LAS extract, while proteins related to RNA modification and processing, DNA modification and replication, transcription regulation, initiation, termination and the TCA cycle were found enriched in the commercial extract.

### Keywords
Cell-free protein expression, In vitro transcription-translation, Synthetic biology, Bacterial cell extract, Phage assembly

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Freising, TU Munich
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Freising, TU Munich


