### Accession
PXD005089

### Title
Proteomic profiling of brain and testis reveals the diverse changes in ribosome proteins in fmr1 knockout mice

### Description
Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited form of mental retardation and autism, is caused by the transcriptional silencing of fmr1 encoding the protein of FMRP. FMRP, acting as an RNA binding protein, FMRP is a wide expressed protein, but primarily in the brain and testis and can regulate approximately 4% of transcripts. Macroorchidism is one of the common symptoms observed both in the FXS people and mice. Thus, we analyzed the protein profiles of cerebral cortex, hippocampus and testis from both the fmr1-KO and WT mouse using a quantitative proteomics. Proteins (FMRP, RS8, RL23A and MPZ) identified by MS/MS were also verified by Western blot. Among the identified proteins, most of the significant changed proteins were downregulated in the FMRP absence. The Gene Ontology and pathway analysis revealed that the changed proteins were clustered in polyribosome and RNA binding proteins in both cerebral cortex and hippocampus, but not the same in testis. Our results provide detailed insights to the ribosome protein profiles of cerebral cortex, hippocampus and testis in the absence of FMRP. Our studies also give a better understanding of protein profile changes and underling dysregulated pathways arising from the fmr1 silencing in the FXS.

### Sample Protocol
Animals  Wild type and Fmr1 null mice in a background of FVB were gifted from Dr. Chen Zhang lab and were bred in our facility with a 12:12 hr dark/light cycle. All experiments were in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the Assessment.  Hippocampus, cerebral cortex and testis isolation  Adult mice (8 to 10 weeks old, the paired KO and wild type mice were littermates) were euthanized using 0.1% pentobarbital and perfused with 0.1M PBS. Then, the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and testis were dissected and kept in -80 oC refrigerator for later use.   Sample preparation Tissues were prepared as we had described previously (19). Briefly, each tissue was quickly frozen with nitrogen and homogenized, then transferred in ice-cold homogenization buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× cocktail). Tissue debris was removed via centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 12,000 rpm. Protein concentration was determined using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  TMT labeling 100 μg protein was pooled together from four individual sample and was treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C followed by 25 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Extracts were then digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:100 w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The following day, samples were acidified with 1% formic acid (FA) and desalted with a reverse phase column (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA) followed the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then dried with a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 100 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 200mM, pH 8.5).   In each group, peptides were labeled with TMT reagents. Briefly, TMT reagent (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl of 99.9% acetonitrile) was added to the solution and the labeling reaction was allowed to progress for 1 h at room temperature before being terminated by the addition of 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 5 min. Peptides were labeled with different TMT labels: TMT-126 was used for hippocampus of KO mice, TMT-127 was used for hippocampus of WT mice, TMT-128 was used for cortex of KO mice and TMT-129 was used for cortex of WT mice as the first set. In another set, TMT-130 was used for testis of KO mice and TMT-131 was used for testis for WT mice. All the labeled peptides in each set from the pools were mixed together and desalted, dried as before and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1% FA.  High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation Fractionation of the labeled peptides was separated as described previously (20). Briefly, peptides (100 μl in 0.1% FA) were transferred to MS tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific). An Xbridge BEH300 C18 column was used (1 ml/min, 4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 μm, Waters). Column temperature was maintained at 45 °C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min, and detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min in 47 tubes, then dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% FA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS was analyzed by the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). The labeled digestion fractions were separated using a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) was used, directly interfaced with a Thermo Q Exactive Benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). The analytical column was a silica capillary column (75 μl ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μl; Varian, Lexington, MA). Xcalibur 2.1.2 software was used to manipulate the Q Exactive mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode. A single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (400-1, 800 m/z, 60,000 resolution) was followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, HCD).  The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were run against the selected mouse FASTA database from UniProt (released on June 19, 2016) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific). The search criteria were set following the recommended software settings, with some alterations as follows: full tryptic specificity was required, two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminal) were set as the static modifications, the oxidation (methionine，M) was set as the dynamic modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. Relative protein quantification was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions using the reporter ion intensities per peptide.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for the altered proteins was performed using FunRich software followed instructions (http://www.funrich.org). For the pathway analysis, an online WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt; Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) was used. Statistical significance of pathways was determined on the basis of a P value < 0.001 and the presence of at least two target genes in the wiki pathway. For the protein-protein interaction analysis, we used STRING database version 10.0 (http://string-db.org) with a medium confidence threshold 0.4. The interaction network was mapped by Cytoscape (3.2.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome, Fmrp, Tmt

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


