### Accession
PXD033366

### Title
Structure and mechanism of a novel cytomegaloviral DCAF mediating interferon antagonism

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a highly relevant pathogen, and its rodent counterparts serve as common infection models. Global proteome profiling of rat CMV (RCMV)-infected cells uncovered a pronounced loss of the transcription factor STAT2, which is crucial for interferon signalling. Deletion mutagenesis documented that STAT2 is targeted by the viral protein E27. Cellular analyses and in vitro reconstitution showed that E27 exploits host-derived Cullin4-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRL4) to induce poly-ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of STAT2. Cryo-electron microscopic structure determination revealed how E27 mimics molecular surface properties of cellular CRL4 substrate receptors to displace them from DDB1. Moreover, structure analyses solved the mechanism of STAT2 recruitment, and indicate that E27-binding disturbs the formation of active STAT2 complexes by occupying the IRF9-binding interface. Our results provide first structural insights into the cytomegalovirus-encoded interferon antagonism and establish an atomic model for STAT2 counteraction by CRL4 misappropriation, with important implications for viral immune evasion.

### Sample Protocol
We crosslinked a protein complex consisting of DDB1 deltaBPB, DDA1, STAT2, and cytomegalovirs E27 using sulfo-SDA concentrations of 0.2-0.3mM. We extracted and desalted the peptides, then fractionated them on a Superdex Peptide column. We precipitated samples in 80% acetone and resuspended them in denaturing buffer. We digested the samples with trypsin overnight and labeled the complex with sulfo-SDA at various concentrations. Samples were cross-linked with UV light at 365 nm for 10 seconds, followed by quenching with 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5 for 20 minutes. Cross-linker concentrations were determined by separating the reaction products on a Novex Bis-Tris 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein pellets were digested with trypsin overnight and extracted using C18 StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. The data for this study was collected using a process called data-dependent mode, with a cycle time of 2.5 seconds. The mass spectrum was recorded using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, between the range of 400 to 1,500 m/z, for each cycle. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were selected and broken down using a method called Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) and a decision tree strategy. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. To ensure accuracy, dynamic exclusion was enabled with a single repeat count and 60 seconds exclusion duration. The precursor m/z was recalibrated based on high-confidence linear peptide identifications, and the peak lists were searched using the Xi software suite for identification. Final crosslink lists were compiled using identified candidates filtered to less than 2% false discovery rate (FDR) on the link level, with a minimum of 3 observed fragments per peptide and at least one crosslinker-containing fragment. FDR settings were optimized by boosting heteromeric crosslinks based on delta score, minimum fragments, and minimum sequence coverage.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR is used to analyze the data and identified the peptides and proteins. Results are exported to mzidentml.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda1, Dcaf, Xl-ms, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Electron microscopy, Ddb1

### Affiliations
Technische Universitaet Berlin

### Submitter
Andrea Graziadei 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universitaet Berlin


