### Accession
PXD016495

### Title
Proteomics on colorectal cancer MCTS upon OXPHOS inhibition

### Description
Previous high throughput gene expression profiling combined with a HCT116 colon cancer tumor spheroid-based drug-screening assay identified context-dependent treatment responses to OXPHOS inhibitors resulting in a shunting towards the mevalonate pathway. To complement these findings with a characterization of the proteome we use mass-spectrometry based proteomics to investigate protein profiles and context-dependent treatment responses in PMCTS and QMCTS compared to monolayer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Spheroids and monolayer cells were treated with four OXPHOS inhibitors Nitazoxanide, FCCP, Oligomycin, Salinomycin and Simvastatin or vehicle control at two different doses and 2 different time points (6h and 24h). Samples were processed in a bottom-up proteomics workflow including SP3-paramagnetic bead technology and isobaric labeling prior high-pH reverse phase fractionation and nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 2.1.0.81) was used for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously identified selective upregulation of the mevalonate pathway genes upon inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in quiescent cancer cells. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we here investigated whether these responses are corroborated on the protein level and whether proteomics could yield unique insights into context-dependent biology. HCT116 colon carcinoma cells were cultured as monolayer cultures, proliferative multicellular tumor spheroids (P-MCTS), or quiescent (Q-MCTS) multicellular tumor spheroids and exposed to OXPHOS inhibitors: nitazoxanide, FCCP, oligomycin, and salinomycin or the HMG-CoA-reductase inhibitor simvastatin at two different doses for 6 and 24 h. Samples were processed using an in-depth bottom-up proteomics workflow resulting in a total of 9286 identified protein groups. Gene set enrichment analysis showed profound differences between the three cell systems and confirmed differential enrichment of hypoxia, OXPHOS, and cell cycle progression-related protein responses in P-MCTS and Q-MCTS. Treatment experiments showed that the observed drug-induced alterations in gene expression of metabolically challenged cells are not translated directly to the protein level, but the results reaffirmed OXPHOS as a selective vulnerability of quiescent cancer cells. This work provides rationale for the use of deep proteome profiling to identify context-dependent treatment responses and encourages further studies investigating metabolic processes that could be co-targeted together with OXPHOS to eradicate quiescent cancer cells.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Colon cancer, Proteomics, Oxphos, Spheroids

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Sweden

### Submitter
Julia Steinmetz

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Kultima
Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Sweden


