### Accession
PXD016023

### Title
Similar but not identical – a quadruple pack of LSU (RESPONSE TO LOW SULFUR) from Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The members of plant-specific LSU (RESPONSE TO LOW SULFUR) family were first identified as strongly induced during sulfur starvation. Molecular function of these protein remains unknown, however they were identified as important stress-related hubs by several research groups. In Arabidopsis thaliana there are four members of LSU family. These proteins are involved in multiple protein-protein interactions and literature data suggest that they can integrate abiotic and biotic stress responses. LSU proteins are small and have the coiled-coil structure. Additionally to binding with other proteins they can form homo- and heterodimers and possibly also multimers. In this work we investigated interactions between different monomers of LSU1-4 using Y2H and BiFC methods. The differences in strength of various homo- and heterodimers formation were observed. The constructed by us structural models of the LSU1-4 homo- and heterodimers were in agreement with the experimental observations concerning differences in strength of dimers formation and might help understanding interaction of LSU with other partners. Since previously the partners of LSU were identified using the Y2H approach we decided to obtain the lists of LSU interactors in plants using the TAP-tagged LSU1-4. Interaction of LSUs with a few selected proteins from the lists was verified by Y2H and BiFC.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at TY, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (CAT NO V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000 g for 30 min, to remove solid remaining. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite and QExative mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the Max-Quant (Version 1.6.3.4) platform search parameters: match between runs (match time window 0.7min, alignment time 20min), enzyme: trypsin/p; specific; max missed 2, minimal peptide length 7aa, variable modification: methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, phosphorylation STY, ubiq GG, fixed: cysteine alkylation, main search peptide tolerance 4.5ppm, protein FDR 0.01. The reference Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database from UniProt was used (downloaded on 2019.02.04, 39 381 entries). Semiquantitative analysis of CoIP results using protein intensity comparison (Orlowska K. et al. 2013 NAR) Protein abundance was defined as the mean signal intensity calculated by MaxQuant software for a protein (mean value from two or one replicates) divided by its molecular weight. Specificity was defined as the ratio of protein signal intensity measured in the bait purification to background level (which is the protein signal intensity in the negative control purification; background level was arbitrarily set to 1 for proteins not detected in the negative control).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coip, Arabidopsis, Sulfur

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences Pawinskiego 5a,  02-106 Warsaw POLAN

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Sirko
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences Pawinskiego 5a,  02-106 Warsaw POLAN


