### Accession
PXD020517

### Title
Quantitative PTM Maps of Human Pathologic Tau Identify Patient Heterogeneity and Define Critical Steps in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression - angular gyrus

### Description
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and PTM stoichiometry in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we generated a high resolution quantitative proteomic map of 88 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from the post-mortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. While Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and patient frequency for AD suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by the analysis of size fractionated Tau.  To summarize, critical features within the Tau protein for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C-terminal, an increase in negative charge in the PRR and a decrease in positive charge in the MBD.

### Sample Protocol
First cohort SRM data were analyzed and validated in Skyline (version 2.6, MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, Seattle, WA). All peptide transitions were evaluated for variability, similarity between y-ion ratios, elution times, and interfering signals by manual analysis. Peak boundaries were manually inspected and reassigned as needed to ensure correct peak detection and accurate integration. Peptides were considered ‘quantifiable’ if the peptide transitions had a signal-to-noise of >3 and at least three light and three heavy high-quality SRM transitions were observed. Peptides were kept for further downstream analysis if quantifiable in every patient sample. To compensate for differences in mixing ratio, samples were normalized by the L/H ratio of the least modified peptides. To this end, in each sample, the L/H ratio of peak intensities of each peptide was divided by the average of the three Tau peptides with highest ratio in that sample. Absolute abundance of Tau was calculated using the FLEX peptide L/H ratio as described before. Αmounts of insoluble Tau in each patient samples was calculated in the unit of fmol Tau per mg brain wet weight (average of technical replicates). Second cohort SRM data were analyzed and validated as described above with the following changes: An updated version of Skyline (version 19.08) was used and all peptide transitions were evaluated additionally for dotp and dotr products. For the isoform-specific peptides, the ratios of the heavy isotope labelled peptides were adjusted to the heavy FLEXITau standard by using the corresponding 2N4R FLEXITau peptides. DDA mass spectrometry raw data was processed using different software for the identification and quantification of post translational modification (PTM) of Tau. QExactive raw files were converted into mgf data format using ProteoWizard. The spectra were centroided and filtered using ms2preproc to select the 6 most intense peaks in a 30 Th window. Collected spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens proteome database (downloaded from uniprot.org on 11/01/2017) with ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 Beta (Paragon Algorithm 4.5.0.0. 1575, Sciex). The following settings were applied: instrument type ‘Orbi MS (1-3ppm)’; ‘Urea denaturation’; ‘thorough’ search mode; ‘phosphorylation emphasis’, ‘acetylation emphasis’, ‘ID focus on biological modifications’. A cutoff of 95% confidence was employed for all modified peptides. In addition, all MS/MS spectra of identified post-translationally modified peptides were subjected to manual verification.  Raw data were additionally analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.10 and peptide list searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2017, only reviewed entries appended with common laboratory contaminants [cRAP database, 247 entries]) using the Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: trypsin (specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search. Oxidation of M, acetylation of N-termini, phosphorylation of S, T, Y, acetylation of K, and ubiquitination (GlyGly) were chosen as variable modifications and propionylation of cysteine as static modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. For all other search parameters, the default settings were used. For the Glu-C and Asp-N digested samples settings were set to the respective enzyme with up to three missed cleavages. Label-free quantification was done using the XIC-based in-built label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. Data analysis was performed with the Perseus software in the MaxQuant computation platform and in the R statistical computing environment.

### Data Protocol
First cohort SRM data were analyzed and validated in Skyline (version 2.6, MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, Seattle, WA). All peptide transitions were evaluated for variability, similarity between y-ion ratios, elution times, and interfering signals by manual analysis. Peak boundaries were manually inspected and reassigned as needed to ensure correct peak detection and accurate integration. Peptides were considered ‘quantifiable’ if the peptide transitions had a signal-to-noise of >3 and at least three light and three heavy high-quality SRM transitions were observed. Peptides were kept for further downstream analysis if quantifiable in every patient sample. To compensate for differences in mixing ratio, samples were normalized by the L/H ratio of the least modified peptides. To this end, in each sample, the L/H ratio of peak intensities of each peptide was divided by the average of the three Tau peptides with highest ratio in that sample. Absolute abundance of Tau was calculated using the FLEX peptide L/H ratio as described before. Αmounts of insoluble Tau in each patient samples was calculated in the unit of fmol Tau per mg brain wet weight (average of technical replicates). Second cohort SRM data were analyzed and validated as described above with the following changes: An updated version of Skyline (version 19.08, MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, Seattle, WA) was used and all peptide transitions were evaluated additionally for dotp and dotr products. For the isoform-specific peptides, the ratios of the heavy isotope labelled peptides were adjusted to the heavy FLEXITau standard by using the corresponding 2N4R FLEXITau peptides. DDA mass spectrometry raw data was processed using different software for the identification and quantification of post translational modification (PTM) of Tau. QExactive raw files were converted into mgf data format using ProteoWizard. The spectra were centroided and filtered using ms2preproc to select the 6 most intense peaks in a 30 Th window. Collected spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens proteome database (downloaded from uniprot.org on 11/01/2017) with ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 Beta (Paragon Algorithm 4.5.0.0. 1575, Sciex). The following settings were applied: instrument type ‘Orbi MS (1-3ppm)’; ‘Urea denaturation’; ‘thorough’ search mode; ‘phosphorylation emphasis’, ‘acetylation emphasis’, ‘ID focus on biological modifications’. A cutoff of 95% confidence was employed for all modified peptides. In addition, all MS/MS spectra of identified post-translationally modified peptides were subjected to manual verification.  Raw data were additionally analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.10 and peptide list searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2017, only reviewed entries appended with common laboratory contaminants [cRAP database, 247 entries]) using the Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: trypsin (specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search. Oxidation of M, acetylation of N-termini, phosphorylation of S, T, Y, acetylation of K, and ubiquitination (GlyGly) were chosen as variable modifications and propionylation of cysteine as static modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. For all other search parameters, the default settings were used. For the Glu-C and Asp-N digested samples settings were set to the respective enzyme with up to three missed cleavages. Label-free quantification was done using the XIC-based in-built label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. Data analysis was performed with the Perseus software in the MaxQuant computation platform and in the R statistical computing environment.

### Publication Abstract
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and post-translational modification (PTM) stoichiometry in Alzheimer's disease (AD), we generated a high-resolution quantitative proteomics map of 95 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from postmortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. Although Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and frequency for AD, suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner, leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by analysis of size-fractionated Tau. To summarize, features in the Tau protein critical for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C terminus, an increase in negative charge in the proline-rich region (PRR), and a decrease in positive charge in the microtubule binding domain (MBD).

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease; post-translational modification; clinical progression; srm; lfq; human tau; protein aggregation; proteopathy

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Judith A. Steen
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


