### Accession
PXD002668

### Title
Isolation of extracellular vesicles by PROSPR

### Description
Here, we report a novel and inexpensive method of rapidly isolating EVs from small volumes of human blood plasma by PRotein Organic Solvent PRecipitation (PROSPR). PROSPR encompasses a rapid three-step protocol to remove soluble proteins from plasma via precipitation in cold acetone, leaving the lipid-encapsulated EVs behind in suspension. This generates higher purity EVs that can then be obtained from filtration or classical ultracentrifugation methods.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles present in human plasma from healthy donors were isolated by PROSPR and Ultra-cushion methods. Isolated vesicles were processed by standard in solution digestion, including urea as solubilizing agent and trypsin as proteolytic enzyme. Peptides were then desalted and fractionated by amino column.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted into Mascot Generic Format (mgf) files using Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Database searches were performed using an in-house Mascot server with a precursor MS tolerance of 10ppm and MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02Da.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) such as exosomes and microvesicles mediate intercellular communication and regulate a diverse range of crucial biological processes. Host cells that are damaged, infected or transformed release biomarker-containing EVs into the peripheral circulation, where they can be readily accessed for use in diagnostic or prognostic testing. However, current methods of EV isolation from blood plasma are complex and often require relatively large sample volumes, hence are inefficient for widespread use in clinical settings. Here, we report a novel and inexpensive method of rapidly isolating EVs from small volumes of human blood plasma by PRotein Organic Solvent PRecipitation (PROSPR). PROSPR encompasses a rapid three-step protocol to remove soluble proteins from plasma via precipitation in cold acetone, leaving the lipid-encapsulated EVs behind in suspension. This generates higher purity EVs that can then be obtained from filtration or classical ultracentrifugation methods. We foresee that PROSPR-based purification of EVs will significantly accelerate the discovery of new disease biomarkers and the characterization of EVs with potential for clinical applications.

### Keywords
Biochemical purification, Biomarker, Exosome, Prospr, Extracellular vesicles, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Reasearch Associate
School of Biological Sciences Division of Chemical Biology & BioTechnology Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Xavier Gallart Palau

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences Division of Chemical Biology & BioTechnology Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


