### Accession
PXD021685

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Evades immune detection in Alveolar Macrophages

### Description
Respiratory infections, like the current pandemic SARS-CoV-2 virus, target the epithelial cells in the respiratory tract. However, alveolar macrophages (AMs) are tissue-resident macrophages located within the alveoli of the lung and they play a key role in the early phases of an immune response to respiratory infections. We expect that AMs are the first immune cells to encounter the SARS-CoV-2 and therefore their reaction to SARS-CoV-2 infection will have a profound impact upon the outcome of the infection. Interferons (IFNs) are antiviral cytokines and the first cytokine produced upon viral infection. Here, we challenge AMs with SARS-CoV-2 and to our surprise find that the AMs are incapable of recognising SARS-CoV-2 and produce IFN. This is in contrast to respiratory pathogens, such as influenza A virus and Sendai virus. Callenge of AMs with those viruses resulted in a robust IFN response. The absence of IFN production by AMs upon challenge could explain the initial asymptotic phase of SARS-CoV-2 infections and argues against the AMs as the source of proinflamatory cytokines later in infection.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation – cells were lysed in 6M urea, 20mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. Protein concentration was estimated using the 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Fifty µg of each sample was reduced in 10mM DTT for 30min at room temperature, followed by alkylation using 25mM IAA incubated for another 30min, while kept dark. Samples were transferred to 10kDa cut-off spin filters (Millipore) and spun for 30min at 14,000xg to remove urea. The filters were washed once in 50µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate before digested at 37°C over-night with 75µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate added 1ug MS grade trypsin (Sigma). The next day, peptides were recovered by centrifugation and acidified using 10µl 5% formic acid. Peptide samples were micropurified prior MS analysis. Samples amounts used for the MS analysis were normalized based on A280 using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific). LC-PRM-MS - The liquid chromatography parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-PRM-MS) analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-line Easy nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected and trapped on an in-house packed trap column (2 cm x 100 μm I.D) using RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm i.d.) pulled and packed in-house with RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 110 min gradient from 5% to 44% solvent B (A solvent: 0.1% formic acid; B solvent: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). The PRM analysis consisted of an MS1 scan recorded in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution and using the default setting. The targeted MS2 (tMS2) scans were recorded at 60,000 resolution in the orbitrap using a precursor isolation width of 1.6 m/z, HCD fragmentation of 30% (plus/minus of 3) collision energy, injection time (IT) of 118 ms and an AGC target set to 800%. The inclusion list monitored 11 of the SARS-Cov2 proteins represented by 55 peptides (SI table MS) compiled by own experimental data supplemented with viral peptides reported in PeptideAtlas (Desiere et al., 2006). The following peptides derived from the SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid phosphoprotein were detected; ITFGGPSDSTGSNQNGER, GQGVPINTNSSPDDQIGYYR, DGIIWVATEGALNTPK, and NPANNAAIVLQLPQGTTLPK.

### Data Protocol
Post-acquisition quantification – the MS raw files were converted to MGF files using the RawConverter (The Scripps Research Institute) and search against a combined SARS CoV2 (UP000464024; 14 sequences) and human (UP000005640; 20,600 sequences) references proteome using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. The data were searched with a mass tolerance of the precursor and product ions of 10 ppm and 0.2 Da using ESI-4SECTOR as the instrument setting. The significance threshold (p) was set at 0.05, and the ion score expect cut-off at 30. Mascot DAT files were extracted and used to build a spectral library in Skyline v.20.1.0 (MacLean et al., 2010). The Skyline PRM analysis was performed using orbitrap settings. Only peptides represented with identification from the Mascot search was used for post-acquisition label-free quantification at the MS2 level. Each peptide was represented by 5 fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Prm, Alveolar macrophages

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark.

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark.


