### Accession
PXD012136

### Title
Hepatocytes induces properties of wound healing type and regulatory macrophages in co-cultivated BMDM

### Description
The liver comprises the body´s largest pool of macrophages constituting approximately 80 % of all sessile tissue macrophages of the body. After liver damage monocyte-derived macrophages are recruited into the liver and were here affected by a micro milieu which is considerably influenced by hepatocytes. Up to now the complex network that determines the differentiation and function of liver macrophages and the impact of the intercellular communication between macrophages and the other parenchymal and non-parenchymal cell types of the liver is not well understood. The present study investigates the role of the intercellular communication between macrophages and hepatocytes on macrophage differentiation and function. Under physiological conditions the sinusoidal endothelial cell layer and the space of Dissé separate macrophages and hepatocytes from each other. Therefore the study focuses on the impact of the intercellular communication via soluble mediators on the differentiation of bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDM), which were recruited to the liver after liver injury, in co-culture models with highly purified primary murine hepatocytes embedded in a sandwich collagen matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Hepatocytes and macrophages from mono and co-culture were harvested and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis as described (Poschmann et al., 2014). Briefly, samples were shortly separated in a polyacrylamide gel, silver-stained, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were further processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using 51414 sequence entries downloaded on the 20th June 2016 from the UniProtKB mus musculus proteome section (UP000000589) considering carbamidomethylation at cysteines as fixed and methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-termini as variable modifications. Quantitative data was further analysed with Perseus (version 1.5.5.3)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocytes, Liver, Macrophages, Label-free quantification, Cell-cell communication

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) University hospital Düsseldorf Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) University hospital Düsseldorf Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf


