### Accession
PXD041367

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human monocytes in atherosclerosis related and non-related to chronic kidney disease

### Description
We performed quantitative and qualitative proteomic analysis by nano LC-MS/MS to investigate global changes in the proteome of monocytes isolated from patients' peripheral blood by immunomagnetic separation. Cells were isolated from patients at different stages of non-related and chronic kidney disease-related atherosclerosis compared to healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were isolated using a positive selection with CD14 Whole Blood MicroBeads and MACS Column (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The cell pellets of monocytes were suspended in lysis buffer (1% SDC and 8mM DTT), vortexed, homogenized using Precellys24 homogenizer and sonicated using an ultrasonic bath. The protein concentration was determined by the 2D-Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Sigma Aldrich). As the next step,in-solution digestion by trypsin was performed, and after digestion SDC was precipitated. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The following LC buffers were used: buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in Mili-Q water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of buffer B from 5% to 65% at a 300 nL/min (185 min. method). The instrument settings were as follows: the resolution was set to 70 000 for MS scans and 17 500 for the MS/MS scans to increase the acquisition rate.

### Data Protocol
Following LC-MS/MS analysis, the raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD), version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The identification of proteins by PD was performed using the SEQUEST engine against the UniProt complete human proteome set (release 20-04-2021) using the following parameters: a tolerance level of 10 ppm for MS and 0.08 Da for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as the digesting enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. A percolator algorithm and target-decoy strategy were used to validate peptide identification. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) filtering was performed at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% (q-value < 0.01). The analysis of monocytes samples was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Monocytes, Atherosclerosis, Lc-ms/ms, Chronic kidney disease

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Poznan, Poland

### Submitter
Joanna  Watral

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Luczak
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Poznan, Poland


