### Accession
PXD041245

### Title
Immunoproteasome function maintains oncogenic gene expression in KMT2A-complex driven leukemia

### Description
Pharmacologic targeting of epigenetic protein complexes has shown significant in vitro responses in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Early clinical trials in KMT2A-rearranged leukemia indicate rather transient responses and development of resistance. In an effort to define functional dependencies of KMT2A-fusions in AML, we identify the catalytic immunoproteasome subunit PSMB8 as a KMT2A-complex-specific vulnerability. Genetic and pharmacologic inactivation of PSMB8 results in impaired proliferation of murine and human leukemic cells while normal hematopoietic cells remain unaffected. Disruption of immunoproteasome function results in cellular enrichment of transcription factor BASP1, and consecutive repression of KMT2A-target genes. Pharmacologic targeting of PSMB8 improves efficacy of Menin-inhibitors, eradicates leukemia in primary human xenografts and shows preserved activity against Menin-inhibitor resistance mutations. This identifies and validates a cell-intrinsic mechanism whereby selective disruption of proteostasis results in altered transcription factor abundance and repression of oncogene-specific transcriptional networks. Therapeutic targeting of PSMB8-dependent transcription in combination with Menin-inhibition could thus eradicate KMT2A-complex driven AML.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, cells were thoroughly washed in plain PBS,  lysed in 1% SDC buffer (1% SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 40mM CAA and 10mM TCEP), incubated on ice for 20 minutes, boiled at 95°C, sonicated for 5mins on a Biorupter plus as describe previously 53. Samples were digested with proteases LysC (1:100 ratio) for 2 hours followed by Trypsin (1:100 ratio) overnight at 37°C. To the digested peptide volume, five times volume of Isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed to stop the digestion. The peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/ 1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Purified peptides were eluted with 60 µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Maxquant version 1.5.5.2 supported by Andromeda search engine. The data was searched for proteins and peptides using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human or Mouse (version 2016) fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the levels of protein and peptide. No changes were made to the enabled default settings such as oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Trypsin as enzyme specificity. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids set. The proteins were assigned to the same protein groups if two proteins could not be discriminated by unique peptides. The label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithum and match between run feature was enabled for identification of peptide across runs based on mass accuracy and normalized retention times. For label free protein quantification, minimum ratio count was set to 2. The Maxquant output table was analyzed in Perseus or R programming, prior to the analysis contaminants marked as reverse hits, contaminants and only identified by site-modification were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Pharmacologic targeting of chromatin-associated protein complexes has shown significant responses in KMT2A-rearranged (KMT2A-r) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) but resistance frequently develops to single agents. This points to a need for therapeutic combinations that target multiple mechanisms. To enhance our understanding of functional dependencies in KMT2A-r AML, we have used a proteomic approach to identify the catalytic immunoproteasome subunit PSMB8 as a specific vulnerability. Genetic and pharmacologic inactivation of PSMB8 results in impaired proliferation of murine and human leukemic cells while normal hematopoietic cells remain unaffected. Disruption of immunoproteasome function drives an increase in transcription factor BASP1 which in turn represses KMT2A-fusion protein target genes. Pharmacologic targeting of PSMB8 improves efficacy of Menin-inhibitors, synergistically reduces leukemia in human xenografts and shows preserved activity against Menin-inhibitor resistance mutations. This identifies and validates a cell-intrinsic mechanism whereby selective disruption of proteostasis results in altered transcription factor abundance and repression of oncogene-specific transcriptional networks. These data demonstrate that the immunoproteasome is a relevant therapeutic target in AML and that targeting the immunoproteasome in combination with Menin-inhibition could be a novel approach for treatment of KMT2A-r AML.

### Keywords
Aml, Kmt2a, Mll-fusion, Leukemia, Proteome, Immunoproteasome

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, DKFZ Heidelberg
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Ashok Kumar Jayavelu
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, DKFZ Heidelberg


