### Accession
PXD001516

### Title
CLL iTRAQ3 -  Total proteome analysis identifies migration defects as a major pathogenetic factor in immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV)-unmutated chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
The mutational status of the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV) defines two clinically distinct forms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) known as mutated (M-CLL) and un-mutated (UM-CLL). To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the adverse clinical outcome associated with UM-CLL, total proteomes from 9 UM-CLL and 9 M-CLL samples were analysed by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry. Unsupervised clustering, based on the expression of 3521 identified proteins, separated CLL samples into two groups corresponding to IGHV mutational status. Computational analysis showed that 43 cell migration/adhesion pathways were significantly enriched by 39 differentially expressed proteins, 35 of which were expressed at significantly lower levels in UM-CLL samples. Furthermore, UM-CLL cells under-expressed proteins associated with cytoskeletal remodelling and over-expressed proteins associated with transcriptional and translational activity. Taken together, our findings indicated that UM-CLL cells are less migratory and more adhesive than M-CLL cells, resulting in their retention in lymph nodes where they are exposed to proliferative stimuli. In keeping with this hypothesis, analysis of an extended cohort of 120 CLL patients revealed a strong and specific association between UM-CLL and lymphadenopathy. Our study illustrates the potential of total proteome analysis to elucidate pathogenetic mechanisms in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Mononuclear cells were isolated from the blood of patients suffering from Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia with either non-mutated (n=9) or mutated (n=9) IGHV. They were lysed in buffer containing 0.1% SDS and aliquots of 100micrograms were reduced, alkylated with MMTS and digested with trypsin. Peptides were labelled with iTRAQ 8plex reagent, fractionated by cation exchange chromatography, desalted and analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Triple TOF 5600.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using ProteinPilot 4.2 and the Paragon algorithm (AB Sciex) against the SwissProt database (2013-2, 40646 human entries), with MMTS as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and biological modifications allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10ppm. The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and only proteins lying within a 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) were taken forward for analysis. iTRAQ data for proteins identified by 2 or more peptides with at least 90% confidence of correct sequence assignment, or by a single peptide with at least 99% confidence were log2 transformed, batch corrected using the Batch Remover Tool in the Partek Genomic Suite (version 6.3, Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) and included in subsequent analyses. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to assess variance across the sample set. PCA was performed using Partek Genomic Suite. A correlation method, which adjusts the data to be standardised to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, was used for dispersion matrix. Eigenvector scaling was performed orthogonal to the original variables and scaled to unity. Statistical significance of the difference in the levels of expression of proteins between UM-CLL and M-CLL samples was determined using student T-test (2-tailed and unpaired) and proteins whose levels of expression were significantly different (P < 0.05) were included in subsequent analyses. Statistical analysis was conducted using the R computational environment.

### Publication Abstract
The mutational status of the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region defines two clinically distinct forms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) known as mutated (M-CLL) and unmutated (UM-CLL). To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the adverse clinical outcome associated with UM-CLL, total proteomes from nine UM-CLL and nine M-CLL samples were analyzed by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry. Based on the expression of 3521 identified proteins, principal component analysis separated CLL samples into two groups corresponding to immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region mutational status. Computational analysis showed that 43 cell migration/adhesion pathways were significantly enriched by 39 differentially expressed proteins, 35 of which were expressed at significantly lower levels in UM-CLL samples. Furthermore, UM-CLL cells underexpressed proteins associated with cytoskeletal remodeling and overexpressed proteins associated with transcriptional and translational activity. Taken together, our findings indicate that UM-CLL cells are less migratory and more adhesive than M-CLL cells, resulting in their retention in lymph nodes, where they are exposed to proliferative stimuli. In keeping with this hypothesis, analysis of an extended cohort of 120 CLL patients revealed a strong and specific association between UM-CLL and lymphadenopathy. Our study illustrates the potential of total proteome analysis to elucidate pathogenetic mechanisms in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Leukemia, Mutation, Itraq

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalind Elspeth Jenkins
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology


