### Accession
PXD008926

### Title
A quantitative analysis of rice stem tissue by iTRAQ proteomic techonology

### Description
Here, we reported the quantitative analysis of brown planthopper (BPH) interactions with rice stem tissue by iTRAQ proteomic techonology.The results obtained from this work not only aimed to provide a new clues that will facilitate better understanding of complex molecular and cellular events in BPH infestation, but also explored the regulatory roles of HSP20 for breeding BPH resistant rice.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 300μg of proteins were diluted in 4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and 100mM DTT and heated at 100ºC for 5 min. Each sample was then cooled to room temperature and loaded onto an ultrafiltration filter (30kDa cutoff, Sartorius, Germany) containing 200μL of UA buffer (8M urea, 150mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) followed by centrifugation at 14,000×g for 30min and an additional washing step with 200μL of UT buffer. One hundred microliters of 50mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer was subsequently added to the filter to block the reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were then incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark followed by centrifugation at 14,000×g for 30min. The filters were washed three times with 100μL of UA buffer and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 30 min after each washing step. Next, 100μL of dissolution buffer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was added to each filter, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 30 min, which was repeated three times. The protein suspensions were then digested with 40μL of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) buffer (6μg trypsin in 40μL dissolution buffer) at 37ºC for 18 h. Finally, the filter unit was transferred to a new tube , added 40μL dissolution buffer and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate, and the peptide concentration was analyzed at OD280.

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed using Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC system connected to Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 1μg of each sample was loaded onto Thermo Scientific EASY column (two columns) using an autosampler at a flow rate of 150nL/min. The sequential separation of peptides on Thermo Scientific EASY trap column (100μm×2cm, 5μm, 100Å, C18) and analytical column (75μm×25 cm, 5μm, 100 Å, C18) was accomplished using a segmented 2h gradient from Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) for 100 min, followed by 35-90% Solvent B for 3 min and then 90% Solvent B for 5 min. The column was re-equilibrated to its initial highly aqueous solvent composition before each analysis.The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and MS spectra were acquired over a range of 350-2000 m/z. The resolving powers of the MS scan and MS/MS scan at 100 m/z for the Orbitrap Elite were set as 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. The top sixteen most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window was 1m/z, and ions were fragmented through higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 35eV. The maximum ion injection times were set at 50ms for the survey scan and 150ms for the MS/MS scans, and the automatic gain control target values for full scan modes was set to 1.0×10−6 and for MS/MS was 5×104. The dynamic exclusion duration was 30s. The raw files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search for the fragmentation spectra was performed using the MASCOT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer against the uniprot_rice_168354_20161009.fasta. The following search parameters were used: monoisotopic mass, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages, iTRAQ labeling and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, and peptide charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+, and the oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.1 Da for the fragment ions. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 1%. The relative quantitative analysis of the proteins in the samples based on the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ions from all unique peptides representing each protein was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1). The relative peak intensities of the iTRAQ reporter ions released in each of the MS/MS spectra were used. Then, the final ratios obtained from the relative protein quantifications were normalized based on the median average protein quantification ratio. Protein ratios represent the median of the unique peptides of the protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Rice

### Affiliations
China
Faculty of Chinese Materia Medica; Cultivation and identification of Chinese herbal medicine/Plant Pathology; Yunnan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Kunming, Yunnan, P.R. China

### Submitter
qian zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Weijiao Li
Faculty of Chinese Materia Medica; Cultivation and identification of Chinese herbal medicine/Plant Pathology; Yunnan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Kunming, Yunnan, P.R. China


