### Accession
PXD039407

### Title
Total proteome analysis of DLD-1 cells expressing various degrons

### Description
Total Proteome analysis of various AID degron-bearing DLD-1 cells  ( Nup96, Nup62, Nup188, TPR, Nup93, GANP, PCID2, Nup153, Nup160, Nup205) before and after addition of Auxin for 4-8 h.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (+/- auxin) were washed with PBS 3 times, scraped and pelleted for 5 min at 500 g. The pellet was dissolved in 8M urea + 1 mM DTT. The lysate was cleared by ultracentrifugation (10 min at 400 000g). 100 µg of cleared lysate was supplemented with freshly added DTT (20 mM final) and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Iodoacetamide (freshly made stock solution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was then added (50 mM final) and alkylation proceeded for 1 h at RT. The reaction was quenched by 50 mM DTT and samples were diluted 10 x with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Three microgram of trypsin (v5111, Promega) was added and digestion reaction proceeded overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified by formic acid, and peptides were desalted with Waters Oasis HLB 1cc columns. Peptides were eluted with 1 ml of buffer E (0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile) and dried using SpeedVac. Samples were  individually analyzed with LCMS for label-free quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation analysis were carried out on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide IDs were assigned by searching the resulting LCMS raw data against UniProt/SwissProt Human database using the Mascot algorithm (V2.6, Matrix Science Inc.). And peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were further validated with Percolate algorithm. Peptides with high confidence (<1% FDR) were filtered for protein identification. Label-free quantitation was based on areas under peptide precursor traces (MS1) that were aligned with the Minora feature detection function in PD2.2. We determined the protein-level fold changes based on the median of peptide-level fold changes from the Proteome Discoverer-produced abundances in handling both TMT and Label-free results. Peptides that could be mapped to multiple proteins by Mascot were removed. We also discarded all keratin-related peptides based on the UniProt annotation. We separated peptides that mapped onto UniProt ID P52948 into NUP96 and NUP98, according to their mapping locations. Peptides that are mapped to amino acids from 1 to 880 were counted for NUP96; the others were used for NUP98. To minimize the batch effect, we used the quartile normalization before calculation of fold changes in the Label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Total lysate, Human dld-1 cells

### Affiliations
NICHD/NIH
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Alexei Arnaoutov

### Lab Head
Dr Mary Dasso
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA


