### Accession
PXD029527

### Title
The dynamic rRNA ribomethylome drives stemness in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Eukaryotic ribosomal RNA carries diverse posttranscriptional modifications, among which the evolutionarily conserved 2’-O-methylation (2’-O-Me) occurs at more than 100 sites and is essential for ribosome biogenesis. Plasticity of 2´-O-Me in ribosomes and its functional consequences in human disease are not yet known. Here, we present the full rRNA 2’-O-Me landscape (ribomethylome) of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) through profiling 94 patient samples as well as 21 normal hematopoietic samples of 5 different lineages. While interior modification sites in functional centers are persistently fully 2’-O-methylated in human AMLs, methylation on ribosome exterior sites is unprecedentedly dynamic. Higher 2’-O-methylation on exterior dynamic sites is associated with leukemia stem cell (LSC) signatures. Forced expression of enzymatically active but not of the catalytic defect 2’-O-methyltransferase FBL induces AML stemness and accelerates leukemogenesis in patient-derived xenografts. Mechanistically, ribomethylome dynamics shifted mRNA ribosome translation preferences. High rRNA 2’-O-Me enhances translation of amino acid transporters enriched in optimal codons and subsequently increases intra-cellular amino acid levels. Methylation on a single exterior modification site affects leukemia stem cell activity. The Guanosine 1447 on the small subunit ribosomal RNA is the most variable site in primary AMLs. Gm1447 is increased in leukemia stem cell populations compared to non-leukemogenic blast cells and AML specimens with higher Gm1447 are enriched for leukemia stem cell genes. Comparison of Gm1447high and Gm1447low ribosome structure solved by cryo-electron microscopy demonstrated disassociation of LYAR from Gm1447low ribosomes. Suppression of Gm1447 alone is sufficient to suppress translation of amino acid transporters, resulting in decreased cellular amino acid levels and leukemia stem cell activity. Taken together, our data reveal the dynamic FBL-mediated rRNA 2'-O-Me landscape as a novel epitranscriptomic level of control employed by leukemic stem cells and may enable new strategies to target human AML.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were washed twice with Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) and cultured in amino acid-depletion medium (RPMI formulation without methionine, arginine and lysine (GIBCO), with 20% dialyzed FBS (GIBCO), 200 mg ml-1 L-proline) for 45 min. The cells were pelleted and cultured in intermediate (depletion medium supplemented with 2H4-lysine, 13C6-arginine and AHA) or heavy (depletion medium supplemented with 15N213C6-lysine, 15N413C6-arginine and AHA) labelling medium for three hours. Cells were pelleted and lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 0.3 M HEPES, 0.75 M NaCl and 6.2% CHAPS detergent) including protease inhibitor cocktail without EDTA (Roche) and sonicated on ice using probe sonicator (Branson). Equal amounts of pre-cleared heavy and intermediate SILAC labelled lysates were merged. Nascent proteins were enriched alkyne agarose resin slurry from the cell lysate mixtures.  The nascent proteins were enriched with alkyne agarose resin slurry (Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit, Thermo Fischer Scientific). On-beads digestion was performed by overnight digestion with 5 μg of trypsin at 37°C in digestion buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in ULCMS water) in a shaking incubator. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min (1,000 g, RT) and the supernatant with digested peptides was collected. Peptides were desalted using an Oasis PRiME HKB mElution Plate according to manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. High pH Reversed Phase fractionation was done on Infinity 1260 LC system (Agilent) with Gemini® 3 µm C18 column (Phenomonex). Separation occurred along 60 min linear gradient of buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10) and buffer B (100% acetonitrile). Samples were dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. MS was performed on Q-Exactive HF or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrophotometers connected to EASY-nLC™ 1200 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated with a C18 UPLC column (Thermo Scientific). The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring one survey MS scan in the orbitrap followed by up to 20 fragmentation scans (TOP20) of the most abundant ions analysed in the MS by HCD fragmentation. Orbitrap Fusion was operated using Orbitrap as MS1 analyser and Ion Trap as MS2 analyser.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant. A minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification and the false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. R/Bioconductor was used to calculate the percentages of SILAC MS/MS spectra as a percentage of the total MS/MS per protein group. SILAC ratios below the threshold of 0.1 were removed. The SILAC ratios were inverted to account for SILAC label swap between replicate experiments. Subsequently, ratios were log2 transformed and corrected by the median of the log2 ratios to obtain filtered and normalized ratios for further analysis. Proteins quantified in both replicates were subjected to differential expression analysis by Limma R package. Multiple test correction was applied according to Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Adjusted p values equal or lower than 0.05 pointed to statistically significant protein expression change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fbl, Aml, Rrna, Leukemia, 2’-o-methylation, Aha, Nascent chain proteomics

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology
Department of Internal Medicine V, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Daria Fijalkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Carsten Müller-Tidow
Department of Internal Medicine V, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


