### Accession
PXD023192

### Title
The universally conserved ATPase YchF regulates translation of leaderless mRNA in response to stress conditions

### Description
The universally conserved P-loop GTPases control diverse cellular processes, like signal transduction, ribosome assembly, cell motility, intracellular transport and translation. YchF belongs to the Obg-family of P-loop GTPases and is one of the least characterized member of this family.  It is unique because it preferentially hydrolyses ATP rather than GTP, but its physiological role is largely unknown. Studies in different organisms including humans suggest a possible role of YchF in regulating the cellular adaptation to stress conditions. In the current study, we explored the role of YchF in the model organism Escherichia coli. By western blot and promotor fusion experiments, we demonstrate that the YchF levels decrease during stress conditions or when cells enter stationary phase. The decline in YchF levels trigger increased stress resistance and cells lacking YchF are resistant to multiple stress conditions, like oxidative stress, replication stress or translational stress. By in vivo site directed cross-linking we demonstrate that YchF interacts with the translation initiation factor IF3 and with multiple ribosomal proteins at the surface of the small ribosomal subunit. The absence of YchF enhances the anti-association activity of IF3, stimulates the translation of leaderless mRNAs and increases the resistance against the endoribonuclease MazF, which generates leaderless mRNAs during stress conditions. In summary, our data identify YchF as a stress-responsive regulator of leaderless mRNA translation

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cells carrying pSUP-BpaRS-6TRN or pEVOL and pBad-YchF or its pBpa-containing derivatives, were grown overnight and used for the inoculation of 400 ml LB. 0.5 mM pBpA in 1 M NaOH was added and cells were grown at 37°C to an OD of 0.6 - 0.8 before they were induced with 0.001 - 0.02 % arabinose. Cells were harvested after 3 h of growth and resuspended in 8 ml PBS buffer. Half of the sample was transferred into a 6-well-microtiter plate and treated with UV-light (0.12 J/cm2) (UV Transilluminator Vilber Lourmat BLX-365) for 20 min. The other half was protected against UV-light. YchF was then purified from UV-exposed and control cells. To purify N- or C-terminally His-tagged YchF or its pBpa-containing variants, BL21 was grown to an OD of 0.6-0.8 and induced with arabinose (pBad24-YchF 0.001%; pSUP 0.01%; pEVOL 0.02%) or 1 mM IPTG (pQE30+pRep4). After 3 hours at 37°C, cells were harvested and resuspended in HKM buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 7.1, 200 mM KCl2, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 % Glycerol). Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche, Germany) and phenylmethylsulfonylfluorid (PMSF, final concentration 1 mM) were added. Cells were lysed three times by Emulsiflex C3 (Avestin) and cell debris was removed by centrifugation (30 min, 15.500 rpm, Thermo Scientific F21 rotor). The supernatant was mixed with HKM (+5 mM imidazole)-equilibrated Talon beads (Clontech) and incubated at 4°C for 1 h. The Talon beads were washed 5 times with 3 ml 5 mM imidazole in HKM buffer and proteins were eluted with 200 mM imidazole in HKM buffer. Eluted proteins were buffer-exchanged to HKMD buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 7.1, 100 mM KCl2, 7 mM MgCl2, 10 % Glycerol) using dialysis (Spectra/Por™, MWCO 12-14 kDa) in 1 L HKMD buffer at 4 °C before storage at – 80 °C. For LC-MS analysis, samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and proteins were visualized with colloidal Coomassie Blue. Gel lanes were cut into 13 slices and destained by three repetitions of incubation in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by incubation with 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% (v/v) ethanol), each for 10 min at room temperature. Cysteines were reduced by incubation with 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 65°C and alkylated by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 37°C. Gel slices were dehydrated and washed by incubation with 100% (v/v) ethanol (10 min at room temperature) and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Christ, Osterode, Germany) for subsequent digest. Proteins were digested o/n at 37°C with a trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) to protein mass ratio of 1:25 in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were eluted twice by adding 0.05% TFA, 50% acetonitrile and sonication for 10 min. Combined eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for subsequent desalting. For LC-MS/MS analysis peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA by 4 min sonication, centrifuged for 6 min at 12,000 rpm to pellet precipitates. Separation of peptides and MS analyses were performed using Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns (Thermo Scientific; length: 5 mm; inner diameter: 0.3 mm; loading flow rate: 30 µl/min) and Acclaim PepMap analytical columns (Thermo Scientific; length: 500 mm; inner diameter: 75 µm; particle size: 2 µm; packing density: 10 nm; flow rate: 0.25 µl/min) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on pre-columns and peptide separation was performed using a gradient of solvent A (4% DMSO; 0.1% FA) and solvent B (48% MeOH; 30% ACN; 4% DMSO; 0.1% FA). Separation and elution of peptides was performed using a multi-step gradient of solvent A and B starting with 1% solvent B for 5 min followed by 1-65% B in 30 min, 65-95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B. The flow rate was 250 nl/min.  MS instruments were operated in data-dependent mode. Parameters were as follows: acquisition of full MS scans in the range of m/z 370 - 1,700; resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400; automatic gain control (AGC) of 1 x 106 with a maximum allowed ion accumulation time (IT) of 200 ms; fragmentation of the 15 most abundant precursor ions with charge states ≥ +2 (TOP15) by collision induced dissociation (CID); normalized collision energy of 35%; activation q of 0.25; activation time of 10 ms; AGC for MS/MS scans of 5 x 105; IT of 150 ms; signal threshold of > 2,500; dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data of YchF(N20pBpa) crosslinking experiments were searched against the E.coli-specific database from UniProt (version  2017_01). Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity and a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The options 'match between runs' and 'iBAQ' were enabled. Proteins were identified with at least one unique peptide and a false discovery rate of 0.01 on both peptide and protein level. For the analysis of site-directed in vivo photo cross-linking experiments of YchF(N20pBpa), iBAQ intensities were used.

### Publication Abstract
The universally conserved P-loop GTPases control diverse cellular processes, like signal transduction, ribosome assembly, cell motility, and intracellular transport and translation. YchF belongs to the Obg-family of P-loop GTPases and is one of the least characterized member of this family. It is unique because it preferentially hydrolyses ATP rather than GTP, but its physiological role is largely unknown. Studies in different organisms including humans suggest a possible role of YchF in regulating the cellular adaptation to stress conditions. In the current study, we explored the role of YchF in the model organism <i>Escherichia coli</i>. By western blot and promoter fusion experiments, we demonstrate that YchF levels decrease during stress conditions or when cells enter stationary phase. The decline in YchF levels trigger increased stress resistance and cells lacking YchF are resistant to multiple stress conditions, like oxidative stress, replication stress, or translational stress. By <i>in vivo</i> site directed cross-linking we demonstrate that YchF interacts with the translation initiation factor 3 (IF3) and with multiple ribosomal proteins at the surface of the small ribosomal subunit. The absence of YchF enhances the anti-association activity of IF3, stimulates the translation of leaderless mRNAs, and increases the resistance against the endoribonuclease MazF, which generates leaderless mRNAs during stress conditions. In summary, our data identify YchF as a stress-responsive regulator of leaderless mRNA translation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Site-directed in vivo photo cross-linking

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


