### Accession
PXD027338

### Title
Combined Metabolic and Chemical (CoMetChem) labeling using stable isotopes

### Description
Histone acetylation is an important, reversible posttranslational protein modification and hallmark of epigenetic regulation. However, little is known about the dynamics of reversible hisotne acetylation, due to the lack of analytical methods that can capture site-specific acetylation and deacetylation reactions. We present a new approach that combines metabolic and chemical labeling (CoMetChem) using uniformly 13C-labeled glucose and stable isotope labeled acetic anhydride, which allows to quantify site-specific lysine acetylation dynamics in tryptic peptides using high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Murine macrophage cells (RAW 264.7) were cultured in DMEM with 4.5g/L [U-12C]-Glucose for 22h, followed by a pre-incubation of 16h with either a histone deacetylase inhibitor (MS-275 or SAHA) or DMSO. The medium was replaced by [U-13C] glucose containing DMEM including either MS-275, SAHA or DMSO. The cells were grown for different timepoints up to 24h. Histones were extracted from cell nuclei with 0.2M HCl and chemically acetylated with 13C4D6-acetic anhydride. To optimise the chemical acetylation, pre-experiments with three different buffer systems (TEAB, ABC and sodium borate) were performed. For all further experiments, chemical acetylation was carried out in sodium borate. The acetylated histones were digested for 16h at 37° with trypsin. Peptides were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a full MS scan and an inclusion list for isobaric peptide isotopologues. For details, see https://chemrxiv.org/engage/chemrxiv/article-details/60c75587842e654540db431e

### Data Protocol
To assess the efficiency of the chemical acetylation with different buffer systems, raw data was analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). Peptide identification was carried out with Andromeda against a murine data base. The following parameters were used: carbamidomethylation on Cys residues as a fixed modification, oxidation of Met and acetylation of the N-terminus as variable modifications. Acetylation of lysine residues with either 12C2H3 or 13C2D3 acetyl-groups was also set as a variable modification. For the analysis of the histone acetylation dynamics, an in-house pipeline was used. For quantification of peptide isotopologues at MS1 level, extracted ion chromatograms were quantified using the genesis algorithm in FreeStyle version 1.6.75.20. Peak heights were corrected for natural isotope distribution using PICor (https://github.com/MolecularBioinformatics/PICor). To analyse the site-specific acetylation abundances, selected MS2 fragments were quantified using PASTAQ (https://pastaq.horvatovichlab.com/). From the relative abundance of the heavy and light fragment ions and the MS1 abundances of the isobaric species, the abundances of the different isotopologue species were calculated. For the H3 peptide H3(18-26), abundances of all possible isotopologue species were calculated, while for the H4 peptide H4(4-17), only the abundances of the singly-acetylated species were calculated in a site-specific manner. Scripts used for this analysis can be found at https://github.com/functional-proteo-metabolomics/CoMetChem. Analysis results are summarised in the file “cometchem_data_table_h3_h4.csv”.

### Publication Abstract
Histone acetylation is an important, reversible post-translational protein modification and a hallmark of epigenetic regulation. However, little is known about the dynamics of this process, due to the lack of analytical methods that can capture site-specific acetylation and deacetylation reactions. We present a new approach that combines metabolic and chemical labeling (CoMetChem) using uniformly 13C-labeled glucose and stable isotope-labeled acetic anhydride. Thereby, chemically equivalent, fully acetylated histone species are generated, enabling accurate relative quantification of site-specific lysine acetylation dynamics in tryptic peptides using high-resolution mass spectrometry. We show that CoMetChem enables site-specific quantification of the incorporation or loss of lysine acetylation over time, allowing the determination of reaction rates for acetylation and deacetylation. Thus, the CoMetChem methodology provides a comprehensive description of site-specific acetylation dynamics.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Stable isotopes, Histones, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Institut für Biochemie
Universität Innsbruck
Functional Proteo-Metabolomics Department of Biochemistry University of Innsbruck  Austria

### Submitter
Anna-Sophia  Egger

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Kwiatkowski
Functional Proteo-Metabolomics Department of Biochemistry University of Innsbruck  Austria


