### Accession
PXD049377

### Title
Differentiating children with sepsis with and without acute respiratory distress syndrome using proteomics

### Description
Both sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) rely on imprecise clinical definitions leading to heterogeneity, which has contributed to negative trials. Because circulating protein/DNA complexes have been implicated in sepsis and ARDS, we aimed to develop a proteomic signature of DNA-bound proteins to discriminate between children with sepsis with and without ARDS. We performed a prospective case-control study in 12 children with sepsis with ARDS matched to 12 children with sepsis without ARDS on age, severity of illness score, and source of infection. We performed co-immunoprecipitation and downstream proteomics in plasma collected ≤ 24 h of intensive care unit admission. Expression profiles were generated, and a random forest classifier was used on differentially expressed proteins to develop a signature which discriminated ARDS. The classifier was tested in six independent blinded samples. Neutrophil and nucleosome proteins were over-represented in ARDS, including two S100A proteins, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and three histones. Random forest produced a 10-protein signature that accurately discriminated between children with sepsis with and without ARDS. This classifier perfectly assigned six independent blinded samples as having ARDS or not. We validated higher expression of the most informative discriminating protein, galectin-3-binding protein, in children with ARDS. Our methodology has applicability to isolation of DNA-bound proteins from plasma. Our results support the premise of a molecular definition of ARDS, and give preliminary insight into why some children with sepsis, but not others, develop ARDS.

### Sample Protocol
Blood Collection and Co-Immunoprecipitation For the parent ARDS cohort study, we collected blood ≤24 h of ARDS onset. For this study, to harmonize with subjects with non-ARDS sepsis, we ensured that blood for all subjects (with and without ARDS) was collected ≤24 h of pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) admission in citrated tubes (Becton, Dickinson; Franklin Lakes, NJ), centrifuged within 30 min (2,000 g, 20 min, 20°C) to generate platelet-poor plasma, and stored at −80°C until analysis. For co-IP, 100 µL of plasma was precleared with Protein A/G Plus Agarose (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and underwent co-IP (Pierce) using anti-ds DNA IgG2A (Abcam, Cambridge, MA). Anti-ds DNA antibody was covalently bound to an amine-reactive resin, making the elution enriched for target DNA-associated proteins, with minimal contamination by antibody. This protocol generated ∼1 µg of protein per sample, quantified using Nanodrop.  In-Solution Digestion Samples were precipitated using acetone/trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (8 vol/1 vol). The pellet was solubilized and digested with the iST kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany), reduced, and alkylated by addition of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer containing tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-chloroacetamide, heated to 95°C for 10 min. Proteins were hydrolyzed for 1.5 h at 37°C by adding LysC and trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition, Spectral Library Generation, and Protein Quantification Samples were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and EasySpray source, using data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Tryptic digests were spiked with iRT standards (Biognosys) and separated by reverse-phase high-purification liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 50 cm 2 μm PepMap RSLC C18 column at 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 210 nL/min with each RP-HPLC run comprising a 125-min gradient from 1% to 5% B in 15 min, 5%–45% B in 110 min for DDA, and 140 min for DIA. For DDA, the mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1,400 (R = 240,000) followed by data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans on the 20 most abundant ions, minimum automatic gain control (AGC) 1⋅e4, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s (R = 15,000). Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) full scan AGC target value was 3⋅e6, while MSn AGC was 1⋅e5, respectively. MSn injection time was 160 ms; microscans were set at 1. Rejection of unassigned and 1+,6–8 charge states was set. The raw files for DIA were collected at one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution, a scan range of 300–1,650 m/z, an AGC target of 3⋅e6, and a maximum inject time of 60 ms. This was followed by 22 (DIA) isolation windows with varying sizes at 30,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3⋅e6, injection times set to auto, loop count, and msx count of 1. Default charge state was 4, first mass fixed at 200 m/z, and normalized collision energy (NCE) per window stepped at 25.5, 27, and 30.  MS/MS raw files for the DDA were searched against a reference human protein sequence database including reviewed isoforms from the Uniprot database using MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0 (16). Trypsin was specified as enzyme with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were considered variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance FTMS was set to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate of 1% was set for peptide and protein identification. Remaining parameters were set to default. MaxQuant output was used to generate the project-specific spectral library for DIA. This library was supplemented with additional library generated using direct DIA approach in Spectronaut 13 (Biognosys) (17).  Data Analysis Perseus (v.1.6.6.0) and Spectronaut 13 (Biognosys) were used for proteomic processing and analysis (18). Data were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median. We filtered to have eight values in at least one (with or without ARDS) grouping. Subsequently, data were processed in R v.3.6.2. Data were imputed using bpca implemented in pcaMethods package v.1.78.0 (Bioconductor, 3.10) (19) and batch effects were removed using the ComBAT method in R sva v.3.32.1 (20). To compare data between the groups, Student’s t test was used to identify differentially expressed proteins, and volcano plots were generated using EnhanceVolcano v.1.2 (Bioconductor, release 3.10) to visualize the affected proteins while comparing different groups. Lists of differentially abundant proteins were then sorted based on the P value < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 1, yielding a prioritized list, from which we selected the top 50 for Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Functional enrichment and the top 20 for predictive analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Both sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) rely on imprecise clinical definitions leading to heterogeneity, which has contributed to negative trials. Because circulating protein/DNA complexes have been implicated in sepsis and ARDS, we aimed to develop a proteomic signature of DNA-bound proteins to discriminate between children with sepsis with and without ARDS. We performed a prospective case-control study in 12 children with sepsis with ARDS matched to 12 children with sepsis without ARDS on age, severity of illness score, and source of infection. We performed co-immunoprecipitation and downstream proteomics in plasma collected &#x2264; 24 h of intensive care unit admission. Expression profiles were generated, and a random forest classifier was used on differentially expressed proteins to develop a signature which discriminated ARDS. The classifier was tested in six independent blinded samples. Neutrophil and nucleosome proteins were over-represented in ARDS, including two S100A proteins, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and three histones. Random forest produced a 10-protein signature that accurately discriminated between children with sepsis with and without ARDS. This classifier perfectly assigned six independent blinded samples as having ARDS or not. We validated higher expression of the most informative discriminating protein, galectin-3-binding protein, in children with ARDS. Our methodology has applicability to isolation of DNA-bound proteins from plasma. Our results support the premise of a molecular definition of ARDS, and give preliminary insight into why some children with sepsis, but not others, develop ARDS.

### Keywords
Acute respiratory distress syndrome, Nucleosome, Sepsis, Neutrophil, Dna-bound proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia  University of Pennsylvania  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Nadir Yehya, MD
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia  University of Pennsylvania  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania


