### Accession
PXD001582

### Title
Study of reversible oxidation of thiol proteins after hexyl aminolevulinate mediated photodynamic therapy

### Description
This proteomic study This proteomic study focuses on the role of reversible thiol oxidation after hexyl aminolevulinate mediated PDT (HAL-PDT). The human epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used as model system and red light as light source, a clinical relevant in vitro model. The light dose dependent cell cytotoxicity was measured by resazurin assay. The most clinical relevant dose, LD100, was used for the proteomic part of the study and cells where harvested 30 min after treatment. The reversibly oxidized thiol proteins were selected by biotinylation and identified by mass spectrometry. This proteomic technique revealed over 1100 thiol proteins which were reversibly oxidized after HAL-PDT.  Identified proteins were analysed by bioinformatics (IPA and GO) and a list of reliable identified proteins (282 proteins) where further analysed. Both the cellular location and function was determined for these proteins. In addition, 18 of the proteins where identified as redox regulated, 36 to be a part of the apoptotic pathway and 9 to be both redox regulated and a part of apoptotic pathway. From these results we suggest redox regulated proteins as a trigger mechanism for PDT induced apoptosis.focuses on the role of reversible thiol oxidation after hexyl aminolevulinate mediated PDT (HAL-PDT). The human epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used as model system and red light as light source, a clinical relevant in vitro model. The light dose dependent cell cytotoxicity was measured by resazurin assay. The most clinical relevant dose, LD100, was used for the proteomic part of the study and cells where harvested 30 min after treatment. The reversibly oxidized thiol proteins were selected by biotinylation and identified by mass spectrometry. This proteomic technique revealed over 1100 thiol proteins which were reversibly oxidized after HAL-PDT.  Identified proteins were analysed by bioinformatics (IPA and GO) and a list of reliable identified proteins (282 proteins) where further analysed. Both the cellular location and function was determined for these proteins. In addition, 18 of the proteins where identified as redox regulated, 36 to be a part of the apoptotic pathway and 9 to be both redox regulated and a part of apoptotic pathway. From these results we suggest redox regulated proteins as a trigger mechanism for PDT induced apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
After red light HAL-PDT(20 µM, 3 h)  with a light dose corresponding to LD100 (based on dose-response experiment) the A431 cells were further incubated for 30 minutes in normal growth medium and kept in the dark in a humidified atmosphere under standard conditions (37 ºC, 5 % CO2) before harvesting. The cells were washed twice in ice cold PBS before lysisbuffer (40 mM Hepes, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, pH 7.4, 1% CHAPS,  100 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) and protease inhibitor) was added (1.5 ml to a 15 cm dish with 90 % confluent cells) and kept on ice for 15 minutes. The cell lysate was scraped, transferred to tubes, pipetted to homogenize and subsequently centrifuged (20 minutes, 16,000g, 4 ºC). The supernatant was transferred to new tubes , snap frozen liquid N2 and kept in -80 ºC (or -20C depending on time) before further sample processing.  Excess NEM was removed by running the samples through Sephadex G-25 (fine course, 20-80µm)) columns in a FPLC system (degassed PBS, flow rate 4 ml/min) where the OD280 was measured automatically for each fraction. Those fractions containing evidently positive OD280 was collected and fresh dithiothreitol (DTT) added to a final concentration of 5mM. The samples were incubated in room temperature for 10 minutes to let the DTT reduce any oxidized thiols and biotin maleimide was then added to a final concentration of 1.5 mM. The samples were incubated for one hour at room temperature placed on at tilting board. Prior to removal of excess DTT and biotin maleimide by the same FPLC set up, the samples were filtrated through a 0.45 µm filter to avoid clogging of the FPLC columns. Those fractions containing evidently positive OD280 was collected and kept at – 80 ºC before further sample processing.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer data analysis   The raw files consisting of mass spectra were analysed with Proteome Discoverer v 1.4.0.288 using Sequest HT algorithm. The search was performed against Human proteome March release from Uniprot using trypsin as cleavaging enzyme with maximum of two allowed miscleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 PPM and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da with Biotin:Sigma-B1267 and Nethylmaleimide as dynamic post-translational-modification in the search criteria. Percolator was used for statistical validation of the identification with q-value cutoff of 0.05, giving us a list of identifications which were further restricted only to score value of at least 1 consisting of medium and high confidence peptides, that is false-discover-rate of 0.05 and 0.01 respectively. The results were parsed with a PERL v 5.14.2 scripts to get a list of subcellular locations of these identification by mapping to the GO cellular-location category, identifications known to be involved in Redox processes by mapping to RedoxDB, and identifications known to be involved in apoptotic processes and cell death by mapping to ApoptoProteomics Database and Cell Death Proteomics Database respectively. The locations were depicted as a network using the Drawings app of the Google docs.  The functional and network analyses were carried out using IPA (Ingenuity® Systems) . Matlab v R2012a programming environment and Microsoft Office was used to do general computations such as correlation studies, scatter plots and pie charts over these parsed results.

### Publication Abstract
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly selective two-step cancer treatment involving a photosensitizer and illumination with visible light in the presence of molecular oxygen. PDT is clinically approved worldwide for treating several premalignant conditions and cancer forms, especially endoscopically accessible tumors and dermatological malignancies. PDT-mediated cytotoxicity takes place via autophagy, apoptosis and necrosis, but the exact trigger mechanisms for various death-pathways are still unknown. PDT induces reactive oxygen species (ROS) through photochemical reactions. ROS can react with different macromolecules resulting in cellular damage, including oxidation of proteins. One of the known protein modifications is reversible oxidation of cysteine thiols (-SH), which in many cases constitute a redox switch to modulate protein activity and cellular signaling. Here we have examined the role of reversible oxidation of protein thiols as a potential mediator of cytotoxicity after hexylaminolevulinate-mediated photodynamic treatment (HAL-PDT) in the human epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431. Nearly 2300 proteins were found to be reversibly oxidized after HAL-PDT, of which 374 high-confidence proteins were further allocated to cellular compartments and functional networks. 115 of the high confidence proteins were associated with apoptosis and 257 have previously not been reported to be reversibly oxidized on cysteines. We find an enrichment of DNA damage checkpoint and oxidative stress response proteins. Many of these constitute potential signaling hubs in apoptosis, including ATM, p63, RSK1 p38, APE1/Ref-1 and three 14-3-3 family members. Our study represents the first comprehensive mapping of reversibly oxidized proteins subsequent to HAL-PDT. Several of the proteins constitute potentially novel redox-regulated apoptotic triggers as well as potential targets for adjuvants that may improve the efficacy of HAL-PDT and PDT using other photosensitizers.

### Keywords
Reversible protein oxidation, Reactive oxygen species, Photodynamic therapy, Proteomic, Redox signalling, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.


