### Accession
PXD026044

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular proteins of Leptospira interrogans

### Description
Leptospira, the causative agent of leptospirosis is known to have several proteases with potential to degrade extracellular matrix. However, a multipronged approach to identify, classify, characterize and elucidate their role has not been attempted. In this study, we carried out in-depth proteomic analysis of Triton X-114 fractions of Leptospira interrogans using high-resolution LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The Leptospira pellet was treated with extraction buffer containing 10mM Tris (pH 8) carrying 1% Triton X-114. The extract was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 30 min at 4C and the supernatant was used as the pellet fraction. Data from three replicated of the same kind was used for further analysis. 250 µg proteins from each fraction were 250 µg of protein was taken for In-solution trypsin digestion followed by fractionation using basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography. The fractions obtained were desalted using C18 StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files obtained from mass spectrometry analysis were processed using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using SEQUEST and Mascot search algorithms against Leptospira interrogans serogroup Icterohaemorrhagiae serovar copenhageni (strain Fiocruz L1-130) obtained from NCBI (3,667 protein entries). The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The peptide matches that qualifies 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as true identification that was calculated using Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
Leptospirosis is a re-emerging form of zoonosis that is caused by the spirochete pathogen <i>Leptospira</i>. Extracellular proteins play critical roles in the pathogenicity and survival of this pathogen in the host and environment. Extraction and analysis of extracellular proteins is a difficult task due to the abundance of enrichments like serum and bovine serum albumin in the culture medium, as is distinguishing them from the cellular proteins that may reach the analyte during extraction. In this study, extracellular proteins were separated as secretory proteins from the culture supernatant and surface proteins were separated during the washing of the cell pellet. The proteins identified were sorted based on the proportion of the cellular fractions and the extracellular fractions. The results showed the identification of 56 extracellular proteins, out of which 19 were exclusively extracellular. For those proteins, the difference in quantity with respect to their presence within the cell was found to be up to 1770-fold. Further, bioinformatics analysis elucidated characteristics and functions of the identified proteins. Orthologs of extracellular proteins in various <i>Leptospira</i> species were found to be closely related among different pathogenic forms. In addition to the identification of extracellular proteins, this study put forward a method for the extraction and identification of extracellular proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Leptospira interrogans, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Scientist E, Indian Council of Medical Research, Regional Medical Research Centre, Dollygunj, Port Blair - 744 103, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,INDIA. Phone: Office: +91-3192-251158 Cell: +91-9434284576 (lab head)
Indian Council of Medical Research, Regional Medical Research Centre

### Submitter
Madathiparambil G.  Madanan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Madathiparambil G. Madanan,
Scientist E, Indian Council of Medical Research, Regional Medical Research Centre, Dollygunj, Port Blair - 744 103, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,INDIA. Phone: Office: +91-3192-251158 Cell: +91-9434284576 (lab head)


