### Accession
PXD020792

### Title
Trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase limits Ca2+ accumulation in the endoplasmic reticulum by inhibiting SERCA2b Ca2+ pump

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) contains various enzymes that metabolize fatty acids (FAs). How FA metabolic enzymes cooperate with other ER functions, such as calcium (Ca2+) accumulation and its regulated release to the cytosol, is elusive. Trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase (TER) is a FA reductase present in the ER membrane, and catalyzes the last step of FA elongation cycle and sphingosine degradation pathway. Here we show that TER directly binds to an ER Ca2+ pump, sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 2b (SERCA2b), and regulates its activity. Thapsigargin, a specific SERCA inhibitor, inhibits this binding. TER binds to SERCA2b through its conserved C-terminal region. TER overexpression suppresses SERCA2b ATPase activity in microsomal membranes. Depletion of TER increases the ER Ca2+ storage and accelerates SERCA2b-dependent Ca2+ uptake to the ER after ligand-induced Ca2+ release. These results demonstrate that TER is a negative regulator of SERCA2b, implying the direct linkage of FA metabolism and Ca2+ accumulation in the ER.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells stably expressing Strep-TER from four 10-cm dishes were lysed by sonication in buffer A [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2] with protease inhibitor cocktail. Solubilization was performed by adding Triton X-100 to a final concentration of 1% and subsequent agitation at 4°C for 30 min. The lysates were then centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 min, and the resultant supernatant was applied to a column with 100 µl of Strep-Tactin Sepharose (IBA). After being washed extensively with buffer A with 1% Triton X-100, bound proteins were eluted with buffer B [118 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 11 mM desthiobiotin]. The eluted samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by sliver staining with Silver Stain MS kit (Wako). The bands of interest in the silver-stained gel were cut out and subjected to in-gel digestion with 10 μg/ml sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid and were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis, which was performed on a LCMS-IT-TOF (Shimadzu) interfaced with a nano reverse-phase liquid chromatography system (Shimadzu). LC separation was performed using a Pico Frit Beta Basic C18 column (New Objective) at 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted using gradients of 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. The heated capillary temperature and electrospray voltage were set at 200°C and 2.5 kV, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode by LCMS solution software (Shimadzu) and were converted to a single peak list file (containing the observed precursor peptide m/z, the fragment ion m/z, and intensity values) by Mascot Distiller (version 2.4.3.3, Matrixscience). The file was analyzed using the Mascot (version 2.3.2, Matrixscience) MS/MS Ion Search to search, and assign the obtained peptides, to the SwissProt database. The search parameters were set as follows: database, SwissProt 2017_05 (taxonomy, all); number of entries in the database, 554515 sequences; enzyme, trypsin (one missed cleavage allowed); fixed modifications, none; variable modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M); mass tolerance for precursor ions, ± 0.05 Da; and mass tolerance for fragment ions, ± 0.05 Da. For protein identification, the criteria were as follows: (1) Mascot scores above the statistically significant threshold (P < 0.05) and (2) at least one top-ranked unique peptide matching the identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calcium atpase, Fatty acid metabolism, Calcium, Protein-protein interaction, Calcium transport, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine
Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology,  Kobe University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Toshiaki Sakisaka

### Lab Head
Dr Toshiaki Sakisaka
Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology,  Kobe University School of Medicine


