### Accession
PXD042828

### Title
mRNA decapping activators Pat1 and Dhh1 regulate transcript abundance and translation to tune cellular responses to nutrient availability

### Description
We have examined the roles of yeast mRNA decapping-activators Pat1 and Dhh1 in repressing the translation and abundance of specific mRNAs in nutrient-replete cells using a combination of ribosome profiling, RNA-Seq, CAGE analysis of capped mRNAs, RNA Polymerase II ChIP-Seq, and TMT-mass spectrometry of mutants lacking one or both factors.

### Sample Protocol
Replicate cultures of WT, dhh1∆, and pat1∆ strains were cultured in YPD medium for ~3 doublings to A600 of ~0.6, and harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 3000 x g. Cells were resuspended in nuclease-free water, collected by centrifugation,  and stored at -80°C. WCEs were prepared in freshly prepared 8M Urea, 25 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB; Thermo Scientific, 90114) by washing the cell pellets once and resuspending again in the extraction buffer, then vortexing with glass beads in the cold room. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 30 min and the quality of extracted proteins was assessed following SDS-PAGE using GelCode™ Blue Stain (Thermo Scientific, 24592) and quantified with the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225). Lysates were stored at -80°C. Sample preparation and TMT-MS/MS (33) was performed at the NHLBI Proteomics Core at NIH (Bethesda, MD) for the WT, dhh1∆, and pat1∆ strains, and at the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics for the pat1∆dhh1∆ and WT strains. At NHLBI, 100 µg of WCEs was incubated for 1 h at 37°C with freshly prepared 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce disulfide bridges. Alkylation was performed at RT for 1 h with freshly made 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the reaction was quenched by adding DTT to 50 mM (50 mM, final). Lysates were diluted 10-fold with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 3 µg of trypsin (Promega, v5111) overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified by adding formic acid to (1%, final) and desalted with Waters Oasis HLB 1cc columns. Peptides were eluted from desalted samples with 1 ml of buffer E (0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile) and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were labelled with TMT reagents for multiplexing (TMT10plex label reagent set, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, resuspended TMT reagent is added to each sample, incubated for 1 hr at RT and the reaction is quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 15 min. To increase the protein coverage, each set of pooled TMT samples was separated into 24 fractions using basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC). Quantification of TMT-labelled peptides was conducted on an LTQ Orbitrap Lumos-based nanoLCMS system (Thermo Scientific) with a 2 h gradient at 120k resolution for MS1 and 50K for MS2 at 38% HCD energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and the MS2 spectra were searched in the SwissProt Yeast database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using the SEQUEST search engine (Eng et al. 1994). Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Percolator based on q-values at a 1% FDR (Brosch et al. 2009) (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/analysis/MascotPercolator/). Relative abundance of each peptide in a strain is measured by normalizing to the total abundance of that peptide coming from all the strains used in the study. We determined the protein-level fold changes based on the median of peptide-level fold changes from the Proteome Discoverer-produced abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Degradation of most yeast mRNAs involves decapping by Dcp1/Dcp2. DEAD-box protein Dhh1 has been implicated as an activator of decapping, in coupling codon non-optimality to enhanced degradation, and as a translational repressor, but its functions in cells are incompletely understood. RNA-Seq analyses coupled with CAGE sequencing of all capped mRNAs revealed increased abundance of hundreds of mRNAs in <i>dcp2</i>&#x394; cells that appears to result directly from impaired decapping rather than elevated transcription. Interestingly, only a subset of mRNAs requires Dhh1 for targeting by Dcp2, and also generally requires the other decapping activators Pat1, Edc3, or Scd6; whereas most of the remaining transcripts utilize nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factors for Dcp2-mediated turnover. Neither inefficient translation initiation nor stalled elongation appears to be a major driver of Dhh1-enhanced mRNA degradation. Surprisingly, ribosome profiling revealed that <i>dcp2</i>&#x394; confers widespread changes in relative translational efficiencies (TEs) that generally favor well-translated mRNAs. Because ribosome biogenesis is reduced while capped mRNA abundance is increased by <i>dcp2</i>&#x394;<i>,</i> we propose that an increased ratio of mRNA to ribosomes increases competition among mRNAs for limiting ribosomes to favor efficiently translated mRNAs in <i>dcp2</i>&#x394; cells. Interestingly, genes involved in respiration or utilization of alternative carbon or nitrogen sources are upregulated, and both mitochondrial function and cell filamentation are elevated in <i>dcp2</i>&#x394; cells, suggesting that decapping sculpts gene expression post-transcriptionally to fine-tune metabolic pathways and morphological transitions according to nutrient availability.

### Keywords
Translation, Yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiea, Mrna decay

### Affiliations
NIH Distinguished Investigator Section on Nutrient Control of Gene Expression Building 6, Room 230 6 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 Phone: 301-496-4480
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Anil Kumar Vijjamarri

### Lab Head
Dr Alan G Hinnebusch
NIH Distinguished Investigator Section on Nutrient Control of Gene Expression Building 6, Room 230 6 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 Phone: 301-496-4480


