### Accession
PXD031077

### Title
Invadopodia small extracellular vesicles glioblastoma

### Description
The therapeutic efficacy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ) for glioblastoma (GBM) is currently limited by the augmented invasive abilities of GBM cells that survive treatment, however the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Due to their ability of transporting oncogenic material between cells, small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) have emerged as key mediators of tumour progression and resistance to treatment. Here, we report that sEVs secreted by GBM cells may facilitate tumour invasion through their ability to promote the formation and activity of actin-rich protrusions known as invadopodia, and that this may be further enhanced following exposure to radio-chemotherapeutic treatment. Furthermore, proteomic analysis of GBM cells exposed to this treatment revealed an increased abundance of invasion-related proteins (including adhesion, cytoskeletal, and membrane trafficking proteins), whilst sEVs were instead enriched in invadopodia-related signalling cargo proteins. Collectively, this work highlights the contributing role of invadopodia and sEVs to the pro-invasive abilities of GBM cells that survive radio-chemotherapeutic treatment.

### Sample Protocol
sEVs solubilised in 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM TEAB, reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA), trypsin digestion. Peptides purified and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay and normalized to 1 µg per 3 µL. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source in positive mode. Peptides were loaded (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5 m beads with 100 Å pore-size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated (1.9-µm particle size C18, 0.075 × 150 mm, Nikkyo Technos Co. Ltd) with a gradient of 2–28% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350–1,650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 × 106 automatic gain control (AGC), 128 mseconds injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition (top 25) with collision-induced dissociation and detection in the ion trap (30,000 resolution, 1 ×105 AGC, 60 mseconds injection time, 28% normalized collision energy, 1.3 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Unassigned precursor ions charge states and slightly charged species were rejected and peptide match disabled. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.12.0) with Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome supplemented with common contaminants. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small extracellular vesicles, Glioblastoma, Invadopodia, Therapeutic, Radiotherapy, Cancer

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.


