### Accession
PXD011456

### Title
Global analysis of methionine oxidation provides a census of folding stabilities for the human proteome

### Description
Most natural proteins fold into a native conformation stabilized by non-covalent interactions. The energy difference between native and denatured states (Gfolding) is highly variable between proteins and can range from less than -10 kcal per mole for highly stable proteins to positive values for intrinsically disordered proteins. Folding stability is a dynamic property of proteins and can be modulated by molecular chaperones and binding interactions. The stability of a protein influences its tendency to aggregate, degrade or become covalently modified in cells. Despite its significance to understanding protein folding and function, quantitative analyses of thermodynamic stability have been mostly limited to small soluble proteins in purified systems. Here, we have used a highly multiplexed bottom-up proteomics approach, based on analyses of rates of methionine oxidation, to quantify the thermodynamic stabilities of the human proteome in crude extracts obtained from dermal fibroblasts. Our data provide structural and stability information for more than 10,000 unique regions and domains within more than 3,200 proteins. The data identifies lysosomal and extracellular proteins as the most stable ontological subsets of the proteome. We show that the stability of proteins can impact their tendency to become oxidized and are globally altered by the osmolyte trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO). We also show that most proteins designated as IDPs retain their unfolded structure in the complex milieu of the cell and most cannot be refolded by TMAO. Together, the data provide a census of the stability of the human proteome and validate a methodology for global analysis of protein thermodynamic stabilities.

### Sample Protocol
Human dermal fibroblasts were grown to 100% confluency and maintained for at least 4 days before harvesting to ensure they reached a quiescent state. On the day of analysis, cell pellets were resuspended in native lysis buffer at 50 µL per 106 cells. Lysis was accomplished by repeated passage through a 16-gauge sterile syringe, resting on ice, after which the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13000xg while at 4oC, and the supernatants collected. Protein concentration was subsequently measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher) and samples were diluted to a final concentration of 2 mg/mL. Protein extracts were aliquoted out in 25 µL portions into 30 wells of a 96-deepwell polypropylene microplate (Fisher Scientific). 3 wells were kept as a control (no H2O2, no GdmCl) for background levels of methionine oxidation, and the remaining wells were split into 3 complementary sets of denaturant-containing buffers such that their final concentrations ranged between 0-3 M GdmCl (see Figure 3A), allowed to equilibrate for 1 hr at RT, and oxidized with  3% H2O2 for 1 min. Oxidation was quenched using a four-fold molar excess of TCEP, and protein was purified using 30-kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore Sigma). During this process, proteins were fully denatured using 8 M urea, disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP in urea buffer for 1 hr at RT, and proteins were alkylated by incubating with 50 mM IAA for 20 min at RT in darkness. After washing out the denaturant, proteins were digested with trypsin protease (Pierce) at a 1:100 ratio (g protein/g trypsin), incubating overnight at 37oC in a wet bath. Trypsin was quenched by adding formic acid (Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1%, after which samples were dried down and 10 µg of digest was resuspended in 25 µL of 0.1 M TEAB for labeling using tandem mass tag (TMT) 10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). TMT labeling was accomplished by adding 20 µL of 10 mg/ml TMT reagents in acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific) and incubating for 1 hr at RT. TMT labeling was quenched using a final concentration of 5% hydroxylamine (Fisher Scientific), incubating for 15 min at RT. For each of the TMT sets, 5 µg portions of labeled digest were combined and dried down. To increase coverage, samples were fractionated using lab-made C18 spin columns. Columns were first conditioned using acetonitrile and 100 mM ammonium formate (AF) buffer (pH 10). Samples were resuspended in 50 µL of AF buffer and added to the columns. After washing the columns with 5% acetonitrile in AF buffer, samples were eluted with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and then 50% acetonitrile (in AF buffer). Eluent fractions were then dried down and resuspended in MS-grade 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water (Thermo Scientific) at a concentration of 0.25 mg/ml for LC-MS/MS analysis.  For analyses conducted in the presence of TMAO, protein extracts were prepared at a concentration of ~5 mg/ml, using the method described above.  On the day of analysis, a concentrated TMAO stock solution was prepared from high purity ((98%) trimethylamine N-oxide dihydrate (Sigma) dissolved in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH = 7.4). Immediately prior to incubation in GdmCl, samples were mixed with the TMAO stock solution such that the final concentration of TMAO was 1 M. Samples were then denatured and processed as above. For MS analysis, peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 um beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 7 minutes, increased to 38% B over 94 minutes, then ramped up to 90% B in 5 minutes and was held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes and re-equilibrating for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 120 minutes.  The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, with both MS1 and MS2 scans acquired in the Orbitrap.  The cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide. The full scan was done over a range of 400-1500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 36% and an isolation width of 0.7 m/z. MS2 scans were collected with a resolution of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 105 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All MS2 data were searched against the H. sapiens UniProt database (20975 entries, downloaded 6/18/2017) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. The searches included the TMT10plex labels as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation as variable modifications,  and allowed for up to two missed cleavages with maximum FDR thresholds of 1%. Subsequent analyses of MaxQuant search results and quantitations were conducted with scripts written in Mathematica (Wolfram). MaxQuant searches produced reporter ion intensities for 15 different TMT 10-plex experiments for -TMAO analyses and 6 for +TMAO experiments, with each tag corresponding to a different GdmCl concentration within a methionine oxidation denaturation curve. Reporter ion intensities within each 10-plex experiment were normalized with respect to one another using the median intensities of non-methionine-containing peptides. For each 10-plex experiment, the data for methionine-sulfoxide-containing (met-ox) peptides were converted to fraction oxidized by using the intensities of no-H2O2/0M GdmCl and highest concentration GdmCl datapoints as initial and final baselines, respectively. For methionine-containing (met) peptides, the inverse fractions were obtained by reversing the baselines. For sequences containing more than one methionine, the fully oxidized and fully unoxidized peptides were analyzed as met-ox and met variants. The data for each peptide were then combined and fit to a sigmoid curve using non-linear least-squares analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The stability of proteins influences their tendency to aggregate, undergo degradation, or become modified in cells. Despite their significance to understanding protein folding and function, quantitative analyses of thermodynamic stabilities have been mostly limited to soluble proteins in purified systems. We have used a highly multiplexed proteomics approach, based on analyses of methionine oxidation rates, to quantify stabilities of &#x223c;10,000 unique regions within &#x223c;3,000 proteins in human cell extracts. The data identify lysosomal and extracellular proteins as the most stable ontological subsets of the proteome. We show that the stability of proteins impacts their tendency to become oxidized and is globally altered by the osmolyte trimethylamine <i>N</i>-oxide (TMAO). We also show that most proteins designated as intrinsically disordered retain their unfolded structure in the complex environment of the cell. Together, the data provide a census of the stability of the human proteome and validate a methodology for global quantitation of folding thermodynamics.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Protein folding, Protein stability, Lumos, Methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
Associate professor, department of Biology. University of Rochester,NY, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA (lab head)
University of Rochester

### Submitter
Ethan Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Associate professor, department of Biology. University of Rochester,NY, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA (lab head)


