### Accession
PXD000061

### Title
Proteome-wide purification of O-GlcNAc proteins

### Description
Global O-GlcNAc profiling: proteome-wide purification and identification of O-GlcNAc proteins using GlcNAz metabolic labeling in combination with Click chemistry and label-free LC-MS/MS-based quantification. OGA inhibition: same workflow as 'Global O-GlcNAc profiling'; inhibition of O-GlcNAcase by a small molecule inhibitor. O-GlcNAc sites: identification of O-GlcNAc sites by metabolic labeling/Click chemistry followed by beta elimination Bioinformatics workflow of Global O-GlcNAc profiling and OGA inhibition experiments: Raw mass spectrometry files have been processed using Progenesis LC-MS (4.0) and exported as Mascot generic format for subsequent Mascot (2.3) database search. Mascot search results were processed using Mascot Percolator and the results have been imported back into Progenesis as well as imported to Scaffold (3.5.1). The Progenesis peptide quantification report has been exported as Excel file. Bioinformatics workflow of O-GlcNAc site identification: Raw mass spectrometry files have been processed using Mascot Distiller 2.3 and searched with Mascot. Mascot search results were processed using the Mascot Percolator and imported into Scaffold (3.5.1). After manual validation, peptide and protein identifications (Scaffold file) were imported into Scaffold PTM 2.0 for the estimation of site localization probabilities.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The post-translational modification of proteins with N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is involved in the regulation of a wide variety of cellular processes and associated with a number of chronic diseases. Despite its emerging biological significance, the systematic identification of O-GlcNAc proteins is still challenging. In the present study, we demonstrate a significantly improved O-GlcNAc protein enrichment procedure, which exploits metabolic labeling of cells by azide-modified GlcNAc and copper-mediated Click chemistry for purification of modified proteins on an alkyne-resin. On-resin proteolysis using trypsin followed by LC-MS/MS afforded the identification of around 1500 O-GlcNAc proteins from a single cell line. Subsequent elution of covalently resin bound O-GlcNAc peptides using selective &#x3b2;-elimination enabled the identification of 185 O-GlcNAc modification sites on 80 proteins. To demonstrate the practical utility of the developed approach, we studied the global effects of the O-GlcNAcase inhibitor GlcNAcstatin G on the level of O-GlcNAc modification of cellular proteins. About 200 proteins including several key players involved in the hexosamine signaling pathway showed significantly increased O-GlcNAcylation levels in response to the drug, which further strengthens the link of O-GlcNAc protein modification to cellular nutrient sensing and response.

### Keywords
Proteomics, O-glcnac, Click chemistry, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head


