### Accession
PXD013411

### Title
The signal transduction protein PII controls ammonium, nitrate and urea uptake in cyanobacteria

### Description
PII signal transduction proteins are widely spread among all domains of life where they regulate a multitude of carbon and nitrogen metabolism related processes. Non-diazotrophic cyanobacteria can utilize a high variety of organic and inorganic nitrogen sources. In recent years, several physiological studies indicated an involvement of the cyanobacterial PII protein in regulation of ammonium, nitrate/nitrite and cyanate uptake. However, direct interaction of PII has not been demonstrated so far. In this study, we used biochemical, molecular genetic and physiological approaches to demonstrate that PII regulates all relevant nitrogen uptake systems in Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803: PII controls ammonium uptake by interacting with the Amt1 ammonium permease, probably similar to the known regulation of E. coli ammonium permease AmtB by the PII homologue GlnK. We could further clarify that PII mediates the ammonium- and dark-induced inhibition of nitrate uptake by interacting with the NrtC and NrtD subunits of the nitrate/nitrite transporter NrtABCD. We further identified the ABC-type urea transporter UrtABCDE as novel PII target. PII interacts with the UrtE subunit without involving the standard interaction surface of PII interactions. The deregulation of urea uptake in a PII deletion mutant causes ammonium excretion when urea is provided as nitrogen source. Furthermore, the urea hydrolyzing urease enzyme complex appears to be coupled to urea uptake. Overall, this study underlines the great importance of the PII signal transduction protein in the regulation of nitrogen utilization in cyanobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
2.4 Preparation of cell extracts and Anti-FLAG pull down  Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 5 mL IP buffer, containing 25 mM MES/NaOH; pH 6.5, 5 mM CaCl2, 10 mM MgCl2, and 20 % (v/v) glycerol for washing and subsequently in 3 mL IP buffer, including protease inhibitors (c0mplete EDTA-free; Roche) for cell lysis. Therefore, an equal volume of glass beads (0.1-0.15 mm diameter) was added and cells were broken using a FastPrep24 Ribolyser (MP Biomdicals) with five 20 s cycles at 6.5 m s−1 and 4 °C. After centrifugation for 5 min at 3,314 × g and 4 °C, the supernatant was transferred and adjusted with IP buffer to a final volume of 6 mL. For membrane protein solubilization, 1.5 % w/v dodecyl β D maltoside (DDM; Carl Roth) was added and incubated under agitation for 1 h at 4 °C, before insoluble cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 20 min at 20,000 × g and 4 °C. Obtained supernatants from 2 L culture were subjected to the PII FLAG pull down procedure: for this, 400 µL of resuspended anti-FLAG M2 agarose (Sigma) was added into empty SPE-columns and washed twice with each 1 mL IP buffer, supplemented with 0.04 % (w/v) DDM, before the supernatants were incubated for 5 min and removed by gravity flow. Repeated washing steps with each 5 mL DDM supplemented IP buffer were performed similarly, until the flow through appeared colorless. Elution of coupled proteins from the anti-FLAG resin was performed by incubation in 600 µL DDM supplemented IP buffer containing 0.3 µg/mL 3x FLAG™ DYKDDDDK peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 40 min. 2.5 Proteomics workflow, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis and data processing Eluates from pull downs were subjected to acetone/methanol precipitation and resulting protein pellets were resuspended in denaturation buffer for subsequent tryptic digestion as described elsewhere (Spat et al., 2015). Resulting peptide mixtures were subjected to stage tip purification (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Qualitative mass spectrometry (MS) for protein identification was performed as described previously (Spat et al., 2015): in brief, purified peptides were loaded on an EASY-LC system (Proxeon Biosystems) onto a 15 cm reversed-phase C18 nanoHPLC column and separated in a 90 min segmented linear gradient. Eluted peptides were ionized in the on-line coupled ESI source and injected in a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS spectra were acquired in the positive-ion mode with, per scan cycle, one initial full (MS) scan followed by fragmentation of the 15 most intense multiply charged ions through collision induced dissociation (CID) for MS/MS scans. The scan range was m/z 300–2000 for precursor ions at resolution 60,000 and sequenced precursors were dynamically excluded for fragmentation for 90 s. The lock mass option was enabled for real time mass recalibration (Olsen et al., 2005).

### Data Protocol
All raw spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) at default settings. Peak lists were searched with the following database search criteria against a target-decoy database of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 with 3,671 protein sequences, retrieved from Cyanobase (Nakao et al., 2010) (July 2014), plus either the sequence of the N- or C-terminal 3xFLAG tagged PII fusion protein (MDYKDDDDKDYKDDDDKDYKDDDDKAAAKKVEAIIRPFKLDEVKIALVNAGIVGMTVSEVRGFGRQKGQTERYRGSEYTVEFLQKLKIEIVVDEGQVDMVVDKLVSAARTGEIGDGKIFISPVDSVVRIRTGEKDTEAI or MKKVEAIIRPFKLDEVKIALVNAGIVGMTVSEVRGFGRQKGQTERYRGSEYTVEFLQKLKIEIVVDEGQVDMVVDKLVSAARTGEIGDGKIFISPVDSVVRIRTGEKDTEAIASYKDDDDKDYKDDDDKDYKDDDDK), respectively, and against 245 common contaminants. Trypsin was defined as a cleaving enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamido-methylation of cysteines was defined as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. False discovery rates retrieved from MaxQuant of peptides and proteins were limited to 1%, each.

### Publication Abstract
P<sub>II</sub> signal transduction proteins are widely spread among all domains of life where they regulate a multitude of carbon and nitrogen metabolism related processes. Non-diazotrophic cyanobacteria can utilize a high variety of organic and inorganic nitrogen sources. In recent years, several physiological studies indicated an involvement of the cyanobacterial P<sub>II</sub> protein in regulation of ammonium, nitrate/nitrite, and cyanate uptake. However, direct interaction of P<sub>II</sub> has not been demonstrated so far. In this study, we used biochemical, molecular genetic and physiological approaches to demonstrate that P<sub>II</sub> regulates all relevant nitrogen uptake systems in <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. strain PCC 6803: P<sub>II</sub> controls ammonium uptake by interacting with the Amt1 ammonium permease, probably similar to the known regulation of <i>E. coli</i> ammonium permease AmtB by the P<sub>II</sub> homolog GlnK. We could further clarify that P<sub>II</sub> mediates the ammonium- and dark-induced inhibition of nitrate uptake by interacting with the NrtC and NrtD subunits of the nitrate/nitrite transporter NrtABCD. We further identified the ABC-type urea transporter UrtABCDE as novel P<sub>II</sub> target. P<sub>II</sub> interacts with the UrtE subunit without involving the standard interaction surface of P<sub>II</sub> interactions. The deregulation of urea uptake in a P<sub>II</sub> deletion mutant causes ammonium excretion when urea is provided as nitrogen source. Furthermore, the urea hydrolyzing urease enzyme complex appears to be coupled to urea uptake. Overall, this study underlines the great importance of the P<sub>II</sub> signal transduction protein in the regulation of nitrogen utilization in cyanobacteria.

### Keywords
Pii signaling protein, Cyanobacteria, Nitrogen regulation, Glnb, Nitrate uptake, Abc transporters, Urea uptake, Ammonium uptake

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Department of Organismic Interactions, University of Tübingen

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Karl Forchhammer
Department of Organismic Interactions, University of Tübingen


