### Accession
PXD037278

### Title
Proteomics revealed the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis

### Description
As an essential micronutrient element in organisms, copper controls a host of fundamental cellular functions. Recently, copper-dependent cell growth and proliferation have been defined as "cuproplasia". Conversely, “cuproptosis” represents copper-dependent cell death, a nonapoptotic manner. So far, a series of copper ionophores have been developed to kill cancer cells. However, the biological response mechanism of copper uptake still lacks systematic analysis. Based on quantitative proteomics, we revealed the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis in cancer cells. Copper stress not only couples with cuproptosis, but also leads to reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress, oxidative damage and cell cycle arrest. In cancer cells, a feedback cytoprotection mechanism involving cuproptosis mediators was discovered. During copper treatment, the activation of glutamine transporters and the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins are the facilitators and results of cuproptosis, respectively. Through copper depletion, glutathione (GSH) blocks the cuproptosis process, rescues the activation of glutamine transporters, and prevents the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins, expect for protecting cancer cells from apoptosis, protein degradation and oxidative damage. Our results are significative for understanding cuproptosis process and developing novel anticancer reagents based on cuproptosis.

### Sample Protocol
After incubating with or without 50 μM CuCl2 and 5 mM GSH for 24 h, MCF-7 cells were harvested for the further proteomic tests. Next, 4% SDS in PBS was used into the protein lysis for MCF-7 cells. Here, 1 mg cell lysates were precipitated by methanol (Vchloroform:Vwater = 8:1), and dissolved with 8 M urea in water, followed by adding ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to dilute urea to 50 mM. Then, the resuspensions were reacted with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h, treated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at R.T., and digested with trypsin for 18 h at 37 °C. After 20000 x g centrifugation for 10 min, the pH of supernatant was adjusted to 3 with 1% formic acid. Then, the peptide samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac cartridge (Waters), dried in SpeedVac (Eppendorf), redissolved in 0.1% formic acid (vol/vol) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Quantitative proteomics tests were performed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 C18 75 µm × 2 cm nanoViper (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as loading column, AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 C18 75 µm × 15 cm nanoViper RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as separating column, and an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto the pre-column and separated by the separating column eluting with 7-30% B [A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (vol/vol)] during 150 min and then subjected to electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD)-based LC-MS/MS analysis. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 300 to 1400 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with the mass resolution of 120000, followed by an HCD MS/MS scan on top of the 20 most intense precursors. The MS/MS fragmentation was performed in a data-dependent mode, of which 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 analysis by the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The SwissPort Homo sapiens database was downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org) on 4th November, 2016. The MS raw data were searched using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.1.0) integrated with Andromeda search engine. The default parameters were set as follows. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and acetyl N terminal were set variable modifications, trypsin/P was set as digestion with a maximum of two missed. In this case, the ‘Matching between runs’ feature was chosen, the ‘Experiment’ parameter was set as 1-9, and the quantitative information was provided using the iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) algorithm. Proteins quantified twice or more were analyzed for the statistical significance analysis with Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
As an essential micronutrient element in organisms, copper controls a host of fundamental cellular functions. Recently, copper-dependent cell growth and proliferation have been defined as "cuproplasia". Conversely, "cuproptosis" represents copper-dependent cell death, in a nonapoptotic manner. So far, a series of copper ionophores have been developed to kill cancer cells. However, the biological response mechanism of copper uptake has not been systematically analyzed. Based on quantitative proteomics, we revealed the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis in cancer cells, and also explored the feasibility of curcumin as anticancer copper ionophore. Copper stress not only couples with cuproptosis, but also leads to reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress, oxidative damage and cell cycle arrest. In cancer cells, a feedback cytoprotection mechanism involving cuproptosis mediators was discovered. During copper treatment, the activation of glutamine transporters and the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins are the facilitators and results of cuproptosis, respectively. Through copper depletion, glutathione (GSH) blocks the cuproptosis process, rescues the activation of glutamine transporters, and prevents the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins, except for protecting cancer cells from apoptosis, protein degradation and oxidative damage. In addition, the copper ionophore curcumin can control the metabolisms of lipids, RNA, NADH and NADPH in colorectal cancer cells, and also up-regulates positive cuproptosis mediators. This work not only established the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis, but also discolored the suppression and acceleration of cuproptosis by GSH and curcumin, respectively. Our results are significant for understanding cuproptosis process and developing novel anticancer reagents based on cuproptosis.

### Keywords
Human, Cuproptosis, Copper stress, Cancer

### Affiliations
Hubei University
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, Hubei, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Xiang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang Li
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, Hubei, P. R. China.


