### Accession
PXD028391

### Title
CsrA-controlled proteins important for Acinetobacter baumannii desiccation tolerance

### Description
Hospital environments serve as excellent reservoirs for the opportunistic pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii in part because it is exceptionally tolerant to desiccation.   To understand the functional basis this trait, we used transposon sequencing (Tn-seq) to identify genes contributing to desiccation tolerance in A. baumannii strain AB5075. We identified 142 candidate desiccation tolerance genes, one of which encoded the global post-transcriptional regulator CsrA.  We characterized CsrA in more detail by using proteomics to identify proteins that were differentially present in wild type and csrA mutant cells.  Among these were a predicted universal stress protein A, an iron-containing redox protein, a KGG-domain containing protein, and catalase. Subsequent mutant analysis showed that each of these proteins was required for A. baumannii desiccation tolerance. The amino acid sequence of the KGG-domain containing protein predicts that it is an intrinsically disordered protein. Such proteins are critical for desiccation tolerance of the small animals called tardigrades. This protein also has a repeat nucleic acid binding amino acid motif, suggesting that it may protect A. baumannii DNA from desiccation-induced damage.

### Sample Protocol
Since the ∆csrA mutant had severe growth defect on TY media, both wild type and ∆csrA mutant were grown in M9/succinate. Two biological sample replicates were prepared for each strain. Cells from each culture were harvested at OD600=0.5 by centrifugation, washed twice with DPBS, and cells were stored in -80°C before further analysis. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH8.0, 10 mM DTT by heating at 95°C for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature, the lysates were sonicated with ultrasonication probe on ice to shear DNA. Total protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Pierce, Rockford, IL). 500 µg of each protein lysate was reduced and alkylated, diluted in 8 M urea solution, and the SDS was removed with a 3kD molecular weight cutoff filter. After buffer exchange, the protein lysates were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight and the digested samples were desalted with 1cc C18 Sep-Pak solid phase extraction cartridges (Milford, MA, Waters). The eluted samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Reverse phase nanoLC-MS analysis of the protein digests was carried out with a Thermo Easy-nanoLC coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Triplicate top 20 data-dependent acquisition runs were acquired for each sample, and 1 µg of protein digest was loaded for each run. The peptides were separated by a 50 cm x 75 µm I.D C8 column (5 µm diameter, 100 Å pore size C8 MichromMagic beads) with a 90 min 10 to 30% B gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, flow rate 300 nl/min). The MS data acquisition parameters were set as follows: full MS scan resolution 70k, maximum ion injection time 100 mS, AGC target 106, scan range of 400 to 2000 m/z; MS/MS scan resolution 17.5 k, maximum ion injection time 100 mS, AGC target 54, isolation window 1.6 m/z, HCD NCE 35 scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z; loop count 20, intensity threshold 53, underfill ratio 1%, dynamic exclusion 10 sec.

### Data Protocol
High resolution MS2 spectra were searched against a target-decoy proteome database of strain AB5075 (a total of 7678 sequences) downloaded from Uniprot (Oct17, 2017) using Comet (version 2015.02 rev. 1) (54) with following parameters: precursor peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, allowing for -1, 0, +1, +2, or +3 13C offsets; fragment ion mass tolerance 0.02 Da; static modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da); variable modification, methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da). The search results were further processed by PeptideProphet (55) for probability assignment to each peptide-spectrum match, and ProteinProphet (56) for protein inference and protein probability modeling. The output pepXML files from three technical replicates were grouped for subsequent spectral counting analysis using Abacus (57). The pepXML and protXML files for each sample, combined ProteinProphet file from all samples were parsed into Abacus for spectral counting of each protein. The following filters were applied for extracting spectral counts from MS/MS datasets: (1) the minimum PeptideProphet score the best peptide match of a protein must have maxIniProbTH=0.99; (2) The minimum PeptideProphet score a peptide must have to be even considered by Abacus, iniProbTH=0.50; (3) The minimum ProteinProphet score a protein group must have in the COMBINED file, minCombinedFilePw=0.90. Spectral counts for 1616 proteins were reported across four sample groups (two strains and two biological replicates) with estimated protein false discovery rate of 1.94%. The protein expression fold changes between wild type AB5075 and ∆csrA mutant were computed from adjusted spectral counts output from Abacus.

### Publication Abstract
Hospital environments are excellent reservoirs for the opportunistic pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii in part because it is exceptionally tolerant to desiccation. We found that relative to other A. baumannii strains, the virulent strain AB5075 was strikingly desiccation resistant at 2% relative humidity (RH), suggesting that it is a good model for studies of the functional basis of this trait. Consistent with results from other A. baumannii strains at 40% RH, we found the global posttranscriptional regulator CsrA to be critically important for desiccation tolerance of AB5075 at 2% RH. Proteomics experiments identified proteins that were differentially present in wild-type and <i>csrA</i> mutant cells. Subsequent analysis of mutants in genes encoding some of these proteins revealed six genes that were required for wild-type levels of desiccation tolerance. These include genes for catalase, a universal stress protein, a hypothetical protein, and a biofilm-associated protein. Two genes of unknown function had very strong desiccation phenotypes, with one of the two genes predicting an intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) that binds to DNA. Intrinsically disordered proteins are widespread in eukaryotes but less so in prokaryotes. Our results suggest there are new mechanisms underlying desiccation tolerance in bacteria and identify several key functions involved. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Acinetobacter baumannii is found in terrestrial environments but can cause nosocomial infections in very sick patients. A factor that contributes to the prevalence of A. baumannii in hospital settings is that it is intrinsically resistant to dry conditions. Here, we established the virulent strain A. baumannii AB5075 as a model for studies of desiccation tolerance at very low relative humidity. Our results show that this trait depends on two proteins of unknown function, one of which is predicted to be an intrinsically disordered protein. This category of protein is critical for the small animals named tardigrades to survive desiccation. Our results suggest that A. baumannii may have novel strategies to survive desiccation that have not previously been seen in bacteria.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Intrinsically disordered proteins, Desiccation, Tn-seq, Csra

### Affiliations
University of Washington
1Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA

### Submitter
Xiaoting Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline S. Harwood
1Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA


