### Accession
PXD018721

### Title
The TNH2 hominin enamel proteome

### Description
Here we analyse two enamel protein extractions from a Middle Pleistocene hominin from Laos, Asia. The proteome is analyzed for potential phylogenetic information and characterized in terms of its molecular damage and in vivo (serine) phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Small enamel samples were demineralized in either hydrochloric acid (1.5 M HCl) or trifluoroacetic acid (0.88 MTFA) at room temperature overnight. Peptides in the supernatent were desalted by solid-phase-extraction using C18 stagetips, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA 5 % ACN. Approximately 500 ng peptides were loaded on a 75 µm inner diameter 15 cm length column home-packed with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) with a laser-pulled silica emitter. The analytes were separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) and two different gradients using 0.1 % TFA 99.9 % water as solvent A and 0.1 % TFA 80 % ACN 19.9 % water as solvent B at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The shorter 45 min gradient increased from 8 to 15 % B over 25 min, to 30 % B over 15 min, and to 45 % B over 5 min. The longer 90 min gradient increased from 8 to 20 % B over 75 min, from 20 to 30 % B over 10 min, and from 30 to 45 min B over 5 min. The LC was interfaced with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) acquiring full MS scans from 350 to 1400 m/z, at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, 3e6 AGC target, and 45 ms max. Injection time (IT), followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans with 1.3 m/z isolation width and HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28 and measured at 45,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC target, 45 ms max. IT, and a first mass of 100 m/z. Laboratory blanks were prepared using the same procedure, and mass spectrometry blanks during data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with Maxquant (version 1.6.0.17) searching against an in-house curated database containing protein sequences expected in the Hominidae enamel proteome. Candidate peptides were generated by “unspecific” digestion and allowed for up to 3 of the following variable modifications: deamidation (NQ), hydroxyproline (P), phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (MW), dioxidation (W), kynurenine formation (W), and arginine-to-ornithine conversion (R), which were chosen based on an open-search strategy using the “dependent peptides” search feature of Maxquant. We added two previously generated .raw files of human enamel to this search (stagetip numbers #1692 and #1693) that were previously analyzed (see PXD014342). The results were interpreted by a BLAST search for confirming sequence uniqueness and by using custom R scripts to assess protein modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Enamel, Lc-ms/ms, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
Evolutionary Genomics Section, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Evolutionary Genomics Section, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


