### Accession
PXD017711

### Title
In-cell architecture of an active transcription-translation complex

### Description
Structural biology performed inside cells can capture molecular machines in action within their native context. Here we develop an integrative in-cell structural approach using the genome-reduced human pathogen Mycoplasma pneumoniae. We combine whole-cell crosslinking mass spectrometry, cellular cryo-electron tomography, and integrative modeling to determine an in-cell architecture of a transcribing and translating expressome at sub-nanometer resolution. The expressome comprises RNA polymerase (RNAP), the ribosome, and the transcription elongation factors NusG and NusA. We pinpoint NusA at the interface between the ribosome and a NusG-bound elongating RNAP, and propose it could mediate transcription-translation coupling. Transcription inhibition stalls and rearranges the expressome, whereas translation inhibition dissociates it, demonstrating that the elongating expressome architecture requires active translation and transcription within the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested from media by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 5 min, followed by two washes with 500 µl 1x Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer. Crosslinker was dissolved freshly in water-free Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at 50 mM. The crosslinker disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO, Thermo Scientific) was quickly added to cells resuspended to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml cells in 1x PBS at a final concentration of 2 mM (5% DMSO in final volume). The cells were incubated at 25°C for 30 min under gentle agitation, followed by quenching with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) for 15 min. Cells were pelleted and snap-frozen with liquid N2 before storing at -80°C.    Cell lysis and Proteolysis for LC-MS Analysis For proteome extraction, the cell pellet was lysed at 20 mg/ml in denaturing solution (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma), 1 mM DTT), aided by sonication using a 3.2 mm Qsonica microtip probe (output 1.5, duty cycle 0.2;  20 min per sample; on ice). Protein concentration of the cell lysate was assessed by Bicinchoninic acid assay according to the manufacturer's instructions and was diluted to 1 mg/ml with the denaturing solution. The lysate was reduced for 30 min by adding 10 mM DTT, followed by addition of 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and incubation in the dark for 20 min. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. Proteolysis was carried out using LysC (Pierce) at 1:100 (mass ratio, protease:protein) for 4 h at 37 °C, followed by 1:5 dilution with 50 mM ABC and tryptic digestion (1:50 (m/m), Pierce) for 16-18 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Honeywell) to pH 2-3. Samples were cleaned-up via Stage-tipping (3M) and stored at -20°C until further use, i.e. peptide fractionation. Peptide fractionation by Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography (SCX)  Peptide digests were eluted from Stage-tips, dried using a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in SCX running buffer A (30% acetonitrile (ACN, VWR Gmbh), 10 mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0 (Sigma)). Separation of peptides was accomplished using a non-linear gradient with running buffer B (30% ACN, 1 M KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0), as described (Chen et al. 2010). For the fractionation, a Shimadzu HPLC (LC-20AD, SIL-20A HT, SPD-M20A, CBM-20A) connected to a PolyLC Polysulfoethyl A column (100 x 2.1 mm, 3 µm, 300 Å) was used. Fractions of 200 µl each were collected over the elution window (ca. 18 column volumes). Collected fractions of interest from five runs were pooled, desalted using Stage-Tips and stored at -20°C. Peptide fractionation by hydrophilic Strong Anionic Exchange Chromatography (hSAX) Peptides from Stage-Tips were dried and subsequently resuspended in hSAX running buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Sample was injected onto a Dionex IonPac AS24 column (2 x 250 mm) running with 150 µl/min operated at 15°C on an Äkta Pure system. Elution of peptide mixtures was achieved by applying an exponential gradient with buffer B (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 M NaCl; gradient identical to SCX gradient), while collecting fractions of 150 µl. Obtained fractions of interest were acidified with TFA to pH 2-3, pooled, desalted by Stage-tipping and stored at -20°C.   Two-dimensional peptide fractionation was first SCX to give 9 fractions then each fraction was fractionated individually by hSAX, resulting in 9x15 total hSAX fractions. LC-MS/MS acquisition of crosslinked samples Acquisition of crosslinked peptide spectra was performed on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) connected to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid), and mobile phase B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The samples were dissolved in 1.6% acetonitrile (Fluka), 0.1% formic acid (Fluka) and separated on an Easy-Spray column (C-18, 50 cm, 75 µm internal diameter, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) running with 300 nl/min flow rate using optimized gradients for each offline-fraction (ranging from 2% B to 55% B over 62.5, 92.5 or 152.5 min (for datasets 1, 2-3, and 4 respectively), then to 55% in 2.5 min and to 95% in 2.5 min). Fractions were injected twice when more than 3 µg peptide material was available. The MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a 3 second cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,600 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between +3 and +6 were isolated and fragmented. The fragmentation regime depended on the crosslinking reagent employed: Stepped fragmentation energies of 18, 24 and 30 normalized collision energy (NCE) were used that were found appropriate . The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
Identification and statistical validation of crosslinked peptides Raw data from mass spectrometry was processed using MSconvert (version 3.0.11729) (Chambers et al. 2012) including denoising (top 20 peaks in 100 m/z bins) and conversion to mgf-file format. Masses of precursor peptides were recalibrated. Obtained peak files were analysed using xiSearch 1.6.746 (Mendes et al. 2019) with the following settings: MS1/MS2 error tolerances 4 and 10 ppm, allowing up to 3 missing isotope peaks (Lenz et al., 2018), tryptic digestion specificity, carbamidomethylation on Cys as fixed and oxidation on Met as variable modification, losses: –CH3SOH / –H2O / –NH3, cross-linker DSSO (158.0037648 Da linkage mass) with variable cross-linker modifications (, “DSSO-NH2” 175.03031 Da, “DSSO-OH” 176.01433 Da). Additional loss masses were defined accounting for its cleavability (“A” 54.01056 Da, “S” 103.99320 Da, “T” 85.98264). Crosslink sites for both reagents were allowed for side chains of Lys, Tyr, Ser, Thr and the protein N-terminus. The database consisted of 687 Swiss-Prot annotated entries for M. pneumoniae strain ATCC 29342/M129 (taxon identifier 272634), 19 small open reading frames that were recently annotated (Lluch‐Senar et al. 2015), and annotated lysine acetylation sites (van Noort et al. 2012). Decoy sequences were generated by reversing the protein sequences.  Results were filtered to an estimated false-discovery rate (FDR) of 5% on residue-pair-level and 5% on protein-protein interaction (PPI)-level using xiFDR (version 1.2.30.59) (Fischer and Rappsilber 2017). Spectral matches in the DSSO dataset were prefiltered before FDR estimation to only those that had cleaved crosslinker peptide fragments for both peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dss, Crosslinking-ms, Xl-ms, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Cx-ms, Clms

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK


