### Accession
PXD023388

### Title
Chronological mitochondrial proteomics of chemically induced hepatocellular carcinoma in rat

### Description
Although disruption of mitochondrial function has been associated with energetic deregulation in cancer, the chronological changes in mitochondria during cancer development remain unclear. With the aim to assess the role of mitochondria throughout cancer development, we analyzed samples chronologically obtained from induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in rats. In our analyses, we integrated mitochondrial proteomic data, mitochondrial metabolomic data and nuclear genome transcriptomic data. We used pathway over-representation and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to integrate expression profiles of genes, miRNAs, proteins and metabolite levels throughout HCC development. Our results show that mitochondria are dynamic organelles presenting specific modifications in different stages of HCC development.  For carcinogenesis, a modified resistant hepatocyte model was used. Rats were initiated with diethylnitrosamine (DEN) (200 mg/kg of body weight) at day 0. Then, 2-acetylaminofluorene (AAF) was administered (20 mg/kg per dose) at days 7, 8 and 9, followed by 3/5 partial hepatectomy (PH) at day 10. Three control groups of non-treated animals were sacrificed by exsanguination on the first day and at 9 and 18 months after the beginning of the experiment. Treated animals were sacrificed at 1, 7, 11 and 16 days and at 1, 9 and 18 months. Their livers were excised, washed in physiological saline solution, frozen with liquid nitrogen in 2-methyl butane and stored at -80°C. Once selected and separately collected nodular, tumoral and its adjacent tissues, total RNA was isolated using TriPureIsolation Reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The microarray analysis was performed using GeneChip Rat Exon 1.0 ST Arrays. Four replicas for each condition and controls were analyzed. This created 11 pairwise contrasts for the differential expression analysis. We grouped all evaluated conditions in three categories: i) early stages, including samples obtained since day one until one month after treatment, these were compared against rats without treatment sacrificed the first day; ii) tumor, nodular and its adjacent tissues obtained from nine months rats were compared against rats without treatment of the same age; and iii) tumor and its adjacent tissues obtained from eighteen months rats were compared against rats without treatment of the same age.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were extracted from rat liver samples (n=3) according to Frezza et al. (2007). Samples of liver tissue in 1.5 ml tubes were macerated in a dry ice bath using a sterile plastic pestle. IBc buffer (0.1 M Tris-MOPS, 0.001 M EGTA-Tris, 0.2 M sucrose, pH 7.4) was added, the tubes were centrifuged at 600 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatant was recovered in a new tube. This tube was centrifuged at 7000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C and the supernatant was discarded. This last step was repeated until the supernatant was clear. The remaining pellet contained isolated mitochondria that were further purified by ultracentrifugation in discontinuous sucrose gradients at 40,000 g (Mercer et al., 2011). Mitochondrial proteins were extracted using one volume of extraction buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 3% CHAPS) per volume of purified mitochondria. Total proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid and resuspended in water. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. Three replicas of mitochondrial protein extracts from each of the samples and control tissues were sent to the Proteomics Core Facility of the University of California, Davis to be analyzed. Total mitochondrial proteins were digested with trypsin (20:1) and run on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) using a C18 column of 120 cm for 90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
A database of 29,998 amino acid sequences, downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) and constituting all rat proteins was used as reference for protein identification. Protein identification and quantification was done with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. For identification, the peptides were of minimum 6 amino acids and had at least 1 unique peptide identified per protein. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % at both peptide and protein level was used. Average absolute mass deviation was set to 0.2 parts per million. For quantitation we used intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Differential expression analysis was based on iBAQ values, normalized by the amount of protein of each sample injected in the LC-MS system. Three replicas for each condition and controls were analyzed against untreated rat  controls of the same age. For data analysis we used DEP package (Zhang et al., 2018) version 1.0.1 in R. Proteins quantified in the three replicates of at least one of the evaluated conditions were included in the analysis. Normalization of data was performed using the vsn package (Huber et al., 2003) in R.  Imputation of missing values was done with MSnbase package (Gatto and Lilley, 2012) version 2.4.2 using the smallest non-missing value with MinProb function. To evaluate the significance of differentially expressed proteins we used the DEP package that depends on limma package (Smyth, 2004) (version 3.34.6). Differentially expressed proteins were considered as such when the adjusted p value ≤ 0.05 and presented a one-fold change in expression level in comparison with the control.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria participate in multiple functions in eukaryotic cells. Although disruption of mitochondrial function has been associated with energetic deregulation in cancer, the chronological changes in mitochondria during cancer development remain unclear. With the aim to assess the role of mitochondria throughout cancer development, we analyzed samples chronologically obtained from induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in rats. In our analyses, we integrated mitochondrial proteomic data, mitochondrial metabolomic data and nuclear genome transcriptomic data. We used pathway over-representation and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to integrate expression profiles of genes, miRNAs, proteins and metabolite levels throughout HCC development. Our results show that mitochondria are dynamic organelles presenting specific modifications in different stages of HCC development. We also found that mitochondrial proteomic profiles from tissues adjacent to nodules or tumor are determined more by the stage of HCC development than by tissue type, and we evaluated two models to predict HCC stage of the samples using proteomic profiles. Finally, we propose an omics integration pipeline to massively identify molecular features that could be further evaluated as key regulators, biomarkers or therapeutic targets. As an example, we show a group of miRNAs and transcription factors as candidates, responsible for mitochondrial metabolic modification in HCC.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Rat, Omics integration, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Shotgun proteomics, Chronological study

### Affiliations
LANGEBIO-CINVESTAV
Langebio, Unidad de Genómica Avanzada, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional

### Submitter
Rafael Montiel

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Montiel
Langebio, Unidad de Genómica Avanzada, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional


