### Accession
PXD016187

### Title
The CDK12-inhibitor CR8 mediates Cyclin K degradation through the CUL4-RBX1-DDB1 E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Description
Small molecules have been identified that induce protein-protein interactions between a substrate and a ubiquitin ligase, resulting in targeted protein degradation. Such molecular glue compounds, unlike traditional enzyme inhibitors, act sub-stoichiometrically to catalyse rapid depletion of previously inaccessible targets. Molecular glue degraders have the potential for clinical efficacy, but have thus far only been discovered serendipitously. Through correlations between compound cytotoxicity and E3 ligase expression levels, we found that CR8, a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor, acts as a molecular glue degrader. A surface-exposed pyridyl moiety of CR8 is sufficient to induce complex formation between CDK12-Cyclin K and DDB1, a component of CUL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes, which presents Cyclin K for ubiquitination and degradation. Our results reveal that minor surface-exposed modifications confer gain-of-function glue properties to an inhibitor. We hypothesize that chemical alteration of surface-exposed moieties is a broad strategy to turn a target binder into a molecular glue.

### Sample Protocol
10x106 MOLT4 cells were treated with DMSO (triplicate) or 1 µM CR8 for 5 hours and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors from Roche) was added to the cell pellets and homogenized by 20 passes through a 21 gauge (1.25 in. long) needle to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 1 – 4 mg mL-1. A micro-BCA assay (Pierce) was used to determine the final protein concentration of protein in the cell lysate. 200 µg of protein for each sample were reduced and alkylated as previously described. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. In brief, four volumes of methanol were added to the cell lysate, followed by one volume of chloroform, and finally three volumes of water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged to separate the chloroform phase from the aqueous phase. The precipitated protein was washed with three volumes of methanol, centrifuged and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme: protein) for 12 hours at room temperature. The LysC digestion was diluted down to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 and then digested with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 hours at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 10-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 hours at room temperature and the reaction quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% for 15 minutes at room temperature. The sample channels were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and analyzed by LC-MS for channel ratio comparison. Samples were then combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was then resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2−3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples were then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse- phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and these fractions were used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EasySpray ES803 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6–27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously [2] The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (September 2016) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.966 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across 10 channels < 200 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5). Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in house scripts and the R framework(Team, 2013). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework(Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Molecular glue compounds induce protein-protein interactions that, in the context of a ubiquitin ligase, lead to protein degradation<sup>1</sup>. Unlike traditional enzyme inhibitors, these molecular glue degraders act substoichiometrically to catalyse the rapid depletion of previously inaccessible targets<sup>2</sup>. They are clinically effective and highly sought-after, but have thus far only been discovered serendipitously. Here, through systematically mining databases for correlations between the cytotoxicity of 4,518&#xa0;clinical and preclinical small molecules and the expression levels of E3 ligase components across hundreds of human cancer cell lines<sup>3-5</sup>, we identify CR8-a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor<sup>6</sup>-as a compound that acts as a molecular glue degrader. The CDK-bound form of CR8 has a solvent-exposed pyridyl moiety that induces the formation of a complex between CDK12-cyclin&#xa0;K and the CUL4 adaptor protein DDB1, bypassing the requirement for a substrate receptor and presenting cyclin&#xa0;K for ubiquitination and degradation. Our studies demonstrate that chemical alteration of surface-exposed moieties can confer gain-of-function glue properties to an inhibitor, and we propose this as a broader strategy through which target-binding molecules could be converted into molecular glues.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Molecular glue, Cdk12, Crl4, Cr8, Cyclin k, Ddb1

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


