### Accession
PXD029280

### Title
Proteomics of liver from mice fed high fat diet (HFD) or regular chow diet

### Description
Proteomics of liver tissue from mice fed a high fat diet (HFD) or regular chow diet. Data accompany our paper entitled “Dynamic Regulation of N6,2′-O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am) in Obesity” scheduled for publication in Nature Communications, 2021

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed with 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl. Lysates were incubated at 96 °C for 5 min, followed by six cycles of 30 s of sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) and a total of 100 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap mini-columns (Protifi, USA) as described 44. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47 °C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were kept at −80 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software version 14 (Genedata, Switzerland) and processed as described in 45. The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against the mouse or human sequences UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and deamidation of N or Q. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet algorithm to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script. Data was normalized base on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalent m<sup>6</sup>Am mRNA cap modification was recently identified as a valid target for removal by the human obesity gene FTO along with the previously established m<sup>6</sup>A mRNA modification. However, the deposition and dynamics of m<sup>6</sup>Am in regulating obesity are unknown. Here, we investigate the liver m<sup>6</sup>A/m methylomes in mice fed on a high fat Western-diet and in ob/ob mice. We find that FTO levels are elevated in fat mice, and that genes which lost m<sup>6</sup>Am marking under obesity are overly downregulated, including the two fatty-acid-binding proteins FABP2, and FABP5. Furthermore, the cellular perturbation of FTO correspondingly affect protein levels of its targets. Notably, generally m<sup>6</sup>Am- but not m<sup>6</sup>A-methylated genes, are found to be highly enriched in metabolic processes. Finally, we deplete all m<sup>6</sup>A background via Mettl3 knockout, and unequivocally uncover the association of m<sup>6</sup>Am methylation with increased mRNA stability, translation efficiency, and higher protein expression. Together, these results strongly implicate a dynamic role for m<sup>6</sup>Am in obesity-related translation regulation.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, High fat diet

### Affiliations
The Hebrew University
Sheba Medical Center

### Submitter
Moshe Shay Ben-Haim

### Lab Head
Dr Gideon Rechavi
Sheba Medical Center


