### Accession
PXD006086

### Title
LC-MS/MS of the secreted fraction of Shigella

### Description
Many human Gram-negative bacterial pathogens express a Type Three Secretion Apparatus (T3SA), including among the most notorious Shigella spp., Salmonella enterica, Yersinia enterocolitica and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC). These bacteria express on their surface multiple copies of the T3SA that mediate the delivery into host cells of specific protein substrates critical to pathogenesis. Shigella spp. are Gram-negative bacterial pathogens responsible for human bacillary dysentery. The effector function of several Shigella T3SA substrates has largely been studied but their potential cellular targets are far from having been comprehensively delineated. In addition, it is likely that some T3SA substrates have escaped scrutiny as yet. Indeed, sequencing of the virulence plasmid of Shigella flexneri has revealed numerous open reading frames with unknown functions that could encode additional T3SA substrates. Taking advantage of label-free mass spectrometry detection of proteins secreted by a constitutively secreting strain of S. flexneri, we identified five novel substrates of the T3SA. We further confirmed their secretion through the T3SA and translocation into host cells using b-lactamase assays. The coding sequences of two of these novel T3SA substrates (Orf13 and Orf131a) have a guanine-cytosine content comparable to those of T3SA components and effectors. The three other T3SA substrates identified (Orf48, Orf86 and Orf176) have significant homology with antitoxin moieties of type II Toxin-Antitoxin systems usually implicated in the maintenance of low copy plasmids. While Orf13 and Orf131a might constitute new virulence effectors contributing to S. flexneri pathogenicity, potential roles for the translocation into host cells of antitoxins or antitoxin-like proteins during Shigella infection are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
mxiD and ipaD strains were grown overnight at 30°C and sub-cultured 1/50 in TSB at 37°C for 6 hours. Sub-cultures were spun at 3,220 g, 4°C for 15 min and supernatants filtered with 0.45 μm syringe filters. Proteins contained in the filtered supernatants were precipitated overnight at 4°C with 10% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid. Protein pellets from centrifugation at 9,400 g, 4°C for 15 min were recovered in 400 μL Laemmli buffer 1X (Biorad), and pH re-equilibrated with a 2M sodium hydroxide solution. Proteins present in the lysates were separated using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by Coomassie G-250 staining (Merck). Each gel lane corresponding to a unique experimental condition was cut into a single piece, then de-stained, dehydrated and treated with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip column (Merck Millipore) and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% formic acid prior to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. The peptide lysates were separated on a UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany). 5 µL samples were first loaded for 5 min on the pre-column (µ-precolumn, Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm, C18, Thermo Scientific) at 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in nanopure water with 0.08% formic acid), 96% mobile phase A (nanopure water with 0.1% formic acid), then eluted from the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18 LC Column, 25 cm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 120 min linear gradient of mobile phase B (4-55% B). The mass spectrometer was set on top speed with a cycle time of 3 s, using the Orbitrap analyser for MS and MS/MS scans with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at normalised collision energy of 28%. MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 in the scan range of 400-1,600 m/z. MS ion count target was set to 4×105 at an injection time of 60 ms. Ions for MS/MS scans were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 2 Daltons (Da) and were measured with a resolution of 15,000 in the scan range of 350-1,400 m/z in the Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Automatic gain control target was set to 5×104 with an injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification and the acquired MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST HT algorithm against the Uniprot reviewed database of Shigella pWR100 proteins (database of 265 protein-coding sequences, containing pWR100 protein annotations from NCBI [17] and the S. flexneri chromosomal IpaH sequences, combined with the sequences of 150 common contaminants). Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10-ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation (methionine) and carbamylation (lysine and arginine) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as a static modification. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 calculated by Percolator [31] and peptide rank =1 were considered as identified. All peptides matching more than one protein were removed, because they could not be used to distinguish between the secretion of homologs (in particular peptides matching the constant carboxy-terminal domain of IpaH proteins). The only exceptions to this rule were OspE1/OspE2, IpaH1.4/IpaH2.5, IpaH1/IpaH6 and IpaH4/IpaH5 for which this filter would have removed nearly all peptides identified, as these proteins are almost identical (>98% identity at the amino acid level). Therefore, these protein pairs were treated as one entity and appear as a single entry in the MS data analysis. The abundance of each detected protein was obtained by averaging peak intensities of up to 3 of its most abundant peptides in each replicate [32,33]; abundance values obtained from at least three independent replicates were then used to derive the average abundance value. Proteins identified in the ipaD sample were sorted into hit tiers based on the following criteria: Tier 2 hits had either at least 1.5-fold higher abundance for peptides also identified in the mxiD sample (i.e. shared peptides), or no peptides identified in the mxiD sample for at least two identified in the ipaD sample; Tier 1 hits had either no peptides identified in the mxiD sample for one identified in the ipaD sample, or 1.5-fold more peptides detected in the ipaD sample with a relative abundance lower than 1.5-fold; Tier 0 hits were the proteins not falling into the previous categories.

### Publication Abstract
Many human Gram-negative bacterial pathogens express a Type Three Secretion Apparatus (T3SA), including among the most notorious Shigella spp., Salmonella enterica, Yersinia enterocolitica and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC). These bacteria express on their surface multiple copies of the T3SA that mediate the delivery into host cells of specific protein substrates critical to pathogenesis. Shigella spp. are Gram-negative bacterial pathogens responsible for human bacillary dysentery. The effector function of several Shigella T3SA substrates has largely been studied but their potential cellular targets are far from having been comprehensively delineated. In addition, it is likely that some T3SA substrates have escaped scrutiny as yet. Indeed, sequencing of the virulence plasmid of Shigella flexneri has revealed numerous open reading frames with unknown functions that could encode additional T3SA substrates. Taking advantage of label-free mass spectrometry detection of proteins secreted by a constitutively secreting strain of S. flexneri, we identified five novel substrates of the T3SA. We further confirmed their secretion through the T3SA and translocation into host cells using &#x3b2;-lactamase assays. The coding sequences of two of these novel T3SA substrates (Orf13 and Orf131a) have a guanine-cytosine content comparable to those of T3SA components and effectors. The three other T3SA substrates identified (Orf48, Orf86 and Orf176) have significant homology with antitoxin moieties of type II Toxin-Antitoxin systems usually implicated in the maintenance of low copy plasmids. While Orf13 and Orf131a might constitute new virulence effectors contributing to S. flexneri pathogenicity, potential roles for the translocation into host cells of antitoxins or antitoxin-like proteins during Shigella infection are discussed.

### Keywords
Plasmid, Proteomics, Gram-negative bacterial pathogens, Shigella

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig


