### Accession
PXD025002

### Title
The extracellular matrix landscape identifies different etiologies behind bicuspid and tricuspid aortic valve degeneration

### Description
The molecular basis of aortic valve degeneration (AVD) is unclear. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the valve is in dynamic reciprocity with its surrounding microenvironment and contains molecular traits of the pathophysiological processes. We compared abundances of ECM proteins from excised valve tissues of 88 patients with isolated AVD of normal tricuspid (TAV) and congenital bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) by employing a new method for protein preparation and quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
ECM proteins were enriched from biopsy samples (taken during aortic valve replacement operations) following the manufacturers’ instructions of the Compartment Protein Extraction Kit (Merck, Germany). The sample were loaded onto an S-Trap plate (Protifi, Hungtington NY). Proteolytic digestion was performed by adding 125 µL of 0.1 µg/µL trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) in 50 mM TEAB incubated at 47°C for 1.5 h. The derived peptides were eluted consecutively applying 80 µL of 50 mM TEAB; 80 µL of 0.2% formic and 80 µL of 0.2% formic acid in 50% AcN with centrifugation at 1500 g for 2 min between each step and finally a drying step in a vacuum concentrator (miVac, Thermo Scientific). The samples were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate (Thermo Scientific) and dried in a 96-well plate to completeness and stored at -80°C. Prior to mass-spectrometry analysis, the samples were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA (solvent A) and injected into an UltiMate 3000 UPLC autosampler (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100C18, 100 μm × 2 cm) and separated on a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was achieved using the following gradient: 4-26% of solvent B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA) in 90 min, 26-95% in 5min, and 5 min of 95%, before equilibration for 9 min at 4% with a flow rate of 300 nlmin-1. For data collection, the mass-spectrometer operated in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The cycle time was 2 seconds and consisted of one full scan with a resolution of 120`000 (at 200Th) covering the range from 350 to 1800 Th. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 4*105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and lock mass was set to 445.12003 Th. Triggered MS/MS scans were recorded with a resolution of 30`000, AGC of 50`000, maximum injection time of 54 ms, isolation window of 1.6 Th, and normalized collision energy (NCE) 30%. Only peptide with a charge from 2+ to 7+ were selected, dynamic exclusion was set to 45sec. All spectra were acquired in profile mode using the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of DDA samples were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Scientific) and analyzed using the SwissProt protein database with Mascot v 2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd., UK) search engine. Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, 0.05 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications. For quantification, both unique and razor peptides were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Aortic valve degeneration (AVD) is a life-threatening condition that has no medical treatment and lacks individual therapies. Although extensively studied with standard approaches, aetiologies behind AVD are unclear. We compared abundances of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins from excised valve tissues of 88 patients with isolated AVD of normal tricuspid (TAV) and congenital bicuspid aortic valves (BAV), quantified more than 1400 proteins per ECM sample by mass spectrometry, and demonstrated that local ECM preserves molecular cues of the pathophysiological processes. The BAV ECM showed enrichment with fibrosis markers, namely Tenascin C, Osteoprotegerin, and Thrombospondin-2. The abnormal physical stress on BAV may cause a mechanical injury leading to a continuous Tenascin C-driven presence of myofibroblasts and persistent fibrosis. The TAV ECM exhibited enrichment with Annexin A3 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.1&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>-16</sup> and the fold change 6.5) and a significant deficit in proteins involved in high-density lipid metabolism. These results were validated by orthogonal methods. The difference in the ECM landscape suggests distinct aetiologies between AVD of BAV and TAV; warrants different treatments of the patients with BAV and TAV; elucidates the molecular basis of AVD; and implies possible new therapeutic approaches. Our publicly available database (human_avd_ecm.surgsci.uu.se) is a rich source for medical doctors and researchers who are interested in AVD or heart ECM in general. Systematic proteomic analysis of local ECM using the methods described here may facilitate future studies of various tissues and organs in development and disease.

### Keywords
Human, Aortic valve degeneration, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Ecm

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Surgical Sciences Uppsala University 752 37 Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Rodin
Department of Surgical Sciences Uppsala University 752 37 Uppsala, Sweden


