### Accession
PXD008162

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals differential of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) to oxygen deficiency stress

### Description
The responses to waterlogging stress of two wheat genotypes including one sensitive and one resistant were systematic investigated. The labeling-based quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted in parallel on these two genotypes in responding to waterlogging for 1-3 days, 951 and 320 differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were detected in the during treat, and 270 DEPs were shared. The results might help to reveal the regulatory mechanism of waterlogging stress tolerance in wheat.

### Sample Protocol
40 healthy plants of Seri M82 and CIGM90.863 were transplanted into 20 small growth boxes (20×10×10 cm, height×length×width) with 2L of Hoagland nutrient solution after growing in seedling tray for 10 days. Then these growth boxes were put into a growth chamber under controlled conditions (16h light/8h dark cycle at 22℃/18℃ day/night temperature, relative humidity 60%). Oxygen of Hoagland nutrient solution was provided by air pump for 2 days. After that, as control, 10 growth boxes was provided with oxygen; as hypoxia treatment, other 10 growth boxes were controlled to be a stable environment with oxygen content at 2.0mg/L, which was made with 0.1% agar (Zeng et al., 2014) and bubbled with N2 gas for 30 minutes. Tissue samples for proteome were collected in 1st, 2nd, and 3rd days after treatment. The plants were taken out of nutrient solution，and the roots were excised and frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Triticum Aestivum (136866) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Wheat, Oxygen deficiency

### Affiliations
Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance TechnHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance TechnHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance Technologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;ologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;ologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;
Wuhan Botanic Garden

### Submitter
Dongli He

### Lab Head
Dr Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance Technologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;
Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance TechnHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance TechnHubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Grain Industry/ Research Center of Crop Stresses Resistance Technologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;ologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;ologies, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China;


