### Accession
PXD035802

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis modified proteome under oxidative stress

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB), which is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), continues to be a public health threat. With the development and widespread of drug-resistant TB, the pressure of prevention and treatment is increasing. To determine and quantify the modified proteins, high resolution mass spectrometry were used to label and quantify the peptides and proteins modified.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched labeled peptides were analyzed by Nano LC-MS/MS through a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200. A trap column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (3 mm, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany), 20× 0.15 mm) and C18 column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (1.9 mm, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) 160 × 0.15 mm) were used for separation. After the sample was loaded on the columns, the gradient started from 10% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and then from 10 to 13% of buffer B for 6 min. Then, the gradient raised from 13 to 29% of buffer B for 78 min and from 29 to 37% for 22 min. Ultimately, the gradient ascended to 95% of buffer B and was kept for 14 min. MS/MS parameters were set as previous reported: MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap resolution, 120 000; mass range, 350~1550 m/z; RF lens, 50%; maximum injection time, 50 ms) and an MS2 analysis with HCD accompanied by the following conditions: Orbitrap solution, 15 000; and isolation window, 0.7 Da; collision energy, 38%; maximum injection time, Dynamic.

### Data Protocol
Raw data acquired were searched against Mtb H37Rv database from UniProt by the Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ version 2.2 software. Two missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed for each peptide. Reporter abundance quantification was based on the intensity, and S/N was set as 1. Peptides with dynamic modifications of oxidation, iodoTMT6plex, and carbamidomethyl were monitored. Data were normalized by the total peptide amount and ANOVA was used for the hypothesis test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Yun Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuefu You
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


