### Accession
PXD012865

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from Size exclusion chromatography fractions.  The starting material was a native extract prepared from corn sprouts (Zea mays).

### Sample Protocol
Liquid nitrogen powder of leaves was prepared using a chilled mortar and pestle.  Powder was thawed to 4°C, and resuspended in Plant Lysis Buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 at room temperature, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, plant-specific protease inhibitors (Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP EASY, Roche)followed by nutation 30 minutes at 4°C.  All subsequent steps were at 4°C.  The crude homogenate was clarified by a low speed spin (~3000 x g, 10 minutes), and the supernatant further clarified by a high speed spin (~14,000 x g, 10 minutes). Lysates were fractionated on a Dionix™ UltiMate™3000 HPLC system consisting of an RS pump, Diode Array Detector, PCM-3000 pH and Conductivity Monitor, Automated Fraction Collector (Thermo Scientific, CA, USA) and an Rheodyne™ MXII Valve (IDEX Health & Science LLC, Rohnert Park, CA) using biocompatible PEEK tubing and a BioSep-SEC-s4000 600 x 7.8 mm ID, particle diameter 5 µm, pore diameter 500 Å (Phenomenex®, Torrance, CA).  Sample was 2.7 mg in 200 µl, flow rate 0.5 ml/min, with fraction collection every 45 seconds, and mobile phase PBS pH 7.2 (Gibco).  Fractions were reduced/alkylated, digested with Trypsin, and processed for LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported. Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Corn, Maize, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA


