### Accession
PXD036504

### Title
The inhibition of putrescine synthesis affects the in vitro shoot development of Cedrela fissilis Vell. (Meliaceae) by altering endogenous polyamine metabolism and the proteomic profile

### Description
Polyamines (PAs) and proteins have been demonstrated to be fundamental for in vitro shoot development of Cedrela fissilis. We evaluated the influence of 6-benzyladenine (BA) and putrescine (Put) on the growth of shoots, PA metabolism and proteomic profiles of C. fissilis. The longest shoots were obtained under 2.5 μM BA + 2.5 mM Put treatment. The inhibition of Put synthesis by D-arginine (D-arg) decreased the shoot length and reduced the endogenous contents of free Put and the activities of the Put biosynthesis enzymes arginine decarboxylase (ADC) and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), resulting in reduced shoot growth. The ODC activity was higher than that of ADC, which is the main enzyme in the synthesis of Put in C. fissilis. Inhibition of Put synthesis affected the proteomic profile, reducing the accumulation of the ubiquitin receptor RAD23c, peroxidase 15, ADP-ribosylation factor 1, ADP-ribosylation factor-like protein 8a, profilin-4, profilin-2, glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase, and expansin-like B1 and increasing the accumulation of V-type proton ATPase catalytic subunit A and methionine gamma-lyase, highlighting the relevance of these proteins in increasing shoot length. The transport protein SEC13 homolog B and the basic isoform glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase, which are unique to shoots treated with BA+Put, are related to the promotion of shoot growth. Our results show that the modulation of endogenous PAs and proteomic profiles is necessary to regulate in vitro morphogenesis in C. fissilis. Moreover, the ODC enzyme is highly involved in the synthesis of Put during in vitro shoot development and is described for the first time in this species.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method according to a protocol by Damerval et al. (1986), with modifications. Three biological samples of shoots containing leaves and apical meristems (300 mg FM per sample) were frozen in liquid nitrogen and then ground into a fine powder. Then, 300 milligrams of fine powder per sample was resuspended in 1 mL of chilled solution containing 10% (w/v) TCA (Sigma-Aldrich) in acetone (Sigma-Aldrich) together with 20 mM DTT (GE Healthcare) and vortexed for 5 min at 8 °C. The mixture was maintained at - 20 °C for 1 h before centrifugation at 16,000×g for 30 min at 4 °C. Then, the supernatant were discarded and the resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone plus 20 mM DTT and centrifuged for 5 min for each wash. The pellets were air dried and resuspended in buffer consisting of 7 M urea (GE Healthcare), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 2% Triton X-100 (GE Healthcare), 1% DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) (Sigma-Aldrich), and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). Next, the samples were vortexed for 30 min at 8 °C, and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min. The supernatant from each sample was collected, and the protein concentration was measured by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Before the trypsin digestion step, the protein samples were precipitated with methanol/chloroform (Nanjo et al. 2012), and resuspended in a solution of 7 M urea/2 M thiourea. Protein digestion was performed using 100 µg of protein from each sample, using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology (Reis et al. 2021). Next, the peptides were resuspended in 100 μL solution containing 95% 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were quantified according to A205 nm protein and peptide methodology using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, USA). The samples were transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters) for mass spectrometry analysis. A nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatograph (UPLC) connected to a Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used for electrospray-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis according to (Passamani et al. 2018). For each treatment, three biological replicates of 1 µg of digested peptide per sample was used. For separation, the samples were loaded onto a nanoACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 5 μm trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μL min-1 for 3 min and then onto a nanoACQUITY M-Class HSS T3 1.8-μm analytical reversed-phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL min-1 and 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia; Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid, and a mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient elution started with 7% B, increased from 7 to 40% B until 91.12 min, increased again from 40 to 99.9% B until 92.72 min, and then remained at 99.9% until 106.00 min, followed by a decrease to 7% B until 106.1 min, and then remained at 7% B until 120 min, the end of the run. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM), with ion mobility separation (IMS), and in data-independent acquisition mode (HDMSE). The ion mobility wave was set to 600 m s-1, with helium and IMS gas flow rates of 180 and 90 mL min-1, respectively. The external calibrant used was human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (100 fmol μL-1). Lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s, and mass spectra were acquired via MassLynx version 4.1 software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and comparative analysis were performed according to Passamani et al. (2020). Spectra processing and database searching were performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) software version 3.0.2 (Waters). and comparative label-free quantification was performed using ISOQuant software version 1.7 (Distler et al. 2014). For ISOQuant, the following parameters were used to identify proteins: a 1% FDR, a peptide score greater than six, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, and at least two peptides per protein were required for label-free quantitation using the TOP3 approach, followed by the multidimensional normalized process within ISOQuant. For protein identification, the obtained data were processed against the content in the nonredundant Cedrela fissilis database (Oliveira et al. 2020).   To ensure the quality of the results after data processing, only the proteins present or absent (for unique proteins) in all three runs were considered for differential accumulation analysis via Student’s t-test (two-tailed; P < 0.05). Proteins with a significant t-test result were considered up-accumulated if the log2 value of the fold change (FC) was greater than 0.60 and down-accumulated if the log2 value of the FC was less than - 0.60. Finally, a functional annotation analysis was performed using OmicsBox software (www.biobam.com/omicsbox)  and UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org). The protein sequences were submitted to a BLAST search against the NCBI nonredundant green plant protein database (taxa: 33090, Viridiplantae).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polyamine inhibitor, Morphogenic competence, Proteomics, Putrescine, Enzymatic activities

### Affiliations
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro Laboratório de Biologia Celular ou Tecidual Av. Alberto Lamego 2000 - Campos dos Goytacazes-RJ 28013-602 - Brazil (lab head)

### Submitter
Claudete Santa-Catarina

### Lab Head
Dr Claudete Santa Catarina
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro Laboratório de Biologia Celular ou Tecidual Av. Alberto Lamego 2000 - Campos dos Goytacazes-RJ 28013-602 - Brazil (lab head)


