### Accession
PXD047505

### Title
Heat inactivation of foetal bovine serum performed after EV-depletion influences the proteome of cell-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
The release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in cell cultures as well as their molecular cargo can be influenced by cell culture conditions such as the presence of foetal bovine serum (FBS). Although several studies have evaluated the effect of removing FBS-derived EVs by ultracentrifugation (UC), less is known about the influence of FBS heat inactivation (HI) on the cell-derived EVs. To assess this, three protocols based on different combinations of EV depletion by UC and HI were evaluated, including FBS ultracentrifuged but not heat inactivated (no-HI FBS), FBS heat inactivated before EV depletion (HI-before EV-depl FBS), and FBS heat inactivated after EV depletion (HI-after EV-depl FBS). We isolated large (L-EVs) and small EVs (S-EVs) from FBS treated in the three different ways, and we found that the S-EV pellet from HI-after EV-depl FBS was larger than the S-EV pellet from no-HI FBS and HI-before EV-depl FBS. Transmission electron microscopy, protein quantification, and particle number evaluation showed that HI-after EV-depl significantly increased the protein amount of S-EVs but had no significant effect on L-EVs. Consequently, the protein quantity of S-EVs isolated from three cell lines cultured in media supplemented with HI-after EV-depl FBS was significantly increased. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of FBS-derived S-EVs showed that the EV protein content was different when FBS was HI after EV depletion compared to EVs isolated from no-HI FBS and HI-before EV-depl FBS. Moreover, we show that several quantified proteins could be ascribed to human origin demonstrating that FBS bovine proteins can mistakenly be attributed to human cell-derived EVs. We conclude that HI of FBS performed after EV depletion results in changes in the proteome, with molecules that co-isolate with EVs and can contaminate EVs when used in subsequent cell cultures. Our recommendation is therefore to always perform HI of FBS prior to EV depletion.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Methods  Sample preparation and digestion The proteomic analysis was performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. The samples and reference pools (representative reference containing equal amounts of all the samples). The samples and reference pool using modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). In short, samples (35 µg) were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 50 mM TEAB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB for 30 min in room temperature. Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific, ratio 1:100) at 37°C overnight and an additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The samples were combined into one TMT-set and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA.  The TMT-set was further purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Spin Column and Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (both Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions prior to basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) fractionation. Peptide separation was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) with a gradient from 3% to 100% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00 over 23 min at a flow of 400 µL/min. The 40 fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.   nanoLC-MS/MS analysis and database search Each fraction was analysed on Orbitrap Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer equipped with the FAIMS Pro ion mobility system interfaced with nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (350x0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using a gradient from 3% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 85 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. FAIMS Pro was alternating between the compensation voltages (CV) of -40 and -60, and essentially the same data-dependent settings were used at both CVs. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120 000 resolution, scan range 450-1375 and maximum injection time 50 ms. MS2 analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, where the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and dynamic exclusion within 10 ppm for 60 s. The isolated precursors were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35% collision energy with the maximum injection time of 50 ms for 3 s (‘top speed’ setting) and detected in the ion trap, followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 10 MS2 fragment ions within the m/z range 400-1200, fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% collision energy and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolution m/z range 100-500 and maximum injection time 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was against Homo Sapiens (Swissprot Database Mars 2022) and Bovine (Swissprot Database April 2021) using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS3 HCD spectra, and the TMT reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. Only the quantitative results for the unique peptide sequences with the minimum SPS match % of 50 and the average S/N above 10 were taken into account for the protein quantification. A reference samples was used as denominator and for calculation of the ratios. The quantified proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy.

### Publication Abstract
The release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in cell cultures as well as their molecular cargo can be influenced by cell culture conditions such as the presence of foetal bovine serum (FBS). Although several studies have evaluated the effect of removing FBS-derived EVs by ultracentrifugation (UC), less is known about the influence of FBS heat inactivation (HI) on the cell-derived EVs. To assess this, three protocols based on different combinations of EV depletion by UC and HI were evaluated, including FBS ultracentrifuged but not heat inactivated (no-HI FBS), FBS heat inactivated before EV depletion (HI-before EV-depl FBS), and FBS heat inactivated after EV depletion (HI-after EV-depl FBS). We isolated large (L-EVs) and small EVs (S-EVs) from FBS treated in the three different ways, and we found that the S-EV pellet from HI-after EV-depl FBS was larger than the S-EV pellet from no-HI FBS and HI-before EV-depl FBS. Transmission electron microscopy, protein quantification, and particle number evaluation showed that HI-after EV-depl significantly increased the protein amount of S-EVs but had no significant effect on L-EVs. Consequently, the protein quantity of S-EVs isolated from three cell lines cultured in media supplemented with HI-after EV-depl FBS was significantly increased. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of FBS-derived S-EVs showed that the EV protein content was different when FBS was HI after EV depletion compared to EVs isolated from no-HI FBS and HI-before EV-depl FBS. Moreover, we show that several quantified proteins could be ascribed to human origin, thus demonstrating that FBS bovine proteins can mistakenly be attributed to human cell-derived EVs. We conclude that HI of FBS performed after EV depletion results in changes in the proteome, with molecules that co-isolate with EVs and can contaminate EVs when used in subsequent cell cultures. Our recommendation is, therefore, to always perform HI of FBS prior to EV depletion.

### Keywords
Ev depletion by ultracentrifugation, Extracellular vesicles, Foetal bovine serum (fbs), Fbs heat-inactivation

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Sahlgrenska Center for Cancer Research and Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Rossella Crescitelli
Sahlgrenska Center for Cancer Research and Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


