### Accession
PXD001888

### Title
Mouse heart toxicity -  A Novel Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Approach to Monitor Cardiac Metabolic Pathway Remodeling in Response to Sunitinib Malate

### Description
Background Sunitinib is a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of diverse cancers. Despite widespread clinical approval the associated cardiovascular toxicity sequelae are of concern; high grade toxicities may lead to dose reduction, interruption or discontinuation. Thus, an effective strategy for the early detection of cardiac damage in the context of sunitinib treatment is warranted. Although yet to be fully elucidated, molecular pathways and kinases implicate include those related to cardiac energy metabolism. We hypothesised that plasticity in cardiac metabolism could represent a novel early marker of cardiotoxicity.  Methods and Results Female Balb/CJ mice (n = 36) or Sprague-Dawley rat (n = 12) models were treated with sunitinib. Physiological parameters were measured. An hypothesis driven cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) approach was implemented to investigate alterations in myocardial glucose, fatty acid and oxidative metabolism.  Following treatment, blood pressure increased, whilst left ventricular ejection fraction decreased in both models. Increased myocardial glucose uptake after 48 hours indicated early perturbations in glucose metabolism. Myocardial fatty acid metabolism appeared increased as a result of sunitinib treatment indicated by PET but electron microscopy revealed significantly increased storage of lipids in the myocardium. Proteomic analyses indicated that oxidative metabolism, fatty acid β-oxidation and mitochondrial dysfunction were among the top cardiac signalling pathways perturbed by sunitinib treatment. [11C]Acetate-PET data suggested a decrease in myocardial perfusion following 5 days of treatment.  Conclusions Data implicates sunitinib as a mediator of compromised myocardial energy metabolism. Increased reliance on glycolysis, increases in myocardial lipid deposition and perturbed mitochondrial function may ultimately result in a fundamental energy crisis manifesting as compromised cardiac function, the long term effects of which are unknown. Our data support the utility of an hypothesis driven PET approach to monitor cardiac metabolic pathway remodelling in response to sunitinib, which may ultimately have clinical utility as a novel safety imaging biomarker strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen whole organs were ground to a powder on dry ice, transferred to a tissue grinder in 500 μL of ice cold lysis buffer (40 mM Tris pH 8.8, 600 mM NaCl, protease inhibitor and Benzonase) and mechanically homogenized on ice. Lysate was transferred to 1.5 mL Beckman tube with glass Pasteur pipette and grinder rinsed with an additional 500 μL of ice cold lysis buffer. Samples were ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 10 °C (Beckman Optima TLX Ultracentrifuge, Rotor TLA 55) and the supernatant containing the soluble protein fraction collected and stored at -80 °C (cytosolic fraction). The remaining pellet containing the insoluble protein fraction was twice re-suspended in 1 μL of 1 M KCl followed by centrifugation step at 50,000 g for 1 hour at 10 °C (Hereus Centrifuge 28RS Rotor 3740), after which the pellet was washed twice with 1 μL of 100 μM Na2CO3 and centrifuged at 50,000 g for 1 hour at 10 °C. The resulting pellet was dissolved in 200 μL extraction buffer (8M urea, 1% CHAPS, 50 mM Tris, pH8.8) and samples were then vortexed and shaken for 1 hour and sonicated until sample appeared to be broken up, with no visible clumps. The samples were then centrifuged at room temperature at 21,000 g for 15 min at maximum speed and supernatant collected.  Cytosolic and membrane proteins (100 μg and 20 μg respectively) were reduced and alkylated using a 3-fold excess of dithiothreitol and a 6-fold excess of iodoacetamide by weight. Cytosolic proteins were then digested overnight at room temperature using 2 μg trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were desalted using solid phase extraction (Strata SDB-L Styrene Divinylbenzene columns containing 25 μg of 100 μm / 260Å beads, Phenomenex), washed twice with 1.0 % v/v formic acid, and eluted with 250 μL of 70% v/v acetonitrile, 1.0 % v/v formic acid and dried overnight in a speed-vac concentrator (Eppendorf). Proteins from the crude membrane fraction (10 μg) were further fractionated by SDS-PAGE (10% SDS PAGE; TAE buffer system; Invitrogen). After protein staining with colloidal blue, 5 bands (270-120 kDa, 120-55 kDa, 55-28 kDa, 28-17 kDa, 17-8 kDa as estimated by comparing with the molecular mass marker) were excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as follows. Each acrylamide piece was cut in pieces of approx. 1 mm2 and transferred to an Eppendorf tube. The gel pieces were de-stained with 50% acetonitrile (in water) for 10 min, then with de-staining solution (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30% v/v acetonitrile) until completely colourless. The acrylamide was then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for 15 min after which the bands were dried in a Speed Vac for 10 min without heating. Digestion was carried out in 50 μL of tryptic digestion buffer (40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 ng/mL trypsin (Promega)) overnight at room temperature, after which the supernatant was collected. The supernatants were then dried in a speed Vac without heating and the peptide extract was kept at -80 °C until further use. Peptide samples were analysed by nanoscale LC-ESI-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow chromatographic system (Thermo Electron) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptide separation was achieved using an analytical fused silica emitter (75/360 μm i.d./o.d., tip diameter 8±1 mm, New Objective home-packed at 400 bar with 15-19 cm of 3 mm Reprosil C18 A.Q. reverse phase material (Dr. Maisch)). The peptide mixture of each sample was dissolved in 100 μL of buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid) and approximately 250 ng equivalent of the peptide mixture were injected into the system at a flow rate of 450 nL/min at 100 % buffer A for 12 min. After loading, the flow was decreased to 250 nL/min and peptides were eluted from the reverse phase column as follows: 12-14 min, 0-5% buffer B (80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid); 14-30 min, 5-30% buffer B using the curve 4 (slightly concave) of the Chromoleon software (Thermo Electron); 30-90 min, 30-55% Buffer B using the curve 6 (slightly convex) of the Chromeleon software. The column was then washed for 15 min with 100% buffer B at 350 nL/min and re-equilibrated for 25 min in 100% buffer A at 350 nL/min. Peptides were analysed by tandem MS (standard operating parameters of electrospray voltage = 2.0 kV; capillary temperature = 170°C). Survey scans (scanning range m/z 400-1650) were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 30,000 with the lock mass option enabled. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra of the five most abundant ions from the survey scan were recorded in the LTQ ion trap using a normalised collision energy of 32 % for MS/MS (30 ms activation, q = 0.25) and a selection threshold of 500. Target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data from crude membrane and soluble fraction were separately processed using the SEQUEST search algorithm (SEQUEST version 27.0, revision 12, Thermo Electron) and searches were performed using the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase database 2011_07 (23927 “Mus musculus” sequences concatenated with their decoy entries). Data were searched with a mass tolerance of +/-5 ppm for parent ions and +/-1.0 Da for fragment ions. Methionines (reduced/oxidized; +15.9949 Da) were considered as differential modifications while cysteines were considered as fully carbamidomethylated (+57.0199 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides with no more than one miscleavage were considered for data analysis. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified proteins was evaluated using an in-house Roche algorithm3 with only proteins with a FDR < 1% included for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sunitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of multiple solid tumors. However, cardiotoxicity is of increasing concern, with a need to develop rational mechanism driven approaches for the early detection of cardiac dysfunction. We sought to interrogate changes in cardiac energy substrate usage during sunitinib treatment, hypothesising that these changes could represent a strategy for the early detection of cardiotoxicity. Balb/CJ mice or Sprague-Dawley rats were treated orally for 4 weeks with 40 or 20 mg/kg/day sunitinib. Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) was implemented to investigate alterations in myocardial glucose and oxidative metabolism. Following treatment, blood pressure increased, and left ventricular ejection fraction decreased. Cardiac [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET revealed increased glucose uptake after 48 hours. [11C]Acetate-PET showed decreased myocardial perfusion following treatment. Electron microscopy revealed significant lipid accumulation in the myocardium. Proteomic analyses indicated that oxidative metabolism, fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation and mitochondrial dysfunction were among the top myocardial signalling pathways perturbed. Sunitinib treatment results in an increased reliance on glycolysis, increased myocardial lipid deposition and perturbed mitochondrial function, indicative of a fundamental energy crisis resulting in compromised myocardial energy metabolism and function. Our findings suggest that a cardiac PET strategy may represent a rational approach to non-invasively monitor metabolic pathway remodeling following sunitinib treatment.

### Keywords
Heart tissue, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd
Pharmaceutical Sciences - TTB Roche Pharma Research and Early Development Roche Innovation Center Basel F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd Building/Room  93/4.44 Grenzacherstrasse 124 CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Axel Ducret

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Ducret
Pharmaceutical Sciences - TTB Roche Pharma Research and Early Development Roche Innovation Center Basel F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd Building/Room  93/4.44 Grenzacherstrasse 124 CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland


