### Accession
PXD035813

### Title
A Proximity Labeling Strategy Provides Insights into the Composition and Dynamics of mitochondria-lipid droplet contact proteomes

### Description
Accumulating studies have shown that mitochondria-lipid droplet (LD) interaction is crucial for maintaining the homeostasis of lipid metabolism in the liver. However, the proteins involved in mitochondria-LD interaction and the functioning mechanism remain largely elusive. Here, we applied a systematic approach to characterize the proteome of mitochondria-LD contacts under normal or starvation condition by combining the bimolecular fluorescence complementary assay and a proximity labeling strategy. We first established a reporter of mitochondria-LD contacts in HepG2 cells and demonstrated that mitochondria-LD contacts are pretty sensitive to nutritional stresses. Furthermore, we uncovered 60 proteins are up-or down-regulated at contact sites upon starvation. Finally, we validated that SQLE translocates from endoplasmic reticulum to LDs and accumulates at mitochondria-LD contact sites upon starvation so as to utilize local ATP for cholesterol synthesis. This work also provides a versatile tool to profile the proteomes of any other inter-organelle membrane contacts in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched biotinylated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie G-250. In-gel protein digestion was followed as previously described (Xue et al., 2017). In brief, manually cut protein lanes were destained with 40% acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 45 min and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 60 min in the dark. The gel pieces were sequentially washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3 and then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. After drying using a SpeedVac, the gels were rehydrated using 100 ng/μL trypsin on ice for 30 min. The proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and the reaction was quenched with 1.0% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and then dried using a SpeedVac. All nano-LC-MS/MS experiments were conducted on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and then separated on an a 75 μm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides bounded on the column were eluted with a 73-min linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and the solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The segmented gradient was 4–9% B, 3 min; 9–20% B, 22 min; 20–30% B, 20 min; 30-40% B, 15 min; 40-95% B, 3 min; 95% B, 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was conducted with Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 60,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 350–1500 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The data dependent mode was selected as cycle time mode with a duration of 2 seconds. The precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z for fragmentation in the Ion Routing Multipole at normalized collision energy of 28%. Subsequently, the MS/MS spectra at resolution 15,000 at m/z 200 were acquired. The target value was 7.50E+04 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40 s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV. There was no sheath gas flow and the heated capillary temperature was 320 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Orbitrap Exploris 480 were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 2.4.1.15. Sequest HT search engine was used for protein identification according to the Uniprot database of human proteins (updated on 09/2018). The following parameters were used to search the database: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl cysteine and oxidized methionine as a variable modification. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator and FDR <1% was set for protein identification. The proteins used for the quantitative analysis were further filtered according to the following criteria: 1) total spectral counts of proteins should be at least 3; 2) at least two unique peptides were required; 3) no razor peptides were allowed. After normalizing protein abundances using RUVg (Risso et al., 2014), the differential expression analysis of proteins was carried out by edgeR (Lun et al., 2016) and the proteins with p-value less than 0.01 and fold change above 2 were considered as high confident candidates.

### Publication Abstract
Inter-organelle membrane contacts are highly dynamic and act as central hubs for many biological processes, but the protein compositions remain largely unknown due to the lack of efficient tools. Here, we developed BiFCPL to analyze the contact proteome in living cells by a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)-based proximity labeling (PL) strategy. BiFCPL was applied to study mitochondria-endoplasmic reticulum contacts (MERCs) and mitochondria-lipid droplet (LD) contacts. We identified 403 highly confident MERC proteins, including many transiently resident proteins and potential tethers. Moreover, we demonstrated that mitochondria-LD contacts are sensitive to nutrient status. A comparative proteomic analysis revealed that 60 proteins are up- or downregulated at contact sites under metabolic challenge. We verified that SQLE, an enzyme for cholesterol synthesis, accumulates at mitochondria-LD contact sites probably to utilize local ATP for cholesterol synthesis. This work provides an efficient method to identify key proteins at inter-organelle membrane contacts in living cells.

### Keywords
Mitochondria-lipid droplet contact, Bifc, Comparative proteomics, Cholesterol, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Maoge Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Xu
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


