### Accession
PXD029844

### Title
Preserving the phosphoproteome of clinical biopsies using a quick freeze collection device

### Description
The current gold standard for collecting and processing cancer biopsies is to flash freeze tumor samples in liquid nitrogen. However, in many clinical settings liquid nitrogen is not readily available, and neither the personnel nor the infrastructure is generally available to rapidly process the tumor samples. As a result, tumors are often subjected to prolonged ischemia and/or chemical fixatives, altering the phosphoproteome such that it may no longer reflect the true in vivo state of the tumor. There is a need for an economical, single-use device that can be stored at room temperature then activated at point of care to rapidly freeze the specimen. Our proof-of-concept quick-freeze prototype device focused on key requirements including cooling performance, device safety, minimizing use error, and the ability to ship via existing cold chain logistics. We have demonstrated that our device can cool a core sample below 0°C in less than 70 seconds, below -8°C in less than 150 seconds, and maintain that sample below 0°C for greater than 70 minutes.  To demonstrate feasibility, the performance of our prototype was benchmarked against flash freezing in liquid nitrogen using melanoma-bearing PDX mice as a model system. After subjecting the mice to total body irradiation to elicit a phosphosignaling response in the DNA damage response pathway, tumors were harvested and quadrisected with two parts of the tumor snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and the remaining two parts rapidly cooled in the prototype quick-freeze biospecimen containers for 1 hour. Phosphoproteins were profiled by LC-MS/MS. The prototype freeze device showed feasibility with bias within acceptable limits and slightly higher variability for a subset of phosphopeptides compared to flash freezing. The prototype device forms the framework for development of a commercial device that will improve tissue biopsy preservation for measurement of important phospho-signaling molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Melanoma-bearing PDX mice were subjected to total body irradiation. After one hour, tumors were harvested and quadrisected. Two parts of each tissue were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and the remaining two parts were rapidly frozen in the quick-freeze prototypes for 1 hour before being transferred to an LN2 tank. Protein concentrations were determined by Micro BCA and the lysates were reduced, alkylated, and proteolytically digested using Lys-C and trypsin. After desalting, samples were TMT labeled, where individual samples were labeled using channels 1-8 and the pooled reference sample was labeled using channel 9. The independent labeling reactions pooled together, lyophilized, desalted and then fractionated by high-pH reverse phase (RP) liquid chromatography to generate 12 samples, which were dried down and stored at −80°C prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. The phosphopeptides in each fraction were enriched using immobilized metal affinity chromatography, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode. The LC system was configured in a vented format with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, and the peptide samples were separated using a 113 minute method. MS/MS analysis occurred over a 3 second cycle time consisting of 1 full scan MS from 350-1800 m/z at resolution 120,000 followed by data dependent MS/MS scans using 40% normalized collision energy of the most abundant ions. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds after a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra from the analyses were searched against UniProt database UP000005640_9606_human using MaxQuant/Andromeda v 1.6.10 (tryptic enzyme constraint at up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications, carbamidomethylated cysteine as a static modification, and peptide MH+ mass tolerances at 20 ppm). The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Any site with a probability greater than 0.75 was considered to be localized. Quantification of TMT ratios was performed using MaxQuant, Perseus, and Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fractionation, Phosphorylation, Imac, Diagnostics, Tissue processing, Pdx, Preanalytics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Clinical Research Division

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G Paulovich
Clinical Research Division


