### Accession
PXD021585

### Title
Proteomic analysis of virion and genomic fibre of Mimivirus reunion

### Description
Mimivirus is the prototype of the Mimiviridae family of giant dsDNA viruses, initially isolated in Acanthamoeba. Little is known about the organization of the viral genome inside the membrane limited nucleoid and whether unpacking or other rearrangements are required prior to early transcription and replication. Here we used Mimivirus reunion (an isolate from La Réunion Island) and showed that in vitro opening of its large icosahedral capsid leads to the release of electron dense, 30 nm diameter rod-shaped objects that appear to be expelled and unwinding from the particles. We developed a purification procedure and performed a mass spectrometry-based characterization of the protein content of the genomic fibre, as well as total virion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from virions and fibre were solubilized with Laemmli buffer (4 volumes of sample with 1 volume of Laemmli 5X-125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10% SDS, 20% glycerol, 25% β-mercaptoethanol and traces of bromophenol blue) and heated for 10 min at 95 °C. Three independent infections using 3 different batches of virions were performed and the genomic fibre was extracted from the resulting viral particles to analyse three biological replicates. Extracted proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 60-min gradient for fibre preparations and a 140-min gradient for virion.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.7.0) through concomitant searches against Mimivirus reunion, classical contaminant databases (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases. The Proline software was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide score ≥ 25, peptide length ≥ 6, peptide-spectrum-match identification false discovery rate < 1% as calculated on scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation and MS1-based quantification of the identified protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Mimivirus is the prototype of the <i>Mimiviridae</i> family of giant dsDNA viruses. Little is known about the organization of the 1.2 Mb genome inside the membrane-limited nucleoid filling the ~0.5 &#xb5;m icosahedral capsids. Cryo-electron microscopy, cryo-electron tomography, and proteomics revealed that it is encased into a ~30-nm diameter helical protein shell surprisingly composed of two GMC-type oxidoreductases, which also form the glycosylated fibrils decorating the capsid. The genome is arranged in 5- or 6-start left-handed super-helices, with each DNA-strand lining the central channel. This luminal channel of the nucleoprotein fiber is wide enough to accommodate oxidative stress proteins and RNA polymerase subunits identified by proteomics. Such elegant supramolecular organization would represent a remarkable evolutionary strategy for packaging and protecting the genome, in a state ready for immediate transcription upon unwinding in the host cytoplasm. The parsimonious use of the same protein in two unrelated substructures of the virion is unexpected for a giant virus with thousand genes at its disposal.

### Keywords
Mimivirus reunion, Genomic fibre, Virion, Nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


