### Accession
PXD035734

### Title
AP-MS of ALPK3 in cardiomyocytes

### Description
Pathogenic mutations in alpha kinase 3 (ALPK3) cause cardiomyopathy and a range of musculoskeletal defects. How ALPK3 mutations result in disease remains unclear and little is known about this atypical kinase. Using a suite of engineered human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) we show that ALPK3 localizes to the sarcomere, specifically at the M-Band. Both sarcomeric organization and calcium kinetics were disrupted in ALPK3 deficient hPSC derived cardiomyocytes. Further, cardiac organoids derived from ALPK3 knockout hPSCs displayed reduced force generation. Phosphoproteomic profiling of wildtype and ALPK3 null hPSC derived cardiomyocytes revealed ALPK3-dependant phospho-peptides were enriched for proteins involved in sarcomere function and protein quality control. We demonstrate that ALPK3 binds to the selective autophagy receptor SQSTM1 (Sequestome 1) and is required for the sarcomeric localization of SQSTM1. We propose that ALPK3 is a myogenic kinase with an integral role in the intracellular signaling networks underlying sarcomere maintenance required for continued cardiac contractility.

### Sample Protocol
Lactate purified cardiomyocytes expressing either empty vector control or FLAG-ALPK3 were washed with cold PBS prior to lysis in Co-IP buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 0.1% triton X-100). Lysates were incubated at 4C with agitation for 1 hour. Insoluble matter was pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000xg for 15 minutes at 4C. Each reaction was incubated in 2ug of anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma F1804) for 2 hours at 4C and incubated with 40ul washed Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen 10003D) for 1 hour. Beads were collected by magnetic separation and washed twice in cold lysis buffer followed by three washes in cold PBS. Buffer was aspirated and the beads were snap frozen on dry ice. Beads were resuspended in 50 µl of 2M urea, 50mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 1mM TCEP, 5mM CAA and 0.2ug trypsin and 0.2ug of LysC, and digested overnight at 37C with shaking at 1800RPM. Peptides were removed at diluted with 150 µl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted on poly(styrenedivinylbenzene)-reversed phase support (SDB-RPS) micro-columns as described previously [PMID: 30190555] (Sigma). The columns were washed with 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA followed by 5% acetonitrile containing 0.2% TFA and then eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 1% ammonium hydroxide and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–950 m/z (60,000 resolution, 2.5 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with HCD of 37 x 16 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (28% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, automatic injection time).  Data were searched with Spectronaut 15.1.210713.50606using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Quantification was performed using MS2-based extracted ion chromatograms employing 3-6 fragment ions >450 m/z with automated fragment-ion interference removal as described previously [PMID: 25724911].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Alpk3

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


