### Accession
PXD002731

### Title
Secretome profiling of Cryptococcus neoformans reveals regulation of a subset of virulence-associated proteins and potential biomarkers by protein kinase A

### Description
Background: The pathogenic yeast Cryptococcus neoformans causes life-threatening meningoencephalitis in individuals suffering from HIV/AIDS.  The cyclic-AMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signal transduction pathway regulates the production of extracellular virulence factors in C. neoformans, but the influence of the pathway on the secretome has not been investigated.  In this study, we performed quantitative proteomics using galactose-inducible and glucose-repressible expression of the PKA1 gene encoding the catalytic subunit of PKA to identify regulated proteins in the secretome.   Results: We identified 61 secreted proteins and found that changes in PKA1 expression influenced the extracellular abundance of five proteins, including the Cig1 and Aph1 proteins with known roles in virulence.  We also observed a change in the secretome profile upon induction of Pka1 from proteins primarily involved in catabolic and metabolic processes to an expanded set that included proteins for translational regulation and the response to stress.  We further characterized the secretome data using enrichment analysis and by predicting conventional versus non-conventional secretion.  Targeted proteomics of the Pka1-regulated proteins allowed us to identify the secreted proteins in lysates of phagocytic cells containing C. neoformans, and in samples from infected mice.  This analysis also revealed that modulation of PKA1 expression influences the intracellular survival of cryptococcal cells upon phagocytosis.   Conclusions: Overall, we found that the cAMP/PKA pathway regulates specific components of the secretome including proteins that affect the virulence of C. neoformans.  The detection of secreted cryptococcal proteins from infected phagocytic cells and tissue samples suggests their potential utility as biomarkers of infection.

### Sample Protocol
For end-point studies, cells were incubated with agitation at 30°C in MM+D or MM+G for 96 h; for time-course studies, cells were incubated with agitation at 30°C in MM+D or MM+G for 16, 48, 72, and 120 h. Supernatant was collected and proteins were precipitated using a TCA/acteone (time-course) or EtPH/acetate (end-point) precipitation method. An in-solution trypsin digestion was performed followed by dimethyl labeling. Purified peptides were analyzed using a linear-trapping quadrupole - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos; Thermo Fisher Scientific) on-line coupled to an Agilent 1290 Series HPLC using a nanospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For analysis of mass spectrometry data, centroid fragment peak lists were processed with Proteome Discoverer v. 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The search was performed with the Mascot algorithm (v. 2.4) against a database comprised of 6,692 predicted protein sequences from the source organism C. neoformans H99 database (C. neoformans var. grubii H99 Sequencing Project, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, http://www.broadinstitute.org/) using the following parameters: peptide mass accuracy 10 parts per million; fragment mass accuracy 0.6 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with 1 max missed cleavages; fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, variable modifications - methionine oxidation, deamidated N, Q and N-acetyl peptides, dimethyl (K), dimethyl (N-term), dimethyl 2H(4) (K), and dimethyl 2H(4) (N-term),  ESI-TRAP fragment characteristics.  Only those peptides with Ion Scores exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified.  The acceptance criteria for protein identification were as follows: only proteins containing at least one unique peptide with a Mascot score > 25 were considered in the dataset.  Quantitative ratios were extracted from the raw data using Proteome Discoverer.  Proteome Discoverer parameters – Event Detector: mass precision 4 ppm (corresponds to extracted ion chromatograms at  ±12 ppm max error), S/N threshold 1; Precursor Ion Quantifier method set for ‘2 labels’ for the formaldehyde labeled samples; Quantitation Method – Ratio Calculation – Replace Missing Quantitation Values with Minimum Intensity – yes, Use Single Peak Quantitation Channels – yes, - Protein Quantification – Use All Peptides – yes. Experimentally determined fold changes for WT and PGAL7::PKA1 strains grown under Pka1-repressed (glucose-containing medium) and Pka1-induced (galactose-containing medium) conditions were converted to a log2 scale and the average fold change and standard deviation were used for analysis.  A fold change of >10 was used as a cut-off limit for the time-point and end-point analyses.   For the comparative analysis of the time-point samples, the statistical significance of the fold changes of the identified secreted proteins present under both Pka1-repressed and Pka1-induced conditions and at equivalent time points (i.e. 16, 48, 72, and 120 hpi) was assessed for an influence of PKA regulation using a Student’s t-test (p-value < 0.05).  For the comparative analysis of the end-point samples, the statistical significance of the fold changes of the identified secreted proteins present under both Pka1-repressed and Pka1-induced conditions was evaluated using a Student’s t-test (p-value < 0.05).  To confirm the statistically significant Pka1-regulated proteins identified from the end-point analysis, a multiple-hypothesis testing correction was performed on the secretome data using the Benjamini and Hochberg method with a false discovery rate of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; fungal pathogenesis; secretome; pka; virulence factors; biomarkers; multiple reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Kronstad
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia


