### Accession
PXD020984

### Title
SILAC analysis of exosome secretion in response to centrosome amplification

### Description
We performed quantitative proteomics analysis by Stable Isotope Labelling by Amino Acids in Cell culture (SILAC) to understand how centrosome amplification changes the composition of human small extracellular vesicles. We carried out SILAC labelling with medium and heavy isotopes, as it enables the exclusion of contaminant serum proteins, which would be unlabeled (equivalent of light labeling), as well as allowing for simultaneous processing of purification steps to decrease sample-to-sample variability. We isolated small extracellular vesicles by ultracentifugation followed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). All experiments were performed in duplicate with switched SILAC labelling.

### Sample Protocol
PaTu-S.iPLK4 cells with and without the induction of centrosome amplification were grown for 6 passages in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium for SILAC supplemented with 10% Gibco ™ Dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum (ultracentrifuged for 18 hours at 100,000 x g for EV depletion), 600 mg/L Proline and 100 mg/L of either heavy or medium amino acids (Lys8 and Arg10 for heavy, and Lys4 and Arg6 for medium, respectively). We analysed lysates of these cellsfor successful SILAC incorporation, which was at > 99%. Labelled cells were then plated at a density of 1x106 cells in 40 x T175 flasks per condition. 24 hours later flasks were washed in PBS and 15 ml of fresh EV depleted medium supplemented with the correct amino acids (heavy or medium) was added to the cells. 48 hours later, the conditioned medium was harvested and pooled together. EVs were then isolated from the conditioned medium via ultracentrifugation and subsequent SEC fractionation. The experiment was then repeated with the SILAC labelling reversed. Three SEC fractions containing the majority of small extracellular vesicles (fractions 7, 8, & 9) were lysed in 8 M Urea in 50 mM Ammonium bi-carbonate (ABC) (pH 8).  Samples were then sonicated using a Diagenode Bioruptor sonicator at 4C. Samples were sonicated at high power for 15 cycles of 30 seconds on and 30 seconds off. 10 mM DTT was added for 20 minutes at room temperature to reduce proteins followed by alkylation using addition of Iodoacetamide (55mM final conc.) for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein quantification was then performed using BCA assay. 15 µg of protein was then selected per sample and diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ABC. Samples were the subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion overnight at 25C. The digested peptides were then acidified and desalted via stagetipping. Peptides were died by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 10 μl of buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.5% acetic acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1 µg of each digested SILAC mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and SILAC quantification. The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). A precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications whilst carbamidomethylation was applied as a fixed modification. Two trypsin miss-cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. SILAC multiplicity was set to 3, with Lys4 and Arg6 selected as medium, and Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy SILAC labels. Minimum SILAC ratio count was set at 1. All raw files were searched together, with the match between runs option enabled. All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.5.5.3), using the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file. Briefly, normalized SILAC H/M intensities were converted to Log 2 scale. Reverse (decoy) hits, potential contaminants, and proteins identified only by modified peptides were filtered out. Ratio values were then median subtracted. Category enrichment analysis was performed using the Fisher exact test function within Perseus. Scatter plots of the SILAC ratio values were also generated by Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Centrosome amplification, Small extracellular vesicles., Silac, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.


