### Accession
PXD009573

### Title
SMARCA4_Phosphopeptide

### Description
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) as part of the PTEFb complex promotes transcriptional elongation by promoting RNAPII pause release. We now report that, paradoxically, CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell screen, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression and cell differentiation, along with activation of endogenous retrovirus (ERV) genes. CDK9 inhibition dephosphorylates the SWI/SNF protein SMARCA4 and represses HP1α expression, both of which contribute to gene reactivation. Based on gene activation, we developed the highly selective and potent CDK9 inhibitor MC180295 (IC50 =5nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in-vitro and is effective in in-vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition sensitizes with the immune checkpoint inhibitor α-PD-1 in vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Kinase Assay An in vitro Kinase assay was performed using purified CDK9/Cyclin T1 (1.2 ug) and SMARCA4 (3 ug), in the presence or absence of MC180295 compound, and using KAS buffer and incubation at 30ºC for 1hr. Protein reaction was stopped by heating at 65 ºC for 5 minutes and samples were desalted using 3kDa cutoff filter (nanosep 3K Omega PALL®). Samples were processed for mass spectrometer analysis using in-StageTip method for digestion and peptide purification before performing LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
The label-free proteomics analysis was performed using the nanoelectrospray ionization (ESI) tandem MS with a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The complete system was fully controlled by Xcalibur software (Version 3.0.63). Mass spectra processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388. The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot Server 2.2.07 for searching against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID=9606, released 2017-05-10. 42,153 sequences). Mascot search parameters were set as follows: species, Homo sapiens; enzyme: trypsin; maximal two missed cleavage; dynamic modifications: phospho (S, T) and phospho (Y); mass tolerance: 20 ppm for precursor peptide ions and 0.4 dalton tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions. Phosphopeptides matches were filtered using an ion score cutoff of 20.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) promotes transcriptional elongation through RNAPII pause release. We now report that CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell drug screen with genetic confirmation, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression, cell differentiation, and activation of endogenous retrovirus genes. CDK9 inhibition dephosphorylates the SWI/SNF protein BRG1, which contributes to gene reactivation. By optimization through gene expression, we developed a highly selective CDK9 inhibitor (MC180295, IC50&#xa0;= 5&#xa0;nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in&#xa0;vitro and is effective in in&#xa0;vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition sensitizes to the immune checkpoint inhibitor &#x3b1;-PD-1 in&#xa0;vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Keywords
Cdk9, Brg1, Epigenetics

### Affiliations
Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Moulder Center for Drug Discovery Professor Lewis Katz School of Medicine Member Fox Chase Cancer Institute Director of Proteomics/Metabolomics Temple University School of Pharmacy 3307 N Broad Street Room 552 Philadelphia, PA 19140 Tel: 215 707 9228
Assistant Professor 
Pharmacy School 
Temple University

### Submitter
Carlos Barrero

### Lab Head
Dr Salim Merali
Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Moulder Center for Drug Discovery Professor Lewis Katz School of Medicine Member Fox Chase Cancer Institute Director of Proteomics/Metabolomics Temple University School of Pharmacy 3307 N Broad Street Room 552 Philadelphia, PA 19140 Tel: 215 707 9228


