### Accession
PXD019908

### Title
Proteomics analysis of rat primary myocyte and neuron-myocyte co-cultures

### Description
Alterations in autonomic function are known to occur in cardiac conditions including sudden cardiac death. Cardiac stimulation via sympathetic neurons can potentially trigger arrhythmias. Dissecting direct neural-cardiac interactions at the cellular level is technically challenging and understudied due to the lack of experimental model systems and methodologies. Here we demonstrate the utility of optical interrogation of sympathetic neurons and their effects on macroscopic cardiomyocyte network dynamics to address research targets such as the effects of adrenergic stimulation via the release of neurotransmitters, the effect of neuronal numbers on cardiac wave behaviour and the applicability of optogenetics in mechanistic in vitro studies. We present novel methodologies to study neuron-cardiomyocyte interactions involving optogenetic selective probing and all-optical electrophysiology to measure electrical activity in an automated fashion, illustrating the power and high-throughput capability of such interrogations. We present new findings on how neurons impact cardiac macroscopic wave properties, the links between neuron density and cardiac firing rates as well as the challenges and benefits of macroscopic co-cultures as experimental model systems.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Cell lysates were mixed with an equal volume of reducing SDS-PAGE sample buffer, heat denatured (95°C for 10 min) and run into the upper part of a Tris-Glycine 8-16% gel (185V, 10m min). Protein material was excised after Coomassie blue staining and cut into 1 – 2 mm3 gel pieces, which were placed into 1.5 mL sample tubes. Gel pieces were rinsed twice with wash solution for 18h in total (200 μL, 50% methanol, 5% acetic acid). The solutions were removed and gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile (200 μL, 5 min). Supernatant were removed and gel pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 3 min. Disulfide reduction was performed with 10 mM DTT (30 μL) for 0.5 h, followed by alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide (30 μL) for 0.5 h. Supernatants were removed from the gel samples and dehydration with acetonitrile and evaporation performed as described above. Gel pieces were washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (200 μL, 10 min). Supernatants were removed and dehydration performed with acetonitrile and evaporation as above. The gel samples were then rehydrated on ice with freshly prepared trypsin solution (30 μL, 20 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin [Promega] in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). After rehydration excess trypsin solution was removed and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (10 μL) was added to prevent dehydration of gel pieces. Gel samples were digested at 37ºC for 18h. The gel pieces were then extracted sequentially with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (60 μL), 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (60 μL) and 85% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (60 μL). The combined extracts were evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge and were redissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (20 μL) on an ultrasonic bath and transferred into LC-MS sample vials. LC-MS/MS analysis A Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano pump at 300 nL/min flow rate was used for analytical separation of digested peptides. A C18, 75 µm x 50 cm (2.6 µm particle size, 150 A; part number: 16126-507569 Thermo Scientific) analytical column was used for separation of peptides and the column temperature was 50 oC. Mobile phase used was: A – 0.1% v/v formic acid in water (LC-MS grade) and B – 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile (LC-MS grade) and a two hour linear gradient was applied reaching 40% B at 120min followed by column wash (90% B) and column re-equilibration (3% B). A Dionex UltiMate 300 RS pump was used for desalting the peptide. A C18 PepMap (µ-Precolumn, 300 µM I.D. x 5 mm, 100 µm particle size, 100 A; Part number: 160454, Thermo Scientific) trapping column was used for trapping peptides. Buffer used for trapping and desalting peptides was 0.05% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water (LC-MS grade). 1 µL of samples was injected and allowed for desalting for 3 minutes at 10 µL/min flow rate. After 3 minutes of desalting the trapping valve was changed and directed (backward flush) to analytical column for separation of all trapped peptides on trapping column. A bench top Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used for data acquisition. A Top10 data dependent acquisition (DDA) method was used. Mass spectrometer was calibrated, for mass accuracy using positive ion calibration mixture provided by mass spectrometer manufacturer, prior to data acquisition. The conditions for the DDA mode were; Chromatographic peak width: 10 s, the Full MS conditions used- resolution: 70,000, AGC target: 1e6, maximum IT (injection time): 100 ms, scan range: 300 to 2000 m/z. The dd-MS2 conditions - resolution: 17,500. The AGC target conditions- 5e4, maximum IT: 100 ms, loop count: 10 (i.e. Top 10), isolation width: 1.6 m/z, fixed first mass: 120.0 m/z, and the data dependent (dd) settings -under fill ratio: 10% (it sets up a minimum intensity threshold of 5e4 ions), charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match; preferred, dynamic exclusion: 30 s. Normalised Collison Energy (NCE) of 27 was used for fragmentation of peptides in a high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell. This method allows the selection, fragmentation and detection of ten precursors in a duty cycle time of 1.42 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1) and the UniProt_SwissProt database with taxonomy restriction ‘rat’ (v2016.06.13, number of entries 549,832, after taxonomy filter: 7,954). The following parameters were applied: peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, 13C = 2, fragment mass tolerance 0.06 Da, number of missed cleavages: two, instrument type: Q-Exactive, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation (Cys), variable modifications: Oxidation (Met). A target-decoy search strategy was employed and search results were displayed at 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac stimulation via sympathetic neurons can potentially trigger arrhythmias. We present approaches to study neuron-cardiomyocyte interactions involving optogenetic selective probing and all-optical electrophysiology to measure activity in an automated fashion. Here we demonstrate the utility of optical interrogation of sympathetic neurons and their effects on macroscopic cardiomyocyte network dynamics to address research targets such as the effects of adrenergic stimulation via the release of neurotransmitters, the effect of neuronal numbers on cardiac behavior, and the applicability of optogenetics in mechanistic in&#xa0;vitro studies. As arrhythmias are emergent behaviors that involve the coordinated activity of millions of cells, we image at macroscopic scales to capture complex dynamics. We show that neurons can both decrease and increase wave stability and re-entrant activity in culture depending on their induced activity-a finding that may help us understand the often conflicting results seen in experimental and clinical studies.

### Keywords
Cardiomyocyte network dynamics; cardiac arrhythmias; myocyte; co-culture

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Du Cane Road,  London W12 0NN,  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Holger B R Kramer
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Du Cane Road,  London W12 0NN,  United Kingdom


