### Accession
PXD029580

### Title
Molecular determinants of the crosstalk between endosomal microautophagy and chaperone-mediated autophagy

### Description
Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) and endosomal microautophagy (eMI) are pathways for selective degradation of cytosolic proteins in endo-lysosomal compartments. These autophagic processes share as a first step the recognition of the same five amino acid motif in substrate proteins by the hsc70 chaperone, therefore raising the possibility of a regulatory network linking the two pathways. In this work, we demonstrate the existence of a compensatory relationship between CMA and eMI and identify a role for the chaperone protein Bag6 in triage and internalization of eMI substrates into the late endosome. Association and dynamics of Bag6 at the late endosome membrane change during starvation which we found that, contrary to other autophagic pathways, causes a decline in eMI activity. Collectively, we establish a coordinated function of eMI with CMA, identify the interchangeable subproteome degraded by these pathways and start to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that facilitate the switch between them.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse LE/MVBs were isolated after tissue homogenization. LE/MVBs were isolated from rodent livers through consecutive discontinuous density gradients made of sucrose and Percoll (GE Healthcare) as described previously (Krause and Cuervo, 2021; Sahu et al., 2011). Endolysosomal compartment integrity after isolation was assessed by measuring enzymatic β-hexosaminidase activity (Storrie and Madden, 1990) in the endolysosomal supernatant after pelleting the endolysosomal compartment. Only isolations with less than 10% membrane breakage were used for subsequent analyses. All solutions were supplemented with protease inhibitor (10mM leupeptin, 10mM 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 1mM pepstatin, 100mM EDTA) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 (Sigma P5726) and 3 (Sigma P0044). For the mass spectrometry analysis of LE/MVBs and lysosomes from WT and L2AKO mice, isolated LE/MBVs were denatured by the addition of 50uL of LYSE buffer solution from the PreOmics iST sample preparation kit, and further sample preparation was performed according to the iST kit protocol.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were then resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and approximately 1μg of digested peptides per sample were loaded onto a 75μm ID column packed with 25cm of Reprosil C18 1.9μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC, Germany) by a nanoElute high-pressure liquid chromatography system (Bruker) interfaced to the mass spectrometer via a captiveSpray source. The column was operated at 50oC, and peptides were directly eluted into a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) over the course of a 50-minute acquisition by gradient elution from 4-17%B in from 0-20min, followed by an increase to 28%B from 20-40min, and then a ramp to 95%B to wash the column.  The gradient was delivered by the nanoElute (Bruker), and the composition of mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile, respectively. A data-dependent PASEF acquisition method was used for data acquisition using the following parameters:  100-1700 m/z range, 0.85-1.30 V*s/cm2 trapped ion mobility range, 1600V spray voltage, intensities of 200,000 were repeated for in PASEF 0 times, intensities of 100,000 to 200,000 were repeated for in PASEF 5 times, intensities of less than 100,000 were repeated for in PASEF 10 times, 4 PASEF MS/MS scans with a total cycle time of 0.53 s, and active exclusion for 0.4 min. All data were searched against the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded 7/2/2020). Peptide and protein identification searches were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm (Cox et al., 2014), and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate. Label-free quantification and statistical testing was performed using the MSstats statistical R-package (Choi et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Autophagy

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


