### Accession
PXD038756

### Title
Identification of proteins in the plasma associated with heifer infertility

### Description
We carried out an experiment to test the hypothesis that differences in protein abundance due to fertility fitness would be shared between heifers of different breeds. We produced proteome data from the plasma collected from 22 heifers (purebred Angus heifers (n=12), purebred Holstein (n=10) heifers). The protein Alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase FTO was more abundant in the plasma collected from Fertile heifers relative to Sub-fertile counterparts (FDR < 0.05).

### Sample Protocol
Blood was collected from the jugular vein at the time of artificial insemination. Plasma was separated by two steps of centrifugation to remove cells. Samples were processed utilizing S-Trap micro columns (Protofi) and trypsin. Recovered peptides were analyzed via LC-ESI-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid instrument (Thermo) running each sample in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed and processed utilizing Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5 (Thermo) merging the results from a Sequest HT search and a Mascot server v. 2.7 (Matrix Science) search of the bovine reference proteome downloaded from UniProt and a common contaminants database provided with Proteome Discoverer. Simultaneous searching of a decoy database allowed for determination of a false discovery rate. Protein quantities were the sum of the intensities of the associated peptides. Values were normalized based on total protein abundances and averaged for duplicate runs prior to statistical analyisis.

### Publication Abstract
Infertility or subfertility is a critical barrier to sustainable cattle production, including in heifers. The development of heifers that do not produce a calf within an optimum window of time is a critical factor for the profitability and sustainability of the cattle industry. In parallel, heifers are an excellent biomedical model for understanding the underlying etiology of infertility because well-nourished heifers can still be infertile, mostly because of inherent physiological and genetic causes. Using a high-density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip, we collected genotypic data, which were analyzed using an association analysis in PLINK with Fisher's exact test. We also produced quantitative transcriptome data and proteome data. Transcriptome data were analyzed using the quasi-likelihood test&#xa0;followed by the Wald's test, and the likelihood test and proteome data were analyzed using a generalized mixed model and Student's t-test. We identified two SNPs significantly associated with heifer fertility (rs110918927, chr12: 85648422, P = 6.7 &#xd7; 10<sup>-7</sup>; and rs109366560, chr11:37666527, P = 2.6 &#xd7; 10<sup>-5</sup>). We identified two genes with differential transcript abundance (eFDR &#x2264; 0.002) between the two groups (Fertile and Sub-Fertile): Adipocyte Plasma Membrane Associated Protein (APMAP, 1.16 greater abundance in the Fertile group) and Dynein Axonemal Intermediate Chain 7 (DNAI7, 1.23 greater abundance in the Sub-Fertile group). Our analysis revealed that the protein Alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase FTO was more abundant in the plasma collected from Fertile heifers relative to their Sub-Fertile counterparts (FDR &lt; 0.05). Lastly, an integrative analysis of the three datasets identified a series of molecular features (SNPs, gene transcripts, and proteins) that discriminated 21 out of 22 heifers correctly based on their fertility category. Our multi-omics analyses confirm the complex nature of female fertility. Very importantly, our results also highlight differences in the molecular profile of heifers associated with fertility that transcend the constraints of breed-specific genetic background.

### Keywords
Infertility, Proteome, Heifer, Cow

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
School of Animal Sciences, Virginia Tech.

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Biase
School of Animal Sciences, Virginia Tech.


