### Accession
PXD018653

### Title
Capsicum leaf and meristem LC-MS/MS

### Description
Capsicum frutescens is one of the chilli varieties, with erect, highly pungent fruits. This variety is used to prepare hot sauces, chilli concentrates, and oleoresin. Its fruits are also used in traditional Indian medicine to treat arthritis and zoster related pain management.  Infection by Polyphagotarsonemus latus commonly called as the Broad mite in chilli, make the leaves turn coppery and dark, show symptoms of leaf curl and stunted growth that eventually results in low yield and economic loss.  We carried out gel-free, labelled mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis of leaves and apical meristems of healthy and infected plants. We identified a total of 5799 proteins, of which total of which, 1677 proteins found to dysregulated in infested plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was carried by sucrose based extraction buffer. Proteins were digested by trypsin, reduced and alkylated using DTT and IAA respectively. Peptides obtained from samples i.e. infected leaf, infected meristem, healthy meristem and healthy leaf were labelled with TMT 6 plex kit labels i.e. TMT 126,128,129 and 130 respectively. LC-MS/MS(3 runs per fraction) was done following bRPLC fractionation (12 fractions).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis was carried out using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 platform (MOSCOT and SEQUEST. Capsicum annuum (Pepper Zunla 1 Ref_v1.0) FASTA files were used as reference. False discovery rate was set to 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Further data analysis was carried out using STRING, PANTHER and KEGG databases

### Publication Abstract
Plant-pathogen interactions are key biological events that shape ecological dynamics, food production, agriculture and economy. In this context, <i>Capsicum frutescens</i> is an economically and culturally significant chili pepper plant grown widely across the globe as an essential ingredient of hot sauces, chili concentrates, oleoresin flavors, and also in traditional medicines. An important pathogen that limits chili cultivation causing low yield and economic loss is the broad mite, <i>Polyphagotarsonemus latus</i>. Broad mite-infested chili plants have stunted growth and leaves appear coppery and dark, which show symptoms of leaf curl and more importantly the smaller fruits unfit for consumption. The molecular mechanisms of how broad mite affect chili remain poorly understood. In this study, we report a tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis of leaves and apical meristems of healthy and infected chili pepper plants. In total, we identified 5799 proteins, of which 1677 proteins were found to be differentially regulated in infested plants. Related signaling pathways of the differentially expressed proteins were examined using bioinformatics tools. Predominantly, we identified pathways associated with jasmonic acid synthesis, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and plant defense and hormone signal transduction. We also observed upregulation of several enzymes of the phenylpropanoid and carotenoid biosynthetic pathways. This study provides the first in-depth proteomic analysis that correlates broad mite infestation in chili and dysregulation of various pathways that take part in plant defense. In the future, data can be extrapolated for innovation in pest management methods whose ecological footprints are better understood.

### Keywords
Birds eye chilli, Capsicum frutescens, Jeerige menasu, Broad mite infection, Polyphagotarsonemus latus

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Applied Biology 
St Aloysius College (Autonomous)
Mangalore 575003
Laboratory of Applied Biology  St Aloysius College (Autonomous) Mangalore 575003, INDIA

### Submitter
Sachin Patavardhan

### Lab Head
Dr Sachin S Patavardhan
Laboratory of Applied Biology  St Aloysius College (Autonomous) Mangalore 575003, INDIA


