### Accession
PXD017622

### Title
A divergent cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase complex controls the atypical replication of Plasmodium berghei during gametogony and parasite transmission.

### Description
Cell cycle transitions are generally triggered by variation in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) bound to cyclins. Malaria-causing parasites have a life cycle with unique cell-division cycles, and a repertoire of divergent CDKs and cyclins of poorly understood function and interdependency. We show that Plasmodium berghei CDK-related kinase 5 (CRK5), is a critical regulator of atypical mitosis in the gametogony and is required for mosquito transmission. It phosphorylates canonical CDK motifs of components in the pre-replicative complex and is essential for DNA replication. We also provide evidence for indirect regulation of the concomitant M-phase progression. During a replicative cycle, CRK5 stably interacts with a single Plasmodium-specific cyclin (SOC2), although we obtained no evidence of SOC2 cycling by transcription, translation or degradation. Our results provide evidence that during Plasmodium male gametogony, this unique cyclin/CDK pair fills the functional space of multiple eukaryotic cell-cycle kinases controlling DNA replication and M-phase progression.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations (IPs) of protein were performed with purified gametocytes. For HA-based IPs, samples were fixed for 10 min with 1% formaldehyde. Parasites were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) and the supernatant was subjected to affinity purification with anti-HA antibody (Sigma) or anti-GFP antibody (Invitrogen) conjugated to magnetics beads. Beads were resuspended in 100 μl of 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). Two μl of 50 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) were added and the reduction was carried out at 37°C for 1h. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 μl of 400 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Urea was reduced to 1 M by addition of 500 μl AB and overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 5 author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license. bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.14.928432. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the 23 μl of freshly prepared 0.2 μg/μl trypsin (Promega) in AB. Supernatants were collected and completely dried under speed-vacuum. Samples were then desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions, completely dried under speedvacuum and stored at -20°C. Liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MSMS). Samples were diluted in 20 μl loading buffer (5% acetonitrile [CH3CN], 0.1% formic acid [FA]) and 2 μl were injected onto the column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed either on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, 3 μm C18, 75 μm x 20 mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm (QExactive) or 500 mm (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos), 2μm C18, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation used a gradient of H2O/0.1% FA (solvent A) and CH3CN/0.1 % FA (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0 to 5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B for 10 min and finally for 15 min at 10 % A and 90 % B. Flow rate was 250 nL/min for a total run time of 90 min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on the Q-Exactive Plus with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 70,000 Full width at half maximum (FWHM) followed by MS2 scans on up to 15 selected precursors. MS1 was performed with an AGC target of 3 x 106 , a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM with an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.6 m/z and 27% normalised collision energy was used for higherenergy collisional dissociation (HCD). DDA was performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within a 3 sec maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license. bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.14.928432. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the 24 an AGC target of 4 x 105 , a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap with a rapid scan rate, an AGC target of 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations (IPs) of protein were performed with purified gametocytes. For HA-based IPs, samples were fixed for 10 min with 1% formaldehyde. Parasites were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) and the supernatant was subjected to affinity purification with anti-HA antibody (Sigma) or anti-GFP antibody (Invitrogen) conjugated to magnetics beads. Beads were resuspended in 100 μl of 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). Two μl of 50 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) were added and the reduction was carried out at 37°C for 1h. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 μl of 400 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Urea was reduced to 1 M by addition of 500 μl AB and overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 5 author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license. bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.14.928432. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the 23 μl of freshly prepared 0.2 μg/μl trypsin (Promega) in AB. Supernatants were collected and completely dried under speed-vacuum. Samples were then desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions, completely dried under speedvacuum and stored at -20°C. Liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MSMS). Samples were diluted in 20 μl loading buffer (5% acetonitrile [CH3CN], 0.1% formic acid [FA]) and 2 μl were injected onto the column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed either on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, 3 μm C18, 75 μm x 20 mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm (QExactive) or 500 mm (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos), 2μm C18, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation used a gradient of H2O/0.1% FA (solvent A) and CH3CN/0.1 % FA (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0 to 5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B for 10 min and finally for 15 min at 10 % A and 90 % B. Flow rate was 250 nL/min for a total run time of 90 min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on the Q-Exactive Plus with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 70,000 Full width at half maximum (FWHM) followed by MS2 scans on up to 15 selected precursors. MS1 was performed with an AGC target of 3 x 106 , a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM with an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.6 m/z and 27% normalised collision energy was used for higherenergy collisional dissociation (HCD). DDA was performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within a 3 sec maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license. bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.14.928432. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the 24 an AGC target of 4 x 105 , a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap with a rapid scan rate, an AGC target of 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for HCD.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Kinase, Parasite, Cyclin, Warwick-rtp, Cyclin-dependent

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rita Tewari
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH


