### Accession
PXD044118

### Title
Early-adulthood spike in protein translation drives aging via juvenile hormone/germline signaling

### Description
Protein translation (PT) declines with age in invertebrates, rodents, and humans. It has been assumed that elevated PT at young ages is beneficial to health and PT ends up dropping as a passive byproduct of aging. In Drosophila, we show that a transient elevation in PT during early-adulthood exerts long-lasting negative impacts on aging trajectories and proteostasis in later-life. Blocking the early-life PT elevation robustly improves life-/health-span and prevents age-related protein aggregation, whereas transiently inducing an early-life PT surge in long-lived fly strains abolishes their longevity/proteostasis benefits. The early-life PT elevation triggers proteostatic dysfunction, silences stress responses, and drives age related functional decline via juvenile hormone-lipid transfer protein axis and germline signaling. Our findings suggest that PT is adaptively suppressed after early-adulthood, alleviating later-life proteostatic burden, slowing down age-related functional decline, and improving lifespan. Our work provides a theoretical framework for understanding how lifetime PT dynamics shape future aging trajectories.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation: Detergent-soluble/-insoluble protein extracts were isolated, as described above. For each age, n=8/group (each derived from whole bodies of 15 female flies) was used. Proteomics analysis was carried out as previously referenced (Ludwig et. al, Proteomics 16, 516-531, doi:10.1002/pmic.201500133 (2016).) with minor changes, under section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 under Protein IDs for GeLC. All proteins extracts were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), and a set amount of protein per sample was diluted to 35μL using NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Proteins were then reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10 minutes prior to loading everything onto Novex NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Invitrogen) and separated (35 min at constant 200V). The gels stained overnight with Novex Colloidal Blue (Invitrogen). Following de-staining, each lane was cut into multiple MW fractions (3-8 fractions) and equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc). Each gel plug was then digested overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega), following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA)/ ddH2O at 0.1μg/μL.  Mass spectrometry: Peptide digests (8μL each) were injected onto a 1260 Infinity nHPLC stack (Agilent Technologies) and separated using a 75 micron I.D. x 15 cm pulled tip C-18 column (Jupiter C-18 300 Å, 5 micron, Phenomenex). This system runs in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer, equipped with a Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and all data were collected in CID mode. The nHPLC is configured with binary mobile phases that includes solvent A (0.1% FA in ddH2O), and solvent B (0.1% FA in 15% ddH2O/85% ACN), programmed as follows; 10min @ 5% B (2μL/ min, load), 90min @ 5%-40% B (linear: 0.5nL/min, analyze), 5min @ 70% B (2μL/ min, wash), 10min @ 0% B (2μL/ min, equilibrate). Following parent ion scan (300-1200m/z @ 60k resolution), fragmentation data (MS2) was collected on the most intense 15 ions. For data dependent scans, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, and exclusion duration of 90s.

### Data Protocol
MS data conversion/searches: XCalibur RAW files were collected in profile mode, centroided, and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1. mgf files were then created using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5) for all scans. The data were then searched using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which is set for three maximum missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 20ppm, trypsin digestion, variable modification C @ 57.0293, and M @ 15.9949 as a base setting, with additional PTM’s (ex: Phos, Ox, GlcNAc, etc.) that may be applied at a later time as determined to be of importance experimentally. Searches were performed with a species specific subset of the UniProtKB database. Peptide filtering, grouping, and quantification: The list of peptide IDs generated based on SEQUEST search results was filtered using Scaffold (Protein Sciences, Portland Oregon). Scaffold filters and groups all peptides to generate and retain only high confidence IDs and generated normalized spectral counts (N675SC’s) across all samples for the purpose of relative quantification. The filter cut-off values were set with minimum peptide length of >5 AA’s, with no MH+1 charge states, with peptide probabilities of >80% C.I., and with the number of peptides per protein ≥2. The protein probabilities were set to a >99.0% C.I., and an FDR<1.0. Scaffold incorporates the two most common methods for statistical validation of large proteome datasets, the false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probability. Relative quantification across experiments was then performed via spectral counting, and when relevant, spectral count abundances were then normalized between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Protein translation (PT) declines with age in invertebrates, rodents, and humans. It has been assumed that elevated PT at young ages is beneficial to health and PT ends up dropping as a passive byproduct of aging. In Drosophila, we show that a transient elevation in PT during early-adulthood exerts long-lasting negative impacts on aging trajectories and proteostasis in later-life. Blocking the early-life PT elevation robustly improves life-/health-span and prevents age-related protein aggregation, whereas transiently inducing an early-life PT surge in long-lived fly strains abolishes their longevity/proteostasis benefits. The early-life PT elevation triggers proteostatic dysfunction, silences stress responses, and drives age-related functional decline via juvenile hormone-lipid transfer protein axis and germline signaling. Our findings suggest that PT is adaptively suppressed after early-adulthood, alleviating later-life proteostatic burden, slowing down age-related functional decline, and improving lifespan. Our work provides a theoretical framework for understanding how lifetime PT dynamics shape future aging trajectories.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Drosophila, Proteomics, Aging, Lcms2

### Affiliations
Director UAB Proteomics Facility, Professor UAB Anesthesiology
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A Mobley
Director UAB Proteomics Facility, Professor UAB Anesthesiology


