### Accession
PXD028116

### Title
Salt stress downregulates 2-hydroxybutyrylation in Arabidopsis siliques

### Description
In this study, we compared the siliques from Arabidopsis thaliana under salt stress (Ss) with those in the control (Cs). The results showed that Khib was abundant in siliques. However, there were certain significant differences between the Ss and the Cs: Totally 3,810 normalized Khib sites on 1,254 proteins were identified in siliques under salt stress, and Khib was up-regulated at 96 sites on 78 proteins while down-regulated at 282 sites on 205 proteins in Ss silique. Among them, 13 proteins, including F4IVN6, Q9M1P5, and Q9LF33, had sites with the most significant regulation Khib modification. Bioinformatics analysis suggests that Khib mainly participates in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and endocytosis. In particular, there were 117 Khib-modified proteins that were mapped to the protein interaction database, and the proteins with the most significant up-regulation of Khib sites were on P46422, O82514, Q38970, Q9LD57, and Q9STW6, while the most down-regulated sites were on Q9M9K1, Q9SF16, O24456, P83484, Q9FWA3, and P54609. In the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, Khib-modified proteins were enriched in several pathways related to energy metabolism, including gluconeogenesis pathway, pentose phosphate pathway, and pyruvate metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (Columbia-0) was taken as the subject of this study. First, the seeds (about 200 seeds per replicate) were vernalized at 4℃ for 3 days, then they were transferred to soil (Nutritional soil (PINDSTRUP): Vermiculite=3:1) for cultivation in an incubator at 24°C (16 h-day/8 h-night). This was followed by salt treatments: for which, 96 seedlings grown for 20-d were watered with 200 mM NaCl solution (marked as “Ss”), and the control without NaCl application (marked as “Cs”). Three weeks after salt treatments, 400 siliques under each treatment were harvested and mixed evenly. All the samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ for later use.

### Data Protocol
1Bioinformatics Annotation Analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). In addition, the proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. The identified proteins domain functional descriptions were annotated by InterProScan, which is based on the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/).  KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main), which is a KEGG online service tool, is adopted to annotate protein’s KEGG database description. Then, the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database was mapped using KEGG mapper (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). 2 Motif Analysis The software MoMo (motif-x algorithm: http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was applied to analyze the motif features of the modified sites.  3 Motif Analysis The software MoMo (motif-x algorithm: http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was applied to analyze the motif features of the modified sites.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is one of the newly discovered post-translational modifications (PTMs) through protein acylation. It has been reported to be widely distributed in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and plays an important role in chromatin conformation change, gene transcription, protein subcellular localization, protein-protein interaction, signal transduction, and cellular proliferation. In this study, the Khib modification proteome of siliques from A. thaliana under salt stress (Ss) and those in the control (Cs) were compared. The results showed that Khib modification was abundant in siliques. Totally 3810 normalized Khib sites on 1254 proteins were identified, and the Khib modification showed a downregulation trend dramatically: it was down-regulated at 282 sites on 205 proteins while was up-regulated at 96 sites on 78 proteins in Ss siliques (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028116 and PXD026643). Among them, 13 proteins, including F4IVN6, Q9M1P5, and Q9LF33, had sites with the most significant regulation of Khib modification. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that the differentially Khib-regulated proteins mainly participated in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and endocytosis. In particular, there were differentially117 Khib-regulated proteins that were mapped to the protein-protein interaction database. In the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, Khib-modified proteins were enriched in several pathways related to energy metabolism, including gluconeogenesis pathway, pentose phosphate pathway, and pyruvate metabolism. Overall, our work reveals the first systematic analysis of Khib proteome in Arabidopsis siliques under salt stress, and sheds a light on the future studies on the regulatory mechanisms of Khib during the salt stress response of plants. SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we found the Khib-modified proteins in silique under salt stress and described the enrichment of Khib-modified proteins involved in the biological processes and cellular localization. Proteins undergoing 2-hydroxyisobutylation were mainly involved in the gluconeogenesis pathway, pentose phosphate pathway, and pyruvate metabolism, suggesting that 2-hydroxyisobutylation affects the energy metabolic pathway, and thus the development of the plant. In addition, specific candidate proteins that may affect plant development under salt stress were selected. This study will provide a theoretical basis for revealing the function and mechanism of these proteins and their 2-hydroxyisobutyryl modifications during the development of silique under salt stress.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana. silique. lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation. salt stress

### Affiliations
 Inner Mongolia Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Physiology and Molecular Biology, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University
Inner Mongolia Agricultural University

### Submitter
Geriqiqige Hong

### Lab Head
Dr Guojing Li
Inner Mongolia Agricultural University


