### Accession
PXD000230

### Title
Membrane enriched proteome of transfected SW480 cells

### Description
This project used membrane-enriched proteomics to compare the membrane proteome of SW480 human colorectal cancer subclones that had been transfected with the full length coding sequence of the beta-6 integrin subunit under an overexpression promoter (SW480OE) against SW480 cells that had been transfected with an ‘empty’ mock vector (SW480M).  Cell lysate samples were enriched for membrane proteins using a modified sodium carbonate stripping method before undergoing peptide immobilised pH gradient isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF). Two IPG-IEF pH ranges were used to increase proteomic coverage: pH3-10 (broad range; BR) and pH3.5-4.5 (narrow range; NR). Each IPG-IEF strip was cut into 24 equal fractions and the peptides eluted. IPG-IEF of each pH range for both cell lines was performed in triplicate, resulting in four triplicate sets of 24 fractions. Data processing and bioinformatics: Spectra were identified against the *Homo sapiens* protein database (derived from Ensembl, Swiss-Prot and NCBI) using X!Tandem and the Global Proteome Machine (GPM) Tornado XE (build date 2010.12.01). GPM searches were set to tryptic peptides under GPM’s default fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.4Da and did not include semi-cleavage. Searches included single acid polymorphisms and default GPM residue modifications (oxidation,dioxidation, carbamidomethyl, deamidation, acetylation).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Many proteins enhance cancer progression toward life-threatening metastases. These include linking proteins called integrins that mediate cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM), consequently altering both function and phenotype. Specific neoexpression of the &#x3b2;6 integrin subunit correlates with the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, metastasis, and poor overall patient survival. While &#x3b2;6 is implicated in these processes, exactly how it affects signaling and/or proteolytic pathways in metastasis remains unclear. A membrane-enriched peptide immobilized pH gradient isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) shotgun proteomics study was undertaken in which subclones of the SW480 colorectal cancer cell line transfected with a vector inducing unregulated &#x3b2;6 integrin overexpression were compared with the "empty" mock vector control cell line. &#x3b2;6 overexpression induced a significant change in 708 proteins and was found to be localized across most intracellular locations, some involving cellular processes and pathways underpinning cancer progression. Proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000230. &#x3b2;6 expression increased cell proliferation 4-fold while decreasing cell adhesion to many integrin ECM substrates. &#x3b2;6 expression also enhanced cell invasion and promoted the expression/repression of many established cancer-related pathways.

### Keywords
Sw480, Membrane proteomics, Integrin, Colorectal cancer, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences

### Submitter
David Cantor

### Lab Head


