### Accession
PXD047040

### Title
Multiplexed Antibody Glycosylation Profiling Using Dual Enzyme Digestion and Liquid Chromatography-Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry Method

### Description
In this study, we used proteomics analysis to confirm the immunoglobulin purification efficiency from human plasma samples. Protein components of plasma, supernatant fraction after affinity purification, and the on bead digestion fraction were performed.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were reduced by using dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
We used Maxquant to do the label free quantitative protein analysis, and used the LFQ intensities to calculated major components of the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody glycosylation plays a crucial role in the humoral immune response by regulating effector functions and influencing the binding affinity to immune cell receptors. Previous studies have focused mainly on the immunoglobulin G (IgG) isotype owing to the analytical challenges associated with other isotypes. Thus, the development of a sensitive and accurate analytical platform is necessary to characterize antibody glycosylation across multiple isotypes. In this study, we have developed an analytical workflow using antibody-light-chain affinity beads to purify IgG, IgA, and IgM from 16&#xa0;&#x3bc;L of human plasma. Dual enzymes, trypsin and Glu-C, were used during on-bead digestion to obtain enzymatic glycopeptides and protein-specific surrogate peptides. Ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with triple quadrupole mass spectrometry was used in order to determine the sensitivity and specificity. Our platform targets 95 glycopeptides across the IgG, IgA, and IgM isotypes, as well as eight surrogate peptides representing total IgG, four IgG classes, two IgA classes, and IgM. Four stable isotope-labeled internal standards were added after antibody purification to calibrate the preparation and instrumental bias during analysis. Calibration curves constructed using serially diluted plasma samples showed good curve fitting (R<sup>2</sup> &gt; 0.959). The intrabatch and interbatch precision for all the targets had relative standard deviation of less than 29.6%. This method was applied to 19 human plasma samples, and the glycosylation percentages were calculated, which were comparable to those reported in the literature. The developed method is sensitive and accurate for Ig glycosylation profiling. It can be used in clinical investigations, particularly for detailed humoral immune profiling.

### Keywords
Liquid chromatography; mass spectrometry; human immunoglobulin; n-glycosylation; antibody profiling

### Affiliations
Taipei Medical University

### Submitter
I-LIn Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr I-Lin Tsai
Taipei Medical University


