### Accession
PXD001079

### Title
Preterm birth increases endogenous human milk peptide release compared to term birth

### Description
Hundreds of naturally occurring milk peptides have been found in term human milk. Whether there are differences between the levels of these peptides between term and preterm milk remains unknown. Premature milk is produced before complete maturation of the mammary gland and is under the influence of a different hormonal milieu, which could change enzymatic activity and protein expression within the mammary gland and result in an altered peptide profile. We employed nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to identify naturally occurring peptides in term and premature milks at multiple time-points across lactation and compare the abundances of these peptides. We found that preterm milks produced more unique peptide sequences than term milks on average (359 vs. 286). The peptides identified were searched for overlapping sequences with an in-house database of known functional peptides. Specifically, we found that both term and preterm milks contain peptides overlapping with known sequences with antimicrobial, opioid antagonist and immunomodulatory actions. We also compared the enzymes involved in degradation of both milks via bioinformatic analysis. This analysis reveals that plasmin is more active in preterm milk than term milk.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection. Human milk samples were collected from 14 healthy mothers who delivered preterm infants (24–32 weeks of gestation) and from eight healthy mothers, who gave birth to a term infant. Preterm infants were in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) of the UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. Milks were collected at various day of lactation up to 50 days after parturition by pumping on-site or at home with clean electric breast pumps into sterile plastic containers and stored immediately at -20°C. The breast was cleansed with water on a wash cloth (no soap or alcohol) prior to pumping. Milk were transported to UC Davis on ice and then stored at -40°C. Sample preparation. Samples were removed from the freezer and thawed on ice. Peptides were extracted as previously described {Dallas, 2014 #5537}(14), with the following modifications. Briefly, 100 μL of each human milk sample was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The upper lipid layer was removed and the infranate (skim milk) was collected. The centrifugation procedure was repeated once. 100 μL water and 1 μL of 10 μg/mL peptide standards stock solution (containing equal parts Leu-enkephalin, gonadoliberin, angiotensin I and neurotensin; Peptide Calibration Standard Set, ProteoChem, Loves Park, IL, USA) were added to 25 μL skim milk for each sample. Then, 505 μL Folch solution was added and samples were centrifuged at 16,000 xg for 15 min at 4°C. The top layer was collected and dried by centrifugal evaporation (MiVac Quattro concentrator, GeneVac, UK). Samples were rehydrated in 100 μL nanopure water and mixed using a vortex mixer. Remaining proteins were precipitated with 1:1 (sample to solution) 200 g/L TCA, followed by vortexing, centrifugation and collection of the supernatant. Supernatants were applied to 96-well C18 solid-phase extraction plate to purify peptides and eluted as described (14). Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and rehydrated in 40 μL nanopure water for quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide analysis. The analysis was performed with the Agilent nano-liquid chromatography chip-cube 6520 quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometer (Santa Clara, CA, USA). The chip employed contained an enrichment and analytical column packed with a C18 stationary phase. Q-TOF parameters were as described (14). Briefly, the gradient elution solvents were (A) 3% ACN/0.1% FA and (B) 90% ACN/0.1% FA. The gradient employed was ramped from 0–8% B from 0–5 min, 8–26.5% B from 5–24 min, 26.5–100% B from 24–42 min, followed by 100% B for 10 min, 100–0% B from 52¬–55 min and 100% A for 10 min (to re-equilibrate the column). Each sample was run on the Q-TOF in MS-only mode. Creation of peptide library. To create a peptide library, these milk samples were run using the same method but with MS/MS as described (14). Data were exported to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) (14) and analyzed via the downloadable version of X!Tandem (thegpm.org) (10) against a library of human milk proteins derived from previous human milk proteomes (15-17). The parameters used in X!Tandem were as previously described (18). Briefly, no complete modifications were required, but possible phosphorylations of serine, threonine or tyrosine, deamidation of glutamine or asparagine, and oxidation of methionine or tryptophan were allowed. Error tolerances employed were 20 ppm for precursor masses and 40 ppm for fragment masses.  The results from X!Tandem for all samples were compiled for all milk samples. Peptides with e-values ≤ 0.01 were removed (a 99% confidence level threshold). To isolate only unique peptide sequences, all duplicates of sequence, protein and modifications combined were eliminated with the “remove duplicates” function in Excel. Peptides representing identical amino acid sequences and modifications but modified in different positions were also removed as duplicates. Additional library peptides were derived from our previous analyses of milk peptides {Dallas, 2014 #5537}. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange (19) with identifier PXD000688. Peptide identification. Compounds were identified from MS-only runs of all samples by the “Find by Formula” function in Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis version 6 against the peptide library. The library information consisted of compound formula, neutral mass, retention time and a peptide ID. The target data type was small molecule (chromatographic). Only peaks with at least 1,000 ion counts were selected. The selected charge carrier was “protons”. The isotope model was “peptides” and the maximum assigned charge was 7. After compounds were extracted, they were matched to the peptide library by mass and retention time to identify peptides. The database match employed a mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 1 min. Each exact peptide mass in the library was converted to an m/z for all charge states from 1-7 for the search. The resulting peaks were integrated via the “agile” algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human milk, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
David Dallas

### Lab Head
Dr David Dallas
University of California, Davis


