### Accession
PXD031222

### Title
Augmented enterocyte damage during Candida albicans and  Proteus mirabilis coinfection

### Description
The human gut acts as the main reservoir of microbes and a relevant source of life-threatening infections, especially in immunocompromised patients. There, the opportunistic fungal pathogen Candida albicans adapts to the host environment and additionally interacts with residing bacteria.  We investigated fungal-bacterial interactions by coinfecting enterocytes with the yeast Candida albicans and the Gram-negative bacterium Proteus mirabilis resulting in enhanced host cell damage. This synergistic effect was conserved across different P. mirabilis isolates and occurred also with non-albicans Candida species and C. albicans mutants defective in filamentation or candidalysin production.  Using bacterial deletion mutants, we identified the P. mirabilis hemolysin HpmA to be the key effector for host cell destruction.  Spatially separated coinfections demonstrated that synergism between Candida and Proteus is induced by contact, but also by soluble factors. Specifically, we identified Candida-mediated glucose consumption and farnesol production as potential triggers for Proteus virulence. In summary, our study demonstrates that coinfection of enterocytes with C. albicans and P. mirabilis can result in increased host cell damage which is mediated by bacterial virulence factors as a result of fungal niche modification via nutrient consumption and production of soluble factors. This supports the notion that certain fungal-bacterial combinations have the potential to result in enhanced virulence in niches such as the gut and might therefore promote translocation and dissemination.

### Sample Protocol
200 ml KB medium or Candida-conditioned medium (CCM) were inoculated with 1e5 Proteus CFUs/ml and incubated under static cell culture conditions. After incubation, bacteria were harvested with a cell scraper and centrifuged for 15 min at 4 °C and 4200×g. Supernatants were collected separately. 1 tablet cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche) per 50 ml was added, the pH was set to 2 with TFA, and samples were filtered using a 0.2 µm vacuum filter. Pellets were resuspended in 1.5 ml of ice-cold PBS, centrifuged at 13000×g for 1 min, followed by a 2nd washing step with ice-cold distilled water. The washed pellets were taken up in 1 ml lysis buffer (1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB] and one tablet cOmplete Ultra per 10 ml) and transferred to 1.5 ml screw cap tubes filled with 500 μl glass beads and disrupted in the BeadBeater for 40 seconds at 4 m/s². The mix was centrifuged at 10000×g for three minutes at 4 °C and the lysate was separated from the beads and treated with 400 U Benzonase followed by 15 min centrifugation at 18000×g at 4°C. The proteins of the supernatant were concentrated by solid phase extraction on a Chromabond C4 SPE column (Macherey-Nagel), washed with 0.1 % TFA and eluted in 4 ml of 0.1 % TFA in 80:20 (v/v) ACN/water. The eluate was evaporated in a vacuum concentrator to almost dryness. Eluates were either evaporated or precipitated by 20 % TCA for 30 min on ice with a subsequent washing step using 90 % acetone (centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C). Samples were resolubilized in 150 µl 50 mM TEAB in 50:50 (v/v) water/2,2,2-trifluoroethanol. Protein concentrations were measured by the Merck-Millipore Direct Detect system. Samples were reduced and alkylated by 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 12.5 mM 2-chloroacetamide (final concentrations) in the dark for 30 min at 70 °C and 500 rpm shaking. For further purification, proteins were precipitated with 9 times the volume of cold acetone at -80 °C overnight. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 20000×g at 1°C. The resulting pellets were washed twice with 1 ml of 90 % acetone at -80°C and then air-dried. Proteins were resuspended in 200 μl of TEAB buffer and the protein concentration was measured as described above. Proteolytic digestion was performed by incubation with trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) at a protein/protease ratio of 25:1 for 18 hours. Samples were filtered with modified PES 10 kDa MWCO spin filters at 14000×g for 15 min. Further purification was performed by water-saturated ethyl acetate extraction. All samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator, resolubilized in 30 µl of 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN, filtered through 0.2 µm hydrophilic PTFE spin filters (14000×g, 15 min). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to (#1) a QExactive Plus or (#2) a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) HCOOH in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 ACN/water) was performed using the following gradient: 0-4 min at 4% B, 10 min at 7% B, 50 min at 12% B, 100 min at 16% B, 150 min at 25% B, 175 min at 35% B, 200 min at 60 %B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Data acquisition was in Full MS/ddMS2 (1) Top10 or (2) Top 15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of (1) 140000 or (2) 120000 FWHM using a ITmax of 120 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% NCE. MS2 ions were scanned at (1) 17500 or (2) 15000 FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (2021/04/22) Candida albicans SC5314 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000559) and Proteus mirabilis HI4320 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000008319) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.4), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 3.2. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and/or loss of methionine, as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and a search engine score of >30 (Mascot), > 4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) or >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization of the proteome samples was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using abundance values of 75% of the lowest abundance identified per sample. Differential protein abundance was defined as a fold change of >4, ratio-adjusted p-value <0.05 (p-value/log4ratio) and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Enterocytes, Coinfection, Cross-kingdom interaction, Proteus mirabilis, Synergism

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


