### Accession
PXD011727

### Title
PCNA interactome -  SLX4IP acts with SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 to promote interstrand crosslink repair

### Description
We examined the complexity of replication fork composition upon DNA damage by employing a PCNA-based proteomic screen to uncover known and new players involved in replication and replication stress response. We used camptothecin or ultraviolet radiation, that lead to fork-blocking lesions, to establish a comprehensive proteomics map of the replisome under such replication stress conditions. We identified and examined two potential candidate proteins WIZ and SALL1 for their roles in DNA replication and replication stress response.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells containing stable N-terminal BioID, PCNA and BioID-GFP were expanded and seeded into 150 cm2 dishes. Three dishes were used for every purification. Cells were synchronized at the G1/S boundary using a double-thymidine block and released into CPT (1 μg/ml)-containing medium where required. For UV damage, a 10 mJ/cm2 dose was used after cells were released into S phase. All BioID pull downs were independently repeated twice for every condition such as unsynchronous, S-phase, CPT or UV conditions. For BioID labeling, 50 μM biotin was added to media for 16 h. Nocodazole (100 ng/ml) was added to cells to prevent them from entering another round of the cell cycle. Cells were collected and lysed in 1 NETN containing protease inhibitors. Chromatin was collected by centrifuging lysate at 13,000 rpm for 30 min. Chromatin was digested by S7 nuclease (10 U/ml) in chromatin extraction buffer containing protease inhibitors for 30 min at 37°C and clarified by centrifuging at 13,000 rpm for 10 min. Both clarified soluble and chromatin fractions were incubated overnight with pre-equilibrated streptavidin beads on rotation at 4°C. Beads were washed 3 times with 1 NETN buffer with 10 min rotation between every wash. Beads were boiled at 95°C for 10 min in Laemmli buffer and loaded onto 10% SDS-PAGE.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in the laboratory of Dr. Jun Qin at Baylor College of Medicine using their standard procedures. Briefly, the pull-down samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. The gel band containing the entire sample was excised into small pieces, destained completely and digested with trypsin at 37oC overnight. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and vacuum dried. The samples were reconstituted in loading solution (5% methanol containing 0.1% formic acid) and subjected to nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) capillary column was created by packing Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 silica into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter  ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. The peptides were separated with a 75-min discontinuous gradient of 4-26% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 800 nl/min. Separated peptides were directly electro-sprayed into a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite; ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode, and the precursor MS spectrum was scanned at 375-1300 m/z with 240k resolution at 400 m/z (2  106 AGC target). The 25 strongest ions were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation with 35 normalized collision energy and 1 m/z isolation width and detected by using an ion trap with 30 s of dynamic exclusion time, 1  104 AGC target and 100 ms of maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were searched in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) with Mascot algorithm 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The Human UniProt FASTA database (October 2015) containing 70,097 entries was searched. Dynamic modifications included acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine. The precursor mass tolerance was confined within 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Assigned peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate using percolator validation. To identify the significantly enriched proteins in the BioID experiment, we compared the list obtained using BioID-PCNA to the list obtained using control BioID-GFP. The PSMs for each protein were normalized to the total PSMs of that MS run. Then the ratios between BioID-PCNA and BioID-GFP were calculated and statistically analysed with a t test.

### Publication Abstract
Interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic DNA lesions that are repaired via a complex process requiring the coordination of several DNA repair pathways. Defects in ICL repair result in Fanconi anemia, which is characterized by bone marrow failure, developmental abnormalities, and a high incidence of malignancies. SLX4, also known as FANCP, acts as a scaffold protein and coordinates multiple endonucleases that unhook ICLs, resolve homologous recombination intermediates, and perhaps remove unhooked ICLs. In this study, we explored the role of SLX4IP, a constitutive factor in the SLX4 complex, in ICL repair. We found that SLX4IP is a novel regulatory factor; its depletion sensitized cells to treatment with ICL-inducing agents and led to accumulation of cells in the G2/M phase. We further discovered that SLX4IP binds to SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 simultaneously and that disruption of one interaction also disrupts the other. The binding of SLX4IP to both SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 not only is vital for maintaining the stability of SLX4IP protein, but also promotes the interaction between SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1, especially after DNA damage. Collectively, these results demonstrate a new regulatory role for SLX4IP in maintaining an efficient SLX4-XPF-ERCC1 complex in ICL repair.

### Keywords
Bioid, Pcna, Interactome

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA


