### Accession
PXD033023

### Title
Proteomic analysis of matrisome proteins from laser capture microdissected FFPE tissue slides of HnSCC xenograft

### Description
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was used to study tumor matrisome from laser capture microdissected FFPE tissue sections of human neck and squamous cell carcinoma (HnSCC) xenograft grown in mouse.

### Sample Protocol
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained tissue slides of HnSCC xenograft grown in mice were dissected for tumor and stromal part using laser capture dissection. The tissues were sonicated and the lysate containing protein mixtures were reduced and alkylated. For matrisome protein enrichment, the mixture was treated with 7.5 M urea. The proteins were digested using Trypsin/Lys-C in S-trap microcolumn. The peptides were desalted and then injected to nanoLC coupled online to Q-Exactive orbitrap system.  The peptides were separated with mobile phase buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile/water (95:5(v/v)), over a 60-minute gradient (8–35% B in 50 minutes, 35-100% B in 2 minutes and held at 100% B for 8 minutes). Data acquisition was achieved in a polarity mode using high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of data-dependent top 10 abundant precursors in each survey scan over 300-1750 m/z with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The resolution for the survey scan was 120,000 and that of MS2 scans was 15,000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using Maxquant software (version 1.6.10.43) against a database containing reviewed human and reviewed as well as unreviewed mouse sequences of UniprotKB release 2020_03. Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and oxidation of M, P, and K were set as variable modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and false discovery rate was set at 1%. Protein identifications were allowed with at least two identified razor or unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the most common metastatic skin cancer. The prognosis of patients with metastatic cSCC is poor emphasizing the need for new therapies. We have previously reported that the activation of Ras/MEK/ERK1/2 and transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;)/Smad2 signaling in transformed keratinocytes and cSCC cells leads to increased accumulation of laminin-332 and accelerated invasion. Here, we show that the next-generation B-Raf inhibitor PLX8394 blocks TGF-&#x3b2; signaling in ras-transformed metastatic epidermal keratinocytes (RT3 cells) harboring wild-type B-Raf and hyperactive Ras. PLX8394 decreased phosphorylation of TGF-&#x3b2; receptor II and Smad2, as well as p38 activity, MMP-1 and MMP-13 synthesis, and laminin-332 accumulation. PLX8394 significantly inhibited the growth of human cSCC tumors and in vivo collagen degradation in xenograft model. In conclusion, our data indicate that PLX8394 inhibits several serine-threonine kinases in malignantly transformed human keratinocytes and cSCC cells and inhibits cSCC invasion and tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. We identify PLX8394 as a potential therapeutic compound for advanced human cSCC.

### Keywords
Xenograft, Laser capture microdissection, Tumor matrisome

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Life Technologies University of Turku Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Ujjwal Suwal

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Life Technologies University of Turku Turku, Finland


