### Accession
PXD045725

### Title
Structural basis of RNA-induced autoregulation of the DExH-type RNA helicase maleless

### Description
RNA unwinding by DExH-type helicases underlies most RNA metabolism and function. It remains unresolved if and how the basic unwinding reaction of helicases is regulated by auxiliary domains. We explored the interplay between the RecA and auxiliary domains of the RNA helicase maleless (MLE) from Drosophila, using a suite of structural and functional studies.   We discovered that MLE exists in a dsRNA bound open conformation and the auxiliary dsRBD2 domain aligns the substrate RNA with the accessible helicase tunnel. In an ATP-dependent manner, dsRBD2 associates with the helicase module, leading to tunnel closure around ssRNA. Furthermore, our structures provide a rationale for blunt ended dsRNA unwinding and 3’-5’ translocation by MLE. Structure-based MLE mutations confirm the functional relevance of our model for RNA unwinding.    Our findings contribute to our understanding of fundamental mechanics of auxiliary domains in DExH helicase MLE which serves as model for its human ortholog and potentially therapeutic target, DHX9/RHA.

### Sample Protocol
Purified MLEfl-FLAG protein was centrifuged for 15 min at 21000 g at 4°C. MLE and RNA constructs of interest were incubated in a 1:2 molar ratio (0.7 µM MLE, 1.4 µM RNA) in MLE crosslinking buffer MXB-50 (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT) in presence of 1 mM Adenylyl-imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP) and RNase inhibitor RNAsin (0.5 U, Promega) for 25 min at 4°C with head-over-end rotation. Samples were incubated with 1 mM Bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate BS3 for 30 min at 30°C and 950 rpm. The crosslinking reaction was quenched by addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl/pH 8.0 and incubation for 15 min at 30°C and 950 rpm.   Before tryptic digestion, 1 M urea was added to the samples to allow partial unfolding of the protein. Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade was added in a 1:50 ratio to MLE. Tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with 500 rpm agitation in presence of 1 mM DTT. Then 4.3 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 min at 25°C, 500 rpm in the dark. Iodoacetamide was quenched by addition of 20 mM DTT and incubation for 10 min at 25°C and 500 rpm. Samples were acidified by the addition of 0.05% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), the pH was adjusted to 1. SDB-RPS stage tip material was equilibrated by washes with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), activation buffer (30% methanol, 0.2% TFA) and equilibration buffer (0.2% TFA). Trypsinized samples were loaded to the equilibrated stage tips and centrifuged for 15 min at 500 g. After subsequent washes with wash buffer (1% TFA in isopropanol) and equilibration buffer, peptides were eluted into low protein binding Eppendorf reaction tubes with freshly prepared elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1.25% ammonia). After vacuum drying of the samples at 45°C, peptides were resuspended in MS sample buffer (0.3% TFA, 2% ACN in MS grade H2O).   Mass spectrometry was essentially performed as described 86. Briefly, for LC-MS/MS analysis samples were injected in an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system and either separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid or in a 25-cm analytical column (75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a QexactiveHF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states between 3 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were first converted by the proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo scientific) xlinkx workflow for crosslink detection into the .mgf file format. Next, the .mgf files were analyzed by crossfinder 87,88 applying the following filter parameters for identification of cross-linking candidates: False-discovery rate (FDR) ≤0.05, number of fragment ions per spectrum ≥4, number of fragment ions per peptide ≥2, fractional intensity of assigned MS2 peaks ≥0.05, relative filter score: 95. Crosslinks were visualized using the xvis web browser for arch plots 89 (https://xvis.genzentrum.lmu.de).

### Publication Abstract
RNA unwinding by DExH-type helicases underlies most RNA metabolism and function. It remains unresolved if and how the basic unwinding reaction of helicases is regulated by auxiliary domains. We explored the interplay between the RecA and auxiliary domains of the RNA helicase maleless (MLE) from Drosophila using structural and functional studies. We discovered that MLE exists in a dsRNA-bound open conformation and that the auxiliary dsRBD2 domain aligns the substrate RNA with the accessible helicase tunnel. In an ATP-dependent manner, dsRBD2 associates with the helicase module, leading to tunnel closure around ssRNA. Furthermore, our structures provide a rationale for blunt-ended dsRNA unwinding and 3'-5' translocation by MLE. Structure-based MLE mutations confirm the functional relevance of our model for RNA unwinding. Our findings contribute to our understanding of the fundamental mechanics of auxiliary domains in DExH helicase MLE, which serves as a model for its human ortholog and potential therapeutic target, DHX9/RHA.

### Keywords
Helicase, Rna, Mle, Cx-ms, Crosslinking, Cl-ms, Drosophila melanogaster, Qexactivehf

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München
1) Structural and Computational Biology Unit, EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany 2) Chair of Biochemistry IV, Biophysical Chemistry, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany

### Submitter
Anna Kiss

### Lab Head
Dr Janosch Hennig
1) Structural and Computational Biology Unit, EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany 2) Chair of Biochemistry IV, Biophysical Chemistry, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany


