### Accession
PXD010586

### Title
Interaction of the GEF SH3BP5 and its cognate GTPase Rab11

### Description
H/D exchange analysis of the GEF SH3BP5 and its interaction with the GTPase Rab11

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system kept in a cold box at 2ºC. The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Porosyme 2-3131-00) and the peptides were collected onto a VanGuard Precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7um particle, 100 x 1mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5%-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Impact QTOF (Bruker), and peptide identification was done by running tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments run in data-dependent acquisition mode. The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Fully deuterated samples were generated by incubating SH3BP5 with 3M guanidine for 30 minutes prior to the addition of D2O. The protein was exchanged for 1 hour on ice before adding quench buffer. This fully deuterated sample allows for the control of peptide back exchange levels during digestion and separation. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: >5% change in exchange, >0.5 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.  Samples were only compared within a single experiment, and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Data Protocol
Data was anlysed using PEAKS studio for MS/MS identification and HDExaminer for quantification of deuterium incorporation

### Publication Abstract
The GTPase Rab11 plays key roles in receptor recycling, oogenesis, autophagosome formation, and ciliogenesis. However, investigating Rab11 regulation has been hindered by limited molecular detail describing activation by cognate guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Here, we present the structure of Rab11 bound to the GEF SH3BP5, along with detailed characterization of Rab-GEF specificity. The structure of SH3BP5 shows a coiled-coil architecture that mediates exchange through a unique Rab-GEF interaction. Furthermore, it reveals a rearrangement of the switch I region of Rab11 compared with solved Rab-GEF structures, with a constrained conformation when bound to SH3BP5. Mutation of switch I provides insights into the molecular determinants that allow for Rab11 selectivity over evolutionarily similar Rab GTPases present on Rab11-positive organelles. Moreover, we show that GEF-deficient mutants of SH3BP5 show greatly decreased Rab11 activation in cellular assays of active Rab11. Overall, our results give molecular insight into Rab11 regulation, and how Rab-GEF specificity is achieved.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Rab11, Gef, Hydrogen deuterium exchange

### Affiliations
University of Victoria
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, BC, Canada

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Edmund Burke
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, BC, Canada


