### Accession
PXD008853

### Title
On the characterisation of the porcine gland-specific salivary proteome using MALDI-TOF/TOF MS and Q-Exactive orbitrap MS/MS

### Description
To expand the knowledge on the porcine salivary proteome, secretions from the three major salivary glands were collected from anaesthetised piglets. Pilocarpine and isoproterenol were simultaneously injected intraperitoneally to increase the volume and protein concentration of the saliva, respectively. The protein composition and relative protein-specific abundance of saliva secreted by the parotid gland and by the mandibular and monostomatic sublingual gland, were determined using iTRAQ. When combining two detection methods, MALDI-TOF/TOF MS and Q-Exactive orbitrap MS/MS, a total of 122 porcine salivary proteins and 6 mammalian proteins with a predicted porcine homolog were identified. Only a quantitative and not a qualitative difference was observed between both ductal secretions. The 128 proteins were detected in both secretions, however, at different levels. Twenty-four proteins (20 porcine, 4 mammalian with a predicted porcine homolog) were predominantly secreted by the parotid gland, such as carbonic anhydrase VI and alpha-amylase. Twenty-nine proteins (all porcine) were predominantly secreted by the mandibular and sublingual glands, for example salivary lipocalin and submaxillary apomucin protein.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion After aceton precipitation (100 µg), the obtained protein pellets were resuspended in 500 mM TEAB. Hydrogen bonds were disrupted and disulphide bonds reduced using 2% SDS and 50 mM TCEP, respectively. To alkylate thiols reversibly, the samples were incubated with 200 MMTS. Subsequently, trypsin was added to digest proteins during the overnight incubation step at 37°C. Finally, the eight samples were labelled using the eight different iTRAQ reagents (113: piglet 1, M/SL; 114: piglet 1, P; 115: piglet 2, M/SL; 116: piglet 2, 117: P; piglet 3, M/SL; 118: piglet 3, P; 119; piglet 4, M/SL; 121: piglet 4, P) and combined, resulting in one sample for further analysis.  Separation First-dimensional separation The combined sample was fractionated in a first dimension by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using a Waters Alliance e2695 HPLC system with Photo Diode Array detector (Waters NV/SA, Zellik, Belgium). After acidification to a pH of 2.7, the sample was loaded onto a polysulfoethyl-aspartamide SCX-column (2.1 mm x 200 mm; 5 µm particles; PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD, USA). Three different solvents (solvent A: 10 mM KH2PO4, 20% ACN (pH 2.7); solvent B: 10 mM KH2PO4, 650 mM KCl, 20% ACN (pH 2.7) and solvent D: 10 mM KH2PO4, 650 mM KCl, 20% ACN (pH 4.7)) were used. First, only solvent A was used for 10 min followed by a salt gradient (7.5 – 30%) of solvent B during 45 min and a pH gradient (30-100%) of solvent D for 15 min, with a final 5 min step of only solvent D to eluate highly charged peptides.  Second-dimensional separation  Micro-capillary RP-HPLC for MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis The ten SCX fractions were resuspended in solvent A (95% water, 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) to allow for further fractionation using a micro-capillary HPLC system (Agilent 1100 series, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). A guard column (0.3 mm x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm; Zorbax 300 SB-C18, Agilent Technologies) was connected to aC18 analytical RP column (0.3 mm x 150 mm; particle size 3.5 µm; Zorbax 300 SB-C18, Agilent Technologies). A total of 15 µg, from each of the ten previously generated fractions, was loaded using solvent A followed by an elution with solvent B (10% water, 90% ACN, 0.1% FA) using the capillary pump at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. The gradient intensified from 5% to 55% in the first 56.7 min and quickly rose to 90% in the subsequent 3.3 min. This fractionation step separated each of the ten fractions into 350 spots on an Opti-TOF® MALDI-plate (28 columns x 25 rows, 700 spots, 2 samples per plate; Applied Biosystems). Afterwards, a matrix consisting of 2.5 mg/ml α-cyanohydroxycinnamic acid in 70% ACN with an internal calibrant (63 pmol/ml human Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B, m/z 1570.6670) was used to cover the spots.   Nano-capillary RP-HPLC for Q-Exactive orbitrap MS/MS analysis The same ten SCX fractions that were used for the previous analysis were desalted by using solid phase extraction. Each SCX fraction was separated in a second dimension by RP-C18 chromatography on an Easy nanoLC system using an Acclaim C18 PepMap®100 column (75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size) connected to an Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (50 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm particle size) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Before loading, the vacuum-dried peptide pellets were dissolved in mobile phase A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA), and spiked with 20 fmol Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Glu-fib, Protea biosciences, Morgantown, WV, USA). Of each fraction, 1 µg of peptides were loaded onto the column. A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN) from 2% to 45% in 55 min followed by a steep increase to 100% mobile phase B in 5 min was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Acquisition MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis Spotted C18 fractions were analysed using a matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) AB4800 proteomics analyser (Applied Biosystems). Spots that generated precursors with a signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio above or equal to 100 after MALDI-TOF (MS) analysis (reflectron mode; 25 x 20 laser shots per spot; mass range: 800 – 3000 Da; laser intensity: 3300) were selected for MALDI-TOF/TOF (MS/MS) analysis (25 x 20 laser shots per spot; laser intensity: 4350). A maximum of 50 unique precursors per spot were selected for fragmentation in a collision cell (1 kV collisions with air), starting from the precursor with the lowest S/N-ratio.  Q-Exactive orbitrap MS/MS analysis Liquid chromatography was followed by MS and was performed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The high-resolution mass spectrometer was set up in an MS/MS mode in which a full scan spectrum (350 – 1850 m/z, resolution 70,000) was followed by a maximum of five high energy collision activated dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (100 to 2000 m/z). The normalised collision energy was set at 33%. A dynamic exclusion list of 15 s for data dependent acquisition was applied.

### Data Protocol
Database searching  Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) was used to export the acquired MS/MS spectra to mascot generic files. All MS/MS spectra were analysed by Mascot (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) using the Swiss-Prot database (Mammalia, 2017, 65789 entries) or the Sus scrofa database that was specifically generated for the present study on the basis of characterised porcine proteins and the porcine genome (Sus scrofa database (reviewed + unreviewed), generated from Uniprot (10/01/2018), 50045 entries). To be complete, a search using the NCBI database (taxonomy Sus scrofa generated from NCBI (11/01/2018), 87942 entries) was additionally performed. Since this database did not lead to the identification of more proteins than the Uniprot Sus scrofa database and because this database is more curated, only the results of the latter search are presented in this manuscript. Methylmethanethiosulfonate binding to cysteine and iTRAQ 8-plex labelling of lysine and the N-terminus were specified as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8-plex labelling of tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Analysis was performed based on trypsin digestions, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and a precursor tolerance of 200 ppm for MALDI-TOF/TOF-spectra and 8 ppm for Q-Exactive orbitrap-MS/MS-spectra.  Data analysis Scaffold Q+ (version 4.7.5; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were only accepted if they could be established at a probability greater than 95% by the stringent Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. This additional selection step reduced the number of peptides identified by Mascot, preserving only peptides with a high confidence. Protein identifications were accepted if they met the same probability criterion and contained at least one Scaffold-selected peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 3% for all Mascot searches. Relative quantification was reported by Scaffold Q+ based upon detected iTRAQ reporter ions during tandem mass spectrometric analyses.

### Publication Abstract
To expand the knowledge on the porcine salivary proteome, secretions from the three major salivary glands were collected from anaesthetised piglets. Pilocarpine and isoproterenol were simultaneously injected intraperitoneally to increase the volume and protein concentration of the saliva, respectively. The protein composition and relative protein-specific abundance of saliva secreted by the parotid gland and by the mandibular and monostomatic sublingual gland, were determined using iTRAQ. When combining two detection methods, MALDI-TOF/TOF MS and Q-Exactive orbitrap MS/MS, a total of 122 porcine salivary proteins and 6 mammalian salivary proteins with a predicted porcine homolog were identified. Only a quantitative and not a qualitative difference was observed between both ductal secretions. The 128 proteins were detected in both secretions, however, at different levels. Twenty-four proteins (20 porcine and 4 mammalian with a predicted porcine homolog) were predominantly secreted by the parotid gland, such as carbonic anhydrase VI and alpha-amylase. Twenty-nine proteins (all porcine) were predominantly secreted by the mandibular and sublingual glands, for example salivary lipocalin and submaxillary apomucin protein. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008853. SIGNIFICANCE: In humans, more than 3000 salivary proteins have been identified. To our knowledge, previous studies on porcine saliva only identified a total of 34 proteins. This research increased the total number of identified proteins in porcine saliva to 143. This insight into the porcine salivary proteome will facilitate the search for potential biomarkers that may help in the early detection of pathologies and follow-up of animal welfare. Moreover, it can also endorse the value of a porcine animal model and contribute to a better understanding of the animal's physiology. Additionally, this was the first study to collect and analyse gland specific saliva of pigs. The obtained relative-quantitative knowledge of the identified proteins is valuable when comparing data of stimulated (chewing on a device) vs. unstimulated (passive) saliva collection in the future, since salivary stimulation changes the relative contribution of the major salivary glands to the whole saliva in the oral cavity. For example, carbonic anhydrase VI, which is present in higher concentrations in parotid saliva, has a higher concentration in stimulated whole saliva because of the larger contribution of the parotid gland after stimulation by chewing.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Gland-specific saliva, Salivary proteome, Itraq, Pig

### Affiliations
Applied Veterinary Morphology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Belgium
UAntwerpen

### Submitter
Sara Prims

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Van Ginneken
Applied Veterinary Morphology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Belgium


