### Accession
PXD038726

### Title
Title: Non-canonical functions of SNAIL drive context-specific progression

### Description
SNAIL is a key transcriptional regulator in embryonic development and cancer. Its effects in physiology and disease are believed to be linked to its role as a master regulator of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we report EMT-independent oncogenic SNAIL functions in cancer. Using genetic models, we systematically interrogated SNAIL effects in various oncogenic backgrounds and tissue types. SNAIL related phenotypes displayed remarkable tissue- and genetic context-dependencies, ranging from protective effects as observed in KRAS- or WNT-driven intestinal cancers, to dramatic acceleration of tumorigenesis, as shown in KRAS-induced pancreatic cancer. Unexpectedly, SNAIL-driven oncogenesis was not associated with E-cadherin downregulation or induction of an overt EMT program. Instead, we show that SNAIL induces bypass of senescence and cell cycle progression through p16INK4A-independent inactivation of the Retinoblastoma (RB)-restriction checkpoint. Collectively, our work identifies novel non-canonical EMT-independent functions of SNAIL and unravel its complex context-dependent role in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates captured by magnetic beads were eluted and digested overnight at 25 °C. The next day, the peptides were cleaned-up, and re-suspended in MS compatible buffer system. They were separated in a nanoLC system over a 90-minute gradient lenght, and the MS was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) was used for the MS raw data processing with "match between runs" enabled. Oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. For the downstream bioinformatics analysis, the Perseus platform (version 1.6.7.0) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: cancer, Chip-ms, Transcription, Cell cycle, Tissue specificity, Snail, Emt

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Institute of Medical Psychology LMU Munich Goethestrasse 31 80336 Munich

### Submitter
Tanja Bange

### Lab Head
Dr Maria S. Robles
Institute of Medical Psychology LMU Munich Goethestrasse 31 80336 Munich


