### Accession
PXD001293

### Title
Comaprison of the phagosome proteome of bone marrow-derived macrophages and RAW264.7

### Description
Macrophages are important immune cells operating at the forefront of innate immunity by taking up foreign particles and microbes through phagocytosis. The RAW 264.7 cell line is commonly used for experiments in the macrophage and phagocytosis field. However, little is known how its functions compare to primary macrophages.  Here, we have performed an in-depth proteomics characterisation of phagosomes from RAW 264.7 and bone marrow-derived macrophages by quantifying more than 2500 phagosomal proteins.  Our data indicates that there are significant differences for a large number of proteins including important receptors such as mannose receptor 1 and Siglec-1.

### Sample Protocol
Phagosome proteins were extracted using 1% sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (commercially available as RapiGest, Waters) in 50 mM pH 8.0 Tris, reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated by iodoacetamide (Sigma), and finally digested by Trypsin Gold (Promega).   Samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system with a 50 cm EasySpray Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 μm ID, 3 μm C18) in conjunction with a Pepmap trapping column (100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm C18) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Six hour linear gradients were performed from 3% solvent B to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid). For each run, sample of 2 µg was injected. Settings for data acquisition were: MS1 with 120,000 resolution, scan range of 400-1600, charge states 2-5, AGC target of 200,000, and dynamic exclusion of 60s with repeat count 1. Peptide ions were fragmented by HCD (35% collision energy) with a resolution of 15,000, an AGC target of 50,000, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The whole duty cycle was set to 2.5 s during which the instrument performed “top speed” analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by label-free quantitation using MaxQuant v1.5.0.12 and searched against a murine Uniprot-Trembl database (51,372 entries; downloaded February 19 2014) and a list of common contaminants. Label-free quantification was performed using MaxQuant Version v1.5.0.12 with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus), Glu->pyro-Glu; label-free quantitiation with a minimum ratio count 2; maximum 5 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavages. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Quantification used only razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2. “Re-quantify” was enabled. “Match between runs” was used with alignment time window 20 min and match time window 0.7 min.  LFQ intensities were used for data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are important immune cells operating at the forefront of innate immunity by taking up foreign particles and microbes through phagocytosis. The RAW 264.7 cell line is commonly used for experiments in the macrophage and phagocytosis field. However, little is known how its functions compare to primary macrophages. Here, we have performed an in-depth proteomics characterization of phagosomes from RAW 264.7 and bone marrow derived macrophages by quantifying more than 2500 phagosomal proteins. Our data indicate that there are significant differences for a large number of proteins including important receptors such as mannose receptor 1 and Siglec-1. Moreover, bone marrow derived macrophages phagosomes mature considerably faster by fusion with endosomes and the lysosome which we validated using fluorogenic phagocytic assays. We provide a valuable resource for researcher in the field and recommend careful use of the RAW 264.7 cell line when studying phagosome functions. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001293 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001293).

### Keywords
Mouse, Raw264.7, Phagosome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.


