### Accession
PXD016582

### Title
Intra-patient clonal diversity in HLA class I peptide ligand presentation

### Description
Tumor heterogeneity results from clonal diversity and evolutionary selection, and is a major cause of therapeutic resistance. Immunotherapy may exploit alternative vulnerabilities of drug resistant cells, and tumor-specific HLA peptide ligands on the cell surface are promising leads to invoke such targeted anti-tumor responses. In this work, we investigate the variability in HLA class I peptide presentation between tumor cells of the same patient, as differential ligand presentation could impact the efficacy of immunological interventions. By organoid amplification, we modeled single-cell level heterogeneity in a MSI- colorectal cancer patient, and directly correlated clonal tumor proteomes with the respective ligandomes. With deep comparative proteome profiling and sensitive detection of >7000 peptide ligands from each tumor organoid line, we found tumor-surface peptide presentation to be largely uncoupled from the steady-state protein abundance. Within the small minority of tumor-specific ligands (~3%), source proteins needed for DNA damage sensing and repair, and tumor suppression were prominently featured, leading us to speculate that such peptides may be consistently presented, as degradative byproducts of intended silencing. While clone-specific differences in peptide presentation were observed, inter-clone variability was also highly prevalent (15-25%). Collectively, these illustrate the heterogeneous peptide presentation landscape even within one individual, and hint that a multi-peptide vaccination approach against highly conserved tumor suppressors may be a viable option in patients with low tumor-mutational burden.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Organoids were lysed by gentle vortexing in 8M Urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 50µg/ml DNAse I (Sigma-Aldrich), 50µg/ml RNAse A (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics). Subsequently, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 1h at 18000*g at 15°C. Protein concentration was determined with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For each sample, 20µg of total protein was reduced, alkylated and digested sequentially with Lys-C (1:100) and trypsin (1:75). For high-pH reversed phase fractionation, peptide digests were loaded on C18 STAGE-tips in 200mM ammonium formate at pH 10 and eluted into 5 fractions with 11-80% acetonitrile. All samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analyses.  Immuno-affinity purification Organoids were lysed as desribed in Demmers et al, 201916. In short, pHLA complexes were immunoprecipitated using 0.7mg W6/32 antibody54 coupled to 175µl protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz) from 35mg organoid lysate. Antibodies were corss-linked to protein A/G beads to prevent co-elution. Incubation took place for approximately 16h at 4°C. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed with 40ml cold PBS. pHLA complexes were subsequently eluted with 10% acetic acid. Peptide ligands were separated from HLA class I complexes using 10kD molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore). The fraction containing HLA class I peptide ligands was dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Raw files were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 and the Andromeda search engine against the human uniprot database (147854 entries, downloaded in January 2016). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was restricted to 1% in both protein and peptide identification. For quantitative comparisons, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with “match between runs” enabled. Data normalization, imputation and statistics were performed with Perseus version 1.6.2.2. The data was visualized with Graphpad PRISM 8.  Ligandome Raw files were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 against the Swissprot human database (20258 entries, downloaded in Feb 2018) appended with the 20 most abundant FBS contaminants55. The search was set to unspecific with a minimum precursor mass of 797 Da to a maximum precursor mass of 1950 Da corresponding to peptides between 8 and 12 amino acids long. Identified peptides were filtered to a 1% FDR using the percolator algorithm, 5% peptide FDR and Xcorr >1. Cysteine cysteinylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. From the identified peptides, FBS contaminants were removed. Binding affinity of HLA class I peptide ligand was predicted using the NetMHC 4.0 pan algorithm56. The data was visualized with Graphpad PRISM 8.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor heterogeneity is a major cause of therapeutic resistance. Immunotherapy may exploit alternative vulnerabilities of drug-resistant cells, where tumor-specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) peptide ligands are promising leads to invoke targeted anti-tumor responses. Here, we investigate the variability in HLA class I peptide presentation between different clonal cells of the same colorectal cancer patient, using an organoid system. While clone-specific differences in HLA peptide presentation were observed, broad inter-clone variability was even more prevalent (15-25%). By coupling organoid proteomics and HLA peptide ligandomics, we also found that tumor-specific ligands from DNA damage control and tumor suppressor source proteins were prominently presented by tumor cells, coinciding likely with the silencing of such cytoprotective functions. Collectively, these data illustrate the heterogeneous HLA peptide presentation landscape even within one individual, and hint that a multi-peptide vaccination approach against highly conserved tumor suppressors may be a viable option in patients with low tumor-mutational burden.

### Keywords
Hla class i peptide ligands; colorectal cancer; tumor heterogeneity; patient-derived organoids; mass spectrometry; affinity proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Laura Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


