### Accession
PXD015608

### Title
LncRNA REG1CP promotes tumorigenesis through an enhancer complex to recruit FANCJ helicase for REG3A transcription

### Description
Co-precipitated proteins from REG1CP RNA pull-down assay were separated by 12.5% SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining. The specific proteins associated with REG1CP were identified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS). The MASCOT database search was applied to validate the data.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were sequenced by nanoflow reversed phased Liquid Chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled directly to an ESI 3D Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (AmaZon ETD, Bruker GmbH, Preston, VIC, Australia) operating in MS/MS (CID) mode. Peptides were loaded at 5ul/min onto a 5um C18 nanoViper trap column (100um x 2cm, Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo) for desalting and pre-concentration. Peptide separation was then performed at 300nl/min over an Acclaim nanoViper analytical column (2um C18, 75um x 15cm) utilising a gradient of 2-40% Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) over 60 minutes.  The peptides were eluted directly into the nanoflow ESI Ion source of the MS system for MS/MS analysis. The AmaZon Ion Trap system was tuned using Smart Parameter Settings tuned to 922 m/z and set to perform MS/MS on the top 6 ions present in each MS scan with an Ion exclusion time of 30 seconds. Source settings were as follows: dry gas temperature, 180°C; dry gas, 4.0 L min−1; nebulizer gas, 0.4 bar; electrospray voltage, 4500 V; high‐voltage end‐plate offset, –200 V; capillary exit, 140 V; trap drive, 57.4; funnel 1 in 100 V, out 35 V, and funnel 2 in 12 V, out 3.3 V; MS/MS ICC target 500 000; maximum accumulation time, 50 ms. The sample was measured with the Ultrascan Scan Mode in polarity positive, scan range from m/z 100–3000, 3 MSn spectra averages. MS/MS spectra were triggered on ions higher than 50,000 in the Profile scan using a fragmentation amplitude of 100%

### Data Protocol
Raw MS Files were converted into MASCOT Generic Format using DataAnalysis 4.1 and imported into ProteinScape 2.1 platform (both Bruker, Bremen, Germany) for database searching. Searches were performed against the UniProt Swiss-Prot Human database (retrieved January 2017) using an in-house licensed MASCOT server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science). The number of allowed trypsin missed cleavages set to 2. Deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine, Oxidation of Methionine and Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The parent ion tolerance was set to 1.2 Da with fragment ion tolerance set to 0.7 Da. Peptide thresholds were set requiring False Positive Rate less than 0.05% with a low stringency MASCOT score greater than 35. Those spectra meeting these criteria were validated by manual inspection to ensure accurate y- and b-ion detection with overlapping sequence coverage.

### Publication Abstract
Protein products of the regenerating islet-derived (REG) gene family are important regulators of many cellular processes. Here we functionally characterise a non-protein coding product of the family, the long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) REG1CP that is transcribed from a DNA fragment at the family locus previously thought to be a pseudogene. REG1CP forms an RNA-DNA triplex with a homopurine stretch at the distal promoter of the REG3A gene, through which the DNA helicase FANCJ is tethered to the core promoter of REG3A where it unwinds double stranded DNA and facilitates a permissive state for glucocorticoid receptor &#x3b1; (GR&#x3b1;)-mediated REG3A transcription. As such, REG1CP promotes cancer cell proliferation and tumorigenicity and its upregulation is associated with poor outcome of patients. REG1CP is also transcriptionally inducible by GR&#x3b1;, indicative of feedforward regulation. These results reveal the function and regulation of REG1CP and suggest that REG1CP may constitute a target for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Reg3a, Fancj, Crc, Reg1cp

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
the university of Newcastle

### Submitter
Hamed Yari

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Dong Zhang
The University of Newcastle


