### Accession
PXD011237

### Title
CpaA is a Glycan-Specific Adamalysin-like Protease Secreted by Acinetobacter baumannii that Inactivates Coagulation Factor XII

### Description
Identification of protein N-terminus and o-linked glycan modifications

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion with trypsin was performed on the submitted sample with a ProGest robot (DigiLab) with the following protocol:  • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and analyzed without further processing.  Mass Spectrometry  Half of each digest was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Enzyme: Semi-Trypsin Database: SwissProt Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N,Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic-resistant <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> is increasingly recognized as a cause of difficult-to-treat nosocomial infections, including pneumonia, wound infections, and bacteremia. Previous studies have demonstrated that the metalloprotease CpaA contributes to virulence and prolongs clotting time when added to human plasma as measured by the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) assay. Here, we show that CpaA interferes with the intrinsic coagulation pathway, also called the contact activation system, in human as well as murine plasma, but has no discernible effect on the extrinsic pathway. By utilizing a modified aPTT assay, we demonstrate that coagulation factor XII (fXII) is a target of CpaA. In addition, we map the cleavage by CpaA to two positions, 279-280 and 308-309, within the highly glycosylated proline-rich region of human fXII, and show that cleavage at the 308-309 site is responsible for inactivation of fXII. At both sites, cleavage occurs between proline and an O-linked glycosylated threonine, and deglycosylation of fXII prevents cleavage by CpaA. Consistent with this, mutant fXII (fXII-Thr309Lys) from patients with hereditary angioedema type III (HAEIII) is protected from CpaA inactivation. This raises the possibility that individuals with HAEIII who harbor this mutation may be partially protected from <i>A. baumannii</i> infection if CpaA contributes to human disease. By inactivating fXII, CpaA may attenuate important antimicrobial defense mechanisms such as intravascular thrombus formation, thus allowing <i>A. baumannii</i> to disseminate.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Ventilator-associated pneumonia and catheter-related bacteremia are the most common and severe infections caused by <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> Besides the capsule, lipopolysaccharides, and the outer membrane porin OmpA, little is known about the contribution of secreted proteins to <i>A. baumannii</i> survival <i>in vivo</i> Here we focus on CpaA, a potentially recently acquired virulence factor that inhibits blood coagulation <i>in vitro</i> We identify coagulation factor XII as a target of CpaA, map the cleavage sites, and show that glycosylation is a prerequisite for CpaA-mediated inactivation of factor XII. We propose adding CpaA to a small, but growing list of bacterial proteases that are specific for highly glycosylated components of the host defense system.

### Keywords
Glycoprotein

### Affiliations
Director Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  Assistant Research Scientist, Dept. of Biological Chemistry  University of Michigan Medical School  NEW location: C570D MSRBII  1150 West Medical Center Drive  Ann Arbor, MI 48109
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Henriette Remmer

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Remmer
Director Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  Assistant Research Scientist, Dept. of Biological Chemistry  University of Michigan Medical School  NEW location: C570D MSRBII  1150 West Medical Center Drive  Ann Arbor, MI 48109


