### Accession
PXD028656

### Title
Mutant glucocerebrosidase impairs -synuclein degradation by blockade of chaperone-mediated autophagy

### Description
The most common genetic risk factors for Parkinson’s disease (PD) are a set of heterozygous mutant (MT) alleles of the GBA1 gene that encodes -glucocerebrosidase (GCase), an enzyme that is normally trafficked from the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus to the lysosomal lumen. We examined isolated lysosomes from anterior cingulate cortex, a region of high alpha-synuclein accumulation in GBA-PD, and found that while lysosomal GCase is entirely luminal in healthy controls, half of the lysosomal GBA-PD GCase was present on the lysosomal surface. This lysosomal mislocalization is dependent on a pentapeptide motif in GCase used for targeting of cytosolic proteins to lysosomes for degradation by chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), a type of autophagy inhibited by PD-related pathogenic proteins including -synuclein and LRRK2. Single cell transcriptional analysis and comparative proteomics of brains from GBA-PD patients demonstrated reduced CMA activity and overall proteome changes similar to those observed in mouse models with CMA blockage. We found that the delivery of unfolded mutant GCase to lysosomes decreased CMA due to recognition of unfolded mutant GCase to the chaperone hsc70, and the resulting complex binds the CMA receptor LAMP2A at the lysosomal surface. Unfolded mutant GCase is a poor substrate for translocation into the lysosomal lumen, and by interfering with LAMP2A multimerization, blocks the translocation and causes cytosolic accumulation of other CMA substrates including -synuclein and tau. In primary substantia nigra dopamine neurons, MT GCase led to neuronal death, while loss of the GCase CMA motif or deletion of -synuclein rescued the neurons. These results indicate how MT GCase alleles may converge with other PD proteins to block CMA function and produce -synuclein accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic fraction was lysed using 5% SDS 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55. Then, samples (100 µg) were digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Briefly, proteins were simoultaneously reduced and alkylated in the dark (15 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA, 30 min, RT) and then, digested with trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:25, 1 h at 47 °C). Resulting peptides were labeled using multiplexed, amine-specific iTRAQ® Reagent 8-plex kit following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC fractionation. Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of phase A (10 mM NH4OH) and loaded onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 µm, 150 mm length and 1 mm ID) (Waters). Phase B was 10 mM NH4OH in 90% ACN. The following gradient (flow rate of 100 µL/min) was used: 0-50 min 0-25% B, 50-56 min 25-60% B, 56-57 min 60-90% B. 45 fractions were collected. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, ThermoScientific) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoScientific) and separated using a 60 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-3 min 2% B, 3-5 min 6% B 5-60 min 25% B, 60-63 min 33% B, 63-65 min 45% B, 65-70 min 98% B, 70-80 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.5 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 300 °C and a S-lens RF level of 50%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (minimum AGC target 1E3) and a dynamic exclusion of 20 sec. MS (350-1500 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and 30,000 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 34% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (45 ms maximum injection time).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, July 2018, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Lysine side chain and peptide N-termini labelling with iTRAQ-8plex reagent and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were considered as fixed modifications, whereas oxidation of methionines, deamidation (NQ) and acetylation of protein N-term were included as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (v1.14) (Wieczorek et al, Bioinformatics 2017) using the intensity values for further statistical analysis. A global normalization of log2-transformed intensities across samples was performed using the LOESS function. Missing values were imputed using the algorithms SLSA (for partially observed values) and DetQuantile (for values missing on an entire condition). Only proteins with a log2 ratio >0.3 or < -0.3 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Cma, Gba, Itraq

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110


