### Accession
PXD014057

### Title
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens Ba168 LC-MSMS

### Description
To establish the protein expression profile of Ba168, a high-resolution LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed. A total of 1155 proteins were identified from 5233 unique peptides. GO and KEGG analysis revealed that a majority of the proteins were associated with biosynthesis and carbon metabolism pathways, such as biosynthesis of amino acids, peptidoglycan, and antibiotics. Then, we identified the antimicrobial proteins of Ba168. At least 16 potential antimicrobial-activity-related proteins were identified; 11 of these proteins have direct antimicrobial effects, while 5 of these proteins are associated with the formation of antimicrobial substances.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Bacterial cell suspensions (50 mL) from the triangular flask were centrifuged and separated at 12,000×g for 5 min at 4°C in 50-mL tubes. The supernatants from fermentation were collected, added 313 g of ammonium sulfate to 1 L of the supernatants. The mixture was stored at 4℃ for 24 hours, and the proteins were then removed. The mixture was centrifugally separated at 12,000×g for 10 min in 4℃ in 50-mL tubes. The supernatant was poured out, and the proteins were collected. The precipitates were mixed with 10 mmol Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) buffer. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000×g for 5 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube.  Preparation of proteins for LC-MS/MS  A total of 30 μg of protein for each sample was incorporated into 30 μL of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl; pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl; pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, 100 μL of iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block the reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μL of UA buffer three times, followed by two washes with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg of trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37°C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by measurement of UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 for a 0.1% (g/L) solution, which was calculated based on the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Each protein sample was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to a C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy column, 10 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient used was as follows: 0-35% buffer B for 50 min, 35-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to an Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method by dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time was set to 10 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for the HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2). The search parameters were as follows: database: UniProt, taxonomy: B. amyloliquefaciens (32598). Antimicrobial proteins were analyzed based on current reports. For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, enzyme=trypsin, missed cleavages=2, fixed modification=carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification=oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
Blue mold caused by Penicillium expansum is one of the most common apple diseases, and it is becoming a serious threat in apple production. The strain <i>Bacillus amyloliquefaciens</i> Ba168 showed high levels of antimicrobial activity in our previous study. To analyze the antimicrobial protein of Ba168, a high-resolution LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed. A total of 1155 proteins were identified from 5233 unique peptides. A total of 16 potential antimicrobial-activity-related proteins were identified; 10 of these proteins have direct antimicrobial effects, while 6 of these proteins are associated with the formation of antimicrobial substances. Then, an antifungal protein of Ba168 was isolated and purified by the sequential chromatography of DEAE Bio-sep FF anion exchange and Sephadex G-75. The single protein, named BP8-2, showed antifungal activity towards <i>Penicillium expansum</i>. The peptide mass fingerprinting of the protein band of BP8-2 had a high similarity with the amino acid sequences of flagellin protein. The results showed that BP8-2 significantly inhibited the growth of <i>P. expansum</i> and slowed the spread of apple blue mold. The results indicated that flagellin is one of the important antimicrobial substances from Ba168.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Ba168

### Affiliations
Microbiology Institute of Shaanxi

### Submitter
meihuan lu

### Lab Head
Dr Meihuan Lu
Microbiology Institute of Shaanxi


