### Accession
PXD027479

### Title
Translational repression of NMD targets by GIGYF2 and EIF4E2

### Description
Translation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) with premature translation termination codons produces truncated proteins with potentially deleterious effects. This is prevented by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) of these mRNAs. NMD is triggered by ribosomes terminating upstream of a splice site marked by an exon-junction complex (EJC), but also acts on many mRNAs lacking a splice junction after their termination codon. We developed a genome-wide CRISPR flow cytometry screen to identify regulators of mRNAs with premature termination codons in K562 cells. This screen recovered essentially all core NMD factors and suggested a role for EJC factors in degradation of PTCs without downstream splicing. Among the strongest hits were the translational repressors GIGYF2 and EIF4E2. GIGYF2 and EIF4E2 mediate translational repression but not mRNA decay of a subset of NMD targets and interact with NMD factors genetically and physically. Our results suggest a model wherein recognition of a stop codon as premature can lead to its translational repression through GIGYF2 and EIF4E2.

### Sample Protocol
StrepII-GIGYF2•EIF4E2 coimmunoprecipitation  HEK293T cells were seeded at 3 million cells per plate and allowed to grow for 24 hours. At 24 hours cells were replenished with fresh DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, transfected with 10 µg pcDNA3.1 4EHP-2A-StrepII-GIGYF2 (kind gift from Ramanujan Hegde), and allowed to grow for 24 hours. 4 h prior to harvest, cells were treated with SMG1i (300 nM). Cells were washed with warm PBS (containing 360 µM emetine) and lysed in 300 µl ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KOAc, 15 mM Mg(OAc)2, 5% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.5% Triton-X-100, 360 µM emetine, 20 nM avidin, 1 mM TCEP, 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Technology), 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide, 2x cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets (Roche), 1 mM PMSF (Sigma), 1x mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 8 units/ml Turbo DNase (Thermo Fisher). Cell lysates were clarified in a tabletop micro-centrifuge (7000 x g, 5 minutes, 4C) and equal protein amounts from the clarified supernatant were used for each immunoprecipitation. The clarified supernatant was incubated with MagStrep “type 3” XT beads (IBA Life Sciences) for 1 h (4˚C) with gentle rocking. Following incubation, samples were bound to Dyna-Mag™ magnet as per manufacturer guidelines, the flow-through was removed, and the samples were washed with lysis buffer supplemented with 0.5% Triton-X-100, 360 µM emetine (4 washes x 10 min, 4˚C), followed by 4 washes (10 min, 4˚C) with lysis buffer not containing glycerol or detergent. Proteins were eluted from the beads using Buffer BXT (100 mM TRIS pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM biotin, IBA Life Sciences) and processed for MS.   Protein Digestion  Protein extracts (~10 µg) were diluted up to 300 µl in 10 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and were reduced with 15 µl of 7.5 mg/ml DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) (60C, 1 hour). After cooling to room temperature, samples were alkylated with 15 µl of 18.5 mg/ml iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Reduced and alkylated proteins were buffer-exchanged on a 30 kDa molecular weight spin cartridge (Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml, Millipore Sigma) and washed four times with 400 µl 10 mM TEAB. Proteins were digested overnight at 37C on the filter with 300 µl Trypsin (20 µg in 3 ml 10 mM TEAB, Promega Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin). Additional Trypsin (100 µl of 10 mg/ml) was added the next morning (37C, 1 hour). Peptides were removed from the top of the filter and the filter was washed twice with 300 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. All washes were combined and dried.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography interfaced with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using an Easy-LC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher) interfaced with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Fractions were resuspended in 20 µl loading buffer (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry.   Peptides (25%, approx. 0.5µg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (S-10 µM, 120 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm, YMC, Japan) and subsequently separated on an in-house packed PicoFrit column (75 µm x 200 mm, 15u, +/-1 µm tip, New Objective) with C18 phase (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, 120 Å, www.dr-maisch.com) using 2-90% acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min over 120 min. Eluting peptides were sprayed at 2.0 kV directly into the Q-Exactive Plus. Survey scans (full MS) were acquired from 350-1800 m/z with data-dependent monitoring with a loop count of 15. Each precursor individually isolated in a 1.4 Da window and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy 28 and 15 sec dynamic exclusion, first mass being 120 m/z. Precursor and the fragment ions were analyzed at resolutions 70,000 and 35,000, respectively, with automatic gain control (AGC) target values at 3e6 with 50 ms maximum injection time (IT) and 1e5 with 100 ms maximum IT, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed and analyzed using the MaxQuant (1.6.7.0) software suite (Tyanova et al., 2016). Default settings were used except that ‘Match between runs’ was turned on to transfer peptide identification from an LC-MS run, in which the peptide has been identified by MS/MS, to another LC-MS run, in which no MS/MS data for the same peptide was acquired or no peptide was assigned (Tyanova et al., 2016). Search parameters were as follows: a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, cysteine carbamidomethyl was included as a fixed modification, and variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, and K-GG ubiquitin remnant on lysines. Trypsin was used as the digestion enzyme, and the minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Searches were performed using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. Database search was performed with Andromeda against Uniprot human database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; downloaded on 09/10/2018) with common serum contaminants and enzyme sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. Protein groups were further analyzed using the Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). Common contaminants, reverse proteins and proteins only identified by site were filtered out. LFQ values were transformed to log2 space and intensity distributions were checked to ensure that data was normally distributed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gigyf2, Translation, Nmd, Eif4e2

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins Medical Institute
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute,  725 N. Wolfe Street  714 PCTB  Baltimore, MD 21205  410-614-4928

### Submitter
Niladri Sinha

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Green
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute,  725 N. Wolfe Street  714 PCTB  Baltimore, MD 21205  410-614-4928


