### Accession
PXD024638

### Title
Venom proteomic analysis of two medically important Nigerian viperidae (Echis ocellatus and Bitis arietans) snake species

### Description
Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography coupled with LC- MS/MS was used to analyze the crude venom extracts of Echis ocellatus (Carpet viper) and Bitis arietans (Puff adder). The gel-free proteomic analysis of the crude venom extracts from E. ocellatus and B. arietans yielded the identification of 86 and 80 proteins, respectively. Seventy- nine proteins were common between the two snake species with a 90.8% similarity. The identified proteins belong to 12 protein families where serine proteases (22.31%) and metalloproteinases (21.06%) were the dominant proteins in the venom of B. arietans. Metalloproteinases (34.84%), phospholipase A 2 s (25.69%) and serine proteases (17.25%) represents the major toxins in the E. ocellatus venom. This study provides some valuable insights into the toxin families to be neutralized in case of envenomation.

### Sample Protocol
B. arietans and E. ocellatus were captured from different regions of Nigeria. The venoms were manually extracted and those from snakes of the same species were combined. They were frozen at -80 °C, lyophilized and stored at -20 °C. Fifty micrograms (50 µg) of the frozen lyophilized venom samples were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma); reduction was performed with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma) in 50 mM TEAB for 40 min at 56 °C. They were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 50 mM TEAB at 25 °C and kept in the dark for 30 min. After alkylation, two-fold dilutions of the samples were made with binding buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile, pH 4.5). The protein solution was added to magnetic bead-based particles (MagResyn; Resyn Biosciences) for HILIC and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After binding of the proteins, the magnetic particles were washed with washing buffer (95% acetonitrile), mixed with 50 mM ammonium formate (pH 8.0) containing trypsin (Promega) to a final ratio of 1:10 and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The peptides were collected and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a C 18 trap column (5 mm × 300 µm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a CSH C 18 analytical column (1.7 µm, 25 cm x 75 µm; Waters), with a linear gradient of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water (solution A) and acetonitrile (solution B). Mass spectrometry was carried out using a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nanospray ion source (Nanospray Flex™ Ion Sources, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two micrograms (2 µg) of the peptide from each venom sample were introduced through a stainless- steel emitter. Data were collected in positive mode with a spray voltage set to 1.8 kV and ion transfer capillary set to 280 °C. Spectra were internally calibrated using polysiloxane ions at m/z 445.12003 and 371.10024. Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra obtained were subjected to Proteome Discoverer v1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and processed using the Sequest and Amanda algorithms. Database interrogation was performed against a concatenated database created by concatenating all ‘snake protein’ entries in the Uniprot-Serpentes database with the cRAP contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The precursor mass tolerance was  set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide validation was performed using the Target-Decoy PSM validator node. The search results were subjected to Scaffold Q+ version 4.10.0 for further validation (www.proteomesoftware.com). Peptide identification, by peptide-spectrum match approach against UniProt-Serpentes database, and subsequent assembly, matching, and identification of protein sequences were performed using X! Tandem and Sequest search engines.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Snake venom, Mass spectrometry., Neglected tropical disease, Bitis arietans, Proteomic, Snakebite, Viperidae, Echi ocellatus

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry
Venom, Antivenom and Natural Toxins Research Centre, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
Department of Biochemistry/Venom, Antivenom and Natural Toxins Research Centre, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria

### Submitter
Emeka Dingwoke

### Lab Head
Dr Emeka John Dingwoke
Department of Biochemistry/Venom, Antivenom and Natural Toxins Research Centre, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria


