### Accession
PXD047572

### Title
ARMC5 controls the degradation of most Pol II subunits, and ARMC5 mutation increases neural tube defect risks in mice and humans

### Description
ARMC5 is an armadillo domain (ARM)-containing protein. We found that Armc5 KO mice had an increased incidence of neural tube defects (NTDs). ARMC5 is the substrate recognition component of a ubiquitin ligase that targets POLR2A, the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Surprisingly, the absence of ARMC5 caused the accumulation of not only POLR2A, but most of the other 11 Pol II subunits associated with POLR2A, indicating that the degradation of the whole Pol II complex is compromised. This did not lead to generalized Pol II stalling or a generalized decrease in mRNA transcription. In neural progenitor cells, ARMC5 KO only dysregulated 106 genes, some of which are known to be involved in neural tube development. FOLH1, critical for folate metabolism and vital in neural tube development, was downregulated in the KO intestine, suggesting that it is a downstream effector gene for NTD. To assess whether ARMC5 gene mutation was associated with human NTD, we conducted whole-exome sequencing of 511 patients with myelomeningocele, a severe form of NTD. Nine deleterious single nucleotide variants were discovered in the ARMC5 coding sequence. Four of them were validated in that they weakened the interaction between ARMC5 and POLR2A; consequently, POLR2A ubiquitination was decreased. This proves that our findings in mice are relevant to human NTD; it also supports the role of Pol II in mediating NTD pathogenesis. Our findings indicate that mutations in ARMC5 increase the risk of NTD and support the role of Pol II in NTD pathogenesis. Further investigation is needed to determine the cause-and-effect relationship between an enlarged Pol II pool and NTD and to validate the potential role of downregulated FOLH1 expression in NTD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 2 mM glutamine and transfected with FLAG-tagged ARMC5- or ARMC5 R315W-expressing plasmids by using Jet Prime Transfection Reagent (PolyPlus). The transfected cells were incubated at 37°C for 24 hours, washed with PBS, pelleted, and snap-frozen until use. Affinity purifications were performed in four independent replicate experiments as described previously [1]. The Speedvac-dried protein extracts were re-solubilized in 10 μl of a 6 M urea buffer, reduced (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 37°C, and alkylated (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 minutes at 24°C. Proteins were digested in 10 μl of trypsin solution (5 ng/μl of trypsin, Promega; 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 37°C for 18 hours. The digests were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned by the Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate (Waters). Peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS using HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source.   [1] Thiffault I, Wolf NI, Forget D, Guerrero K, Tran LT, Choquet K, et al. Recessive mutations in POLR1C cause a leukodystrophy by impairing biogenesis of RNA polymerase III. Nat Commun. 2015;6:7623. Epub 2015/07/08. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8623. PubMed PMID: 26151409; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4506509.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data were searched against the human SwissProt database (updated on April 24th, 2019) and X-Tandem using ProHits software [1]. Spectral counts were transferred in Perseus (Version 1.6.1.3) [2]. Proteins quantified in three out of four experiments for either WT ARMC5 or ARMC5 R315W were kept for further analysis. Spectral counts reported as 0 by X-Tandem were replaced by a randomly generated spectral count value normally distributed with a mean and S.D. equal to those of the lowest 20% spectral count values from the LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectral counts were normalized by the spectral count of the bait (ARMC5) to allow comparison between different purifications. Proteins in the WT ARMC5 and ARMC5 R315W precipitates were compared to the FLAG empty vector control samples and were labeled as high-confidence interactors when their p-value was under 0.05. Their spectral count ratio was over 1.5.  Statistically significant differences between proteins from the WT ARMC5 and ARMC5 R315W precipitates were determined using a two-tailed t-test. They were subsequently adjusted for multiple testing using a Benjamini-Hochberg-based test [3]. FDR of 5% was adjusted using a 0-correction factor of 0.1. The level of differential interaction was considered statistically significant when the FDR was <0.05 and its average spectral count fold-change between WT ARMC5 and ARMC5 R315W was > ± 2.  [1] Liu G, Zhang J, Larsen B, Stark C, Breitkreutz A, Lin Z-Y, et al. ProHits: Integrated software for mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics. Nature biotechnology. 2010;28:1015-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt1010-1015. [2] Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016;13(9):731-40. Epub 2016/06/28. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3901. PubMed PMID: 27348712. [3] Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological). 1995;57(1):289-300.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Folh1, Polr2a-specific e3, Ubiquitin ligase, Pol ii pool size, Neural tube defects, Armc5, Myelomeningocele, Cullin 3, 12 subunits of pol ii

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Director, Translational Proteomics Research Unit, IRCM Director, Biomarker Pipeline for Precision Medicine Strategic Initiative Full IRCM Research Professor Full Research Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine (accreditation for the Molecular Biology Programs), Université de Montréal Holder of the Bell-Bombardier Chair of Excellence Person in charge of responsible conduct of research, IRCM

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Director, Translational Proteomics Research Unit, IRCM Director, Biomarker Pipeline for Precision Medicine Strategic Initiative Full IRCM Research Professor Full Research Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine (accreditation for the Molecular Biology Programs), Université de Montréal Holder of the Bell-Bombardier Chair of Excellence Person in charge of responsible conduct of research, IRCM


