### Accession
PXD007986

### Title
Protein acetylation landscape of developing rice anthers

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation (KAC) is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification, playing important biological roles in many organisms.Here, we reported results from a proteomic investigation to detect KAC status of the developing rice anthers near the time of meiosis (RAM), providing strong biochemical evidence for roles of many KAC-affected proteins during rice anther development and meiosis. We identified a total of 1,354 KAC sites in 676 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
We collected 3-5 mm length long florets from rice, and isolated meiotic stage anthers (stages 5-8) under a stereoscopic microscope. Anthers were pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen at once and stored at -80℃ until use. Total protein extraction of frozen anthers was performed as described previously (Ye et al., 2015). Finally, using Lys-C and modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) digest protein. Specific procedures refer to Ye’s paper. Acetylated peptides were enriched with agarose conjugated acetyl lysine antibody (PTM1104 PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) as previously reported (Wu et al., 2013).An LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data were interpreted with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK) against the TIGR Rice (Oryza Sativa Japonica) protein sequence database (pseudomolecules version 7.0, included 66495 sequences). Cleavage enzyme was set as trypsin, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. For variable modifications, protein N-acetylation, oxidation on methionine, and acetylation on lysine were permitted. Only the peptides with the expectation value was lower than 0.01 and the rank was evaluated as NO. 1 by the Mascot server were allowed for further analysis. Acetylation site assignments were verified manually from the remaining lysine acetyl-peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation (KAC) is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification that has important biological roles in many organisms. Although KAC has been shown to affect reproductive development and meiosis in yeast and animals, similar studies are largely lacking in flowering plants, especially proteome-scale investigations for particular reproductive stages. Here, we report results from a proteomic investigation to detect the KAC status of the developing rice anthers near the time of meiosis (RAM), providing strong biochemical evidence for roles of many KAC-affected proteins during anther development and meiosis in rice. We identified a total of 1354 KAC sites in 676 proteins. Among these, 421 acetylated proteins with 629 KAC sites are novel, greatly enriching our knowledge on KAC in flowering plants. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed chromatin silencing, protein folding, fatty acid biosynthetic process and response to stress to be over-represented. In addition, certain potentially specific KAC motifs in RAM were detected. Importantly, 357 rice meiocyte proteins were acetylated; and four proteins genetically identified to be important for rice tapetum and pollen development were acetylated on 14 KAC sites in total. Furthermore, 47 putative secretory proteins were detected to exhibit acetylated status in RAM. Moreover, by comparing our lysine acetylome with the RAM phosphoproteome we obtained previously, we proposed a correlation between KAC and phosphorylation as a potential modulatory mechanism in rice RAM. This study provides the first global survey of KAC in plant reproductive development, making a promising starting point for further functional analysis of KAC during rice anther development and meiosis.

### Keywords
Anther development, Lc-msms, Lysine acetylation, Meiosis, Rice

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China

### Submitter
Xiaojing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Pingli Lu
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China


