### Accession
PXD042802

### Title
Rat plasma liquid chromatography MS/MS

### Description
LC-MS/MS performed in the plasma of rats subjected to macrophage administration into intervertebral disc herniated tissue (Mac6w group) and macrophage systemic depletion (CLP6w group), as well as in their respective control groups (L6w).

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was centrifuged at 15000g for 15 min at 4°C, total protein quantified by BCA method and 100µg of total protein was solubilized and processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. After enzymatic digestion, protein identification and quantitation was performed by label free high-resolution accurate-mass nanoLC-MS/MS, which is composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.11 software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the Rattus norvegicus Proteome 2020_05 and a predicted spectral library. A common protein contaminant list from MaxQuant was also considered. The MSPepSearch and Sequest HT search engines were used to identify tryptic peptides. Data was filtered by employing a FDR threshold of 1% and considering only unique or razor peptides higher than 2. Contaminants were removed. Volcano plots were created with VolcaNoseR software, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with ClustVis software and the heatmap was generated with Morpheus software. Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment was assessed using the Functional Annotation Clustering Tool from DAVID Database.

### Publication Abstract
Intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration and herniation is a leading cause of disability globally and a large unmet clinical need. No efficient non-surgical therapy is available, and there is an urgency for minimally invasive therapies capable of restoring tissue function. IVD spontaneous hernia regression following conservative treatment is a clinically relevant phenomenon that has been linked to an inflammatory response. This study establishes the central role of macrophages in IVD spontaneous hernia regression and provides the first preclinical demonstration of a macrophage-based therapy for IVD herniation. A rat model of IVD herniation was used to test complementary experimental setups: (1) macrophage systemic depletion via intravenous administration of clodronate liposomes (Group CLP2w: depletion between 0 and 2 weeks post-lesion; Group CLP6w: depletion between 2 and 6 weeks post-lesion), and (2) administration of bone marrow-derived macrophages into the herniated IVD, 2 weeks post-lesion (Group Mac6w). Herniated animals without treatment were used as controls. The herniated area was quantified by histology in consecutive proteoglycan/collagen IVD sections at 2 and 6 weeks post-lesion. Clodronate-mediated macrophage systemic depletion was confirmed by flow cytometry and resulted in increased hernia sizes. Bone marrow-derived macrophages were successfully administered into rat IVD hernias resulting in a 44% decrease in hernia size. No relevant systemic immune reaction was identified by flow cytometry, cytokine, or proteomic analysis. Furthermore, a possible mechanism for macrophage-induced hernia regression and tissue repair was unveiled through IL4, IL17a, IL18, LIX, and RANTES increase. This study represents the first preclinical proof-of-concept of macrophage-based immunotherapy for IVD herniation.

### Keywords
Plasma, Rat, Lc-m/ms

### Affiliations
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Carla Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Mário Barbosa
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal


