### Accession
PXD043704

### Title
The response to fasting and refeeding reveals functional regulation of lipoprotein lipase proteoforms

### Description
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is responsible for the intravascular catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and plays a central role in whole-body energy balance and lipid homeostasis. As such, LPL is subject to tissue-specific regulation in different physiological conditions, but the mechanisms of this regulation remain incompletely characterized. Previous work revealed that LPL comprises a set of proteoforms with different isoelectric points, but their regulation and functional significance have not been studied thus far. Here we studied the distribution of LPL proteoforms in different rat tissues and their regulation under physiological conditions. First, analysis by two-dimensional electrophoresis and Western blot showed different patterns of LPL proteoforms (i.e., different pI or relative abundance of LPL proteoforms) in different rat tissues under basal conditions, which could be related to the tissue-specific regulation of the enzyme. Next, the comparison of LPL proteoforms from heart and brown adipose tissue between adults and 15-day-old rat pups, two conditions with minimal regulation of LPL in these tissues, yielded virtually the same tissue-specific patterns of LPL proteoforms. In contrast, the pronounced down-regulation of LPL activity observed in white adipose tissue during fasting is accompanied by a  prominent reconfiguration of the LPL proteoform pattern. Furthermore, refeeding reverts this down-regulation of LPL activity and restores the pattern of LPL proteoforms in this tissue. Importantly, this reversible proteoform-specific regulation during fasting and refeeding indicates that LPL proteoforms are functionally diverse. Further investigation of potential differences in the functional properties of LPL proteoforms showed that all proteoforms exhibit lipolytic activity and have similar heparin-binding affinity, although other functional aspects remain to be investigated. Overall, this study demonstrates the ubiquity, differential distribution and specific regulation of LPL proteoforms in rat tissues and underscores the need to consider the existence of LPL proteoforms for a complete understanding of LPL regulation under physiological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE):
After protein precipitation, partially purified LPL was processed as described elsewhere (Casanovas, 2009 JP) and applied to rehydrated immobilized pH-gradient (IPG) strips. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was performed at 20 °C on IPGphor (GE Healthcare) according to the following protocol: linear ramp to 500 V in 1 h, linear ramp to 1000 V in 1 h, linear ramp to 5000 V in 1 h and 5000 V/h up to 25 KVh. After that, focused IPG strips were cut at 7.5 cm from the anode (pH 6) and equilibrated as previously described (Casanovas, 2009 JP). Equilibrated strips were loaded onto a 9% w/v polyacrylamide gel and sealed using a solution containing 0.5% w/v agarose, 25 mM Tris, 0.1% w/v SDS, 192 mM glycine and bromophenol blue for protein separation in the second dimension by SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE was run until the blue dye front reaches the bottom of the gel  Silver staining After electrophoresis, proteins were silver-stained using a procedure compatible with mas spectrometry, as previously described (Casanovas, 2009).  
Difference gel electrophoresis (DIGE) :
After protein precipitation, partially purified LPL was incubated with 30 μL of DIGE buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% w/v CHAPS, Tris-HCl 20 mM, pH 8.5) and each sample was mixed with one fluorophore from a CyDye DIGE Fluor minimal labeling kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) following the manufacter instructions. After incubation for 30 minutes in a cold and dark chamber, 1 μL of lysine solution (10 mM) was added, mixed and incubated for 10 minutes in the same conditions. Finally, 32 μL of DIGE buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% w/v CHAPS, 1% v/v IPG Buffer pH 6–11 and 18 mM DTT) were added and all samples were mixed together and analyzed by 2DE in the same gel. After electrophoresis, gels were analyzed using a fluorescence scanner (Typhoon FLA 9500; GE Healthcare) at different wavelengths (specific for each fluorophore) and images were overlapped for comparison. Gels were also silver stained.  
In-gel digestion:
The spots of interest were excised from silver-stained gels and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) using a Digest ProMS (Intavis Bioanalytical Instruments AG, Koeln, Germany) as previously described (Casanovas, 2009 J).  Protein identification by mass spectrometry:  
Tryptic digests from LPL gel spots were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an LTQ XL Orbitrap (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoESI ion source. A volume of 20 μL from each sample was loaded into the chromatographic system consisting of a C18 preconcentration cartridge (Agilent Technologies) connected to a 15 cm long, 100 μm i.d. C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co.). The separation was done at 0.4 μL/min in a 30-min acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). The HPLC system comprised an Agilent 1200 capillary nano pump, a binary pump, a thermostated micro injector and a micro switch valve. The LTQ XL Orbitrap was operated in the positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. The spectrometric analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, acquiring a full scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense signals detected in the MS scan. The full MS (range 300–1800) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion-trap using CID for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 to avoid the redundant selection of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer v1.4, ThermoFisher) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.6 Da, enzyme set as trypsin and allowance of up to two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification. The database used for searching was "Macaca fascicularis". The results were filtered by peptide rank 1, peptide confidence high and two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is responsible for the intravascular catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and plays a central role in whole-body energy balance and lipid homeostasis. As such, LPL is subject to tissue-specific regulation in different physiological conditions, but the mechanisms of this regulation remain incompletely characterized. Previous work revealed that LPL comprises a set of proteoforms with different isoelectric points, but their regulation and functional significance have not been studied thus far. Here we studied the distribution of LPL proteoforms in different rat tissues and their regulation under physiological conditions. First, analysis by two-dimensional electrophoresis and Western blot showed different patterns of LPL proteoforms (i.e., different pI or relative abundance of LPL proteoforms) in different rat tissues under basal conditions, which could be related to the tissue-specific regulation of the enzyme. Next, the comparison of LPL proteoforms from heart and brown adipose tissue between adults and 15-day-old rat pups, two conditions with minimal regulation of LPL in these tissues, yielded virtually the same tissue-specific patterns of LPL proteoforms. In contrast, the pronounced downregulation of LPL activity observed in white adipose tissue during fasting is accompanied by a prominent reconfiguration of the LPL proteoform pattern. Furthermore, refeeding reverts this downregulation of LPL activity and restores the pattern of LPL proteoforms in this tissue. Importantly, this reversible proteoform-specific regulation during fasting and refeeding indicates that LPL proteoforms are functionally diverse. Further investigation of potential differences in the functional properties of LPL proteoforms showed that all proteoforms exhibit lipolytic activity and have similar heparin-binding affinity, although other functional aspects remain to be investigated. Overall, this study demonstrates the ubiquity, differential distribution and specific regulation of LPL proteoforms in rat tissues and underscores the need to consider the existence of LPL proteoforms for a complete understanding of LPL regulation under physiological conditions.

### Keywords
Tissue-specific regulation, Proteoform, Lipoprotein lipase, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr M.Dolores López-Tejero
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain


