### Accession
PXD029263

### Title
Differential impact of phosphate availability on primary and specialized metabolism of Streptomyces lividans and Streptomyces coelicolor.

### Description
In order to define the impact of phosphate (Pi) availability on cellular metabolism the project aimed to perform a comparative analysis of the proteomes of two Streptomyces strains with different abilities to produce antibiotics, S. coelicolor and S. lividans as well as of the pptA mutant of S. lividans, grown low (1mM) and high (5mM) phosphate (Pi) availability conditions. Interestingly, in contrast to most Streptomyces species, S. coelicolor produces more antibiotics in Pi proficiency than in Pi limitation, S. lividans does not produce antibiotics in any Pi conditions and the pptA mutant produces antibiotics only in Pi limitation. This in-depth proteomic comparison of three Streptomyces strains (S. coelicolor, S. lividans wt and pptA mutant), in different growth conditions (time and Pi concentration in the medium) was performed on four biological replicates. Protein abundance changes were determined using two label-free mass spectrometry based-quantification methods: spectral count (SC) and MS1 ion intensities named XIC (for eXtracted Ion Current). Our proteomic data reveal for the first time, the impact of Pi availability on the abundance of approximately 4000 proteins of these Streptomyces strains with different abilities to produce antibiotics. The most striking feature differentiating these strains was the much higher abundance of enzymes of the respiratory chain in both phosphate conditions in S. coelicolor compared to the S. lividans strains.

### Sample Protocol
Viable spores (106) of each Streptomyces strains were grown in 5 cm diameter Petri dishes on solid R2YE modified medium devoided of sucrose, supplemented with glucose 50 mM as major carbon source and was either limited (1mM final, no K2HPO4 added) or proficient (5mM final, 4mM K2HPO4 added) in phosphate (Pi). Growth, at 28 °C in darkness, was estimated by dry biomass weight per plate. Total protein extracts of 48 samples resulting from four biological replicates of three strains (S. lividans WT, its pptA deletion mutant and S. coelicolor) grown on R2YE limited (1 mM) and proficient (5 mM) in Pi for 48 h and 60 h were prepared as described previously (Millan-Oropeza A et al, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10:8492) and subjected to an in-depth shotgun label-free comparative analysis. The samples were alkylated before digestion by Lysyl-Endopeptidase (Wako) and sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (Promega). The resulting proteolytic peptides were pre-cleaned, concentrated under vaccuum and stored before mass spectrometry analysis as described previously (Millan-Oropeza A et al, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10:8492). Proteolytic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MSMS using a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). Protein digests (1 µg in 2 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% Trifluoroacetic acid in water loading buffer) were loaded on an Aurora analytical column (ION OPTIK, 25 cm x75 µm, C18, 1.6 µm) and eluted with a gradient of 0-35% of solvent B for 100 min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded and raw data were processed and converted into mgf files as preisoulsy described (Shikura N et al, Antibiotics, 2021, 10: 325).

### Data Protocol
Proteins identifications were performed against S. coelicolor and S. lividans protein database from UniprotKB (15012020) using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix science, London, UK). Database searches were performed using following parameters: specific trypsin digestion with two possible miscleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. Peptide and fragment tolerances were 25 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Protein identifications were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides, identified with a score higher than the identity threshold and a false-positive discovery rate of less than 1% (Mascot decoy option).   Protein abundance changes were determined using two label-free mass spectrometry based-quantification methods: spectral count (SC) or MS1 ion intensities named XIC (for eXtracted Ion Current). For spectral counting, total MS/MS spectral count values were extracted from Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.11.1, Proteome software Inc, Portland, OR) filtered with 95% probability and 1% FDR for protein and peptide thresholds, respectively. For MS1 ion intensity, MS raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software (v 1.6.10.43) using the maxLFQ algorithm with default settings and 4D feature alignment corresponding to a match between run function including CCS alignment. Normalization was set as default. Identifications with Andromeda were performed using the same search parameters as those described previously for MASCOT searches. Statistical quantitative analyses were based on two different generalized linear models depending on the type of quantification method used and data that were generated. A rough relative quantitative analysis was performed using the discrete spectral counting (SC) data. A sensitive relative quantification of low abundant proteins or small abundant changes was performed using continuous XIC abundances values. Effects of each term and their interactions for each protein abundance were estimated by maximum likelihood. Statistical significances were calculated using likelihood ratio tests based on the analysis of deviance. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for multiple testing correction. For each protein, a significant difference in abundance for the 66 combinations of pairwise comparisons was set at 10 for SC fold change and 1 log fold change for XIC. A threshold of 10 significant pairs and an adjusted p-value of 0.05 was used to consider a protein abundance as significantly variable. These statistical analyses were performed in R using a homemade R script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free protein quantification, Oxidative stress, Respiratory chain, Antibiotics, Phosphate, Proteomics, Streptomyces, Central carbon metabolism

### Affiliations
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr Marie-Joelle Virolle
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.


