### Accession
PXD017335

### Title
A dedicated ubiquitin-K48/63R variant-based affinity approach specifically identifies both high-risk and low-risk substrates of the HPV E6-E6AP ubiquitin ligase complex

### Description
To identify potential substrate proteins of both low risk and high risk E6 proteins, we established an affinity-based enrichment approach using a dedicated biotin-tagged ubiquitin variant that in the absence of the E6 proteins, cannot or only poorly be used by E6AP for ubiquitination. Enriched proteins were identified by high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and label-free quantification. E6-mediated ubiquitination/degradation of some of the proteins identified were validated in vitro and within cells by using recombinant proteins and in transient transfection experiments in cells demonstrating the potential of this approach.

### Sample Protocol
For a detailed description of the ubiquitination assay with cell extract and biotinylated ubiquitin as well as for the affinity purification of ubiquitinated substrate proteins see materials and methods section of the corresponding publication. In short, ubiquitin was biotinylated using Sulfo-N-hydrosuccinimide-long-chain-biotin (Sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin; Thermo Scientific). For ubiquitination assays with cell extract, HaCaT cells were lysed, lysate was cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined by the BCA protein assay kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific). In vitro ubiquitination was performed with 30 µg cell extract and additional amounts of E1 enzyme, UbcH7, indicated amounts of baculovirus-expressed E6AP, GST-16E6 or GST-11E6 as well as biotinylated ubiquitin. In addition, reaction mixtures contained 25 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM ATP, 4 mM MgCl2. For determination of potential substrates of the E6 proteins, 5 mg of HaCaT cell extract were employed. Reactions were incubated at 30 °C for 90 min. To isolate proteins modified by biotinylated ubiquitin, total reaction mixtures were mixed with High Capacity Streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific) in a ratio of 1.3 µg biotinylated ubiquitin to 2 µl beads pre-equilibrated in 25 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl. Upon incubation for 60 min at room temperature, mixtures were transferred into columns (Empty Lab Columns, 5 ml column volume, 35 µm filter pore size; Mobitec). Beads were washed in a sequential manner with 5 column volumes each of 7 different buffers. Additionally, beads were washed after each washing step with 5 column volumes of MilliQ H2O supplemented with 1 mM DTT. Finally, proteins bound to streptavidin beads were eluted by boiling in 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 20% (v/v) Glycerol, 4% (w/v) SDS, 0.001% (w/v) Bromophenol blue, 200 mM DTT at 95 °C for 5 min. Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE followed by staining with colloidal Coomassie blue. To identify potential substrates of the E6 proteins, ubiquitination reactions with cell extracts were performed in three independent experiments ("biological replicates"). For in-gel digestion, the individual lanes were sliced into 7 pieces and washed at 37 °C with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) until gel pieces appeared colorless. After washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 60 min at 56 °C. Then, proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After 60 min at room temperature, gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) and dried in 100% acetonitrile. For digestion, gel pieces were fully covered with trypsin solution (Promega, V5111) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Finally, peptides were extracted twice from the gel pieces in 5% formic acid/acetonitrile (1:2, v/v), freeze-dried and desalted using U-C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Peptides were eluted in 2 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid / 75% acetonitrile and diluted with 21 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a 45 min gradient from 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 35% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. This was followed by a 6 min gradient from 35% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 45% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and subsequently by a 1 min gradient from 45% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 80% acetonitrile and a washing step with 80% acetonitrile for 8 min. Each of the three biological replicates was measured in technical duplicates. Mass spectra were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion set at 45 s and a total cycle time of 3 s. A resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) with an automatic gain control ion target value of 4e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was chosen to acquire full scan MS spectra in the Orbitrap. Most intense precursors with charge states of 2-7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for MS/MS experiments using CID with 35% collision energy. In the quadrupole, isolation was carried out with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. The automatic gain control ion target was set to 2e3 or ions were collected for a maximum injection time of 300 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. For MS/MS selection, monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were evaluated using MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) with the andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2014; Tyanova et al., 2016) with default settings and match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) (minimum ratio count 2) enabled. The human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date 2018-02-06) and an integrated database of common contaminants was used to identify protein identities. Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits, for proteins that were only identified by site, and for common contaminants.  The Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used to further process acquired data. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Proteins detected in at least 4 replicates (out of 6 replicate experiments) were selected and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8), based on the assumption that these proteins were below the detection limit. A t-test (FDR = 0.001, s0 = 2) was used to identify significantly enriched proteins, comparing LFQ intensities of each experiment group (HPV-16 E6, HPV-11 E6) with the respective control group without E6. Additionally, LFQ intensities of the HPV-16 E6 group was compared with the HPV-11 E6 group. The data was visualized in volcano plots showing the log2 fold change versus the negative logarithmized p-values. To determine potential ubiquitination sites, significant hits were further analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.3.88) allowing diG as dynamic modification on lysine residues and N termini.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E6, Hpv-11, Human papillomavirus (hpv), Hpv-16, E6-e6ap ubiquitin ligase, Ube3a

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


