### Accession
PXD037571

### Title
Molecular basis of RanGTP-activated release of Histones H2A-H2B from Importin-9

### Description
Imp9 is the primary importin for shuttling H2A-H2B from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. It employs an unusual mechanism where the binding of RanGTP is insufficient to release H2A-H2B. The resulting stable RanGTP•Imp9•H2A-H2B complex gains nucleosome assembly activity with H2A-H2B able to be deposited into an assembling nucleosome in vitro. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled with mass spectrometry (HDX), we show that Imp9 stabilizes H2A-H2B beyond the direct binding site, like other histone chaperones. HDX also shows that binding of RanGTP releases H2A-H2B contacts at Imp9 HEAT repeats 4-5, but not 18-19. DNA- and histone-binding surfaces of H2A-H2B are exposed in the ternary complex, facilitating nucleosome assembly. We also reveal that RanGTP has a weaker affinity for Imp9 when H2A-H2B is bound. Imp9 thus provides a connection between the nuclear import of H2A-H2B and its deposition into chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for the experiment were prepared from 25 µM stocks of H. sapiens Imp9, X. laevis H2A-H2B, S. cerevisiae RanGTP, Imp9•H2A-H2B (1:1), Imp9•RanGTP (1:0.8), and RanGTP•Imp9•H2A-H2B (1:1:0.8). Purified protein stocks were prepared in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM Mg(CH3COO)2•4H2O, 2 mM TCEP, 10% Glycerol, pH 7.5. These stocks were equilibrated at 25°C for 20 minutes. Following this equilibration period, the control samples were diluted 1:24 with buffer containing H2O (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM Mg(CH3COO)2•4H2O, and 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.5). For exchange samples, the same buffer containing D2O was used for 1:24 dilution (pHreading = 7.1 at 25°C; final D2O of 96%). Exchange proceeded at 25°C for 10, 102, 103, or 104 s. Exchange was quenched by mixing samples 1:1 with cooled 0.8% (v/v) formic acid, 2 M Urea, pH 1.7 (1:1 mix had a final pH of 2.3 at 0°C) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were prepared in quadruplicate and stored at −80°C.  Samples were thawed for 40 s immediately prior to injection of 80 uL into a Waters™ HDX manager in line with a SYNAPT G2-Si. Samples were injected in random order. Samples were digested by Sus scrofa Pepsin A (Waters™ Enzymate BEH) at 15°C and the peptides trapped on a C18 trap column (Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column) at 1°C using a flowrate of 100 μl/min for 1 min and then 200 µL/min for 2 min. A C18 column (Waters™ Acquity UPLC BEH) was then used to separate the peptides, eluting for 12 min at 40 uL/min at 1°C. Liquid chromatography buffers used were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water.  Mass spectrometry data were acquired using positive ion mode and resolution mode in either HDMS or HDMSE mode. Peptide identification of water-only control samples was performed in HDMSE mode. Peptide precursor and fragment data were collected via collision-induced dissociation at low (6 V) and high (ramping 22–44 V) energy. For deuterated samples, HDMS mode was used to collect low energy ion data. Capillary voltage was set to 2.4 kV for the sample sprayer. Desolvation gas was set to 650 L/h at 175°C. The source temperature was set to 80°C. Cone and nebulizer gas were flowed at 90 L/h and 6.5 bar, respectively. The sampling cone and source offset were both set to 30 V. Data were acquired at a scan time of 0.4 s with a range of 100–2000 m/z. Mass correction was done using [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B as a reference. For ion mobility, the wave velocity was 700 ms−1 and the wave height was 40 V.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of water-only Imp9, H2A-H2B, and RanGTP controls were processed by PLGS (Waters™ Protein Lynx Global Server 3.0.3) using a database containing sequences of S. scrofa Pepsin A, S. cerevisiae RanGTP, X. laevis H2A-H2B, and H. sapiens Imp9. The minimum fragment ion matches per peptide was 3 in PLGS. Deuterated samples were searched for peptides with filters of 0.3 products per amino acid and 1 consecutive product in 2 out of 4-5 controls using DynamX 3.0. Data were manually curated. Structural images were made using scripts from DynamX in The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.5 (Schrödinger, LLC); heatmaps were made using scripts by Naifu Zhang, D’Arcy laboratory.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Rangtp, Cryo-em, Kap114, H2a-h2b, Importin-9

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Dallas
The University of Texas at Dallas

### Submitter
Sheena D'Arcy

### Lab Head
Dr Sheena D'Arcy
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Dallas


