### Accession
PXD025373

### Title
The search for microproteins encoded by long non-coding RNAs in P.patens

### Description
We then used mass-spectrometry analysis to validate the translation of predicted smORFs. The peptidomic datasets from our previous studies and additionally generated datasets were used. All datasets were searched against a custom database and thoroughly filtered using the target-decoy strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous peptide extraction was conducted as described previously (Fesenko et al. 2015).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra from peptidomic samples were searched individually with PEAKS Studio version 8.0 software (Bioinfor Inc., CA, USA) and MaxQuant v1.6.14 (Tyanova et al. 2016) against a custom database containing 32,926 proteins from annotated genes in the latest version of the moss genome (V3.3) (Lang et al. 2018), 85 moss chloroplast proteins, 42 moss mitochondrial proteins, and predicted smORF peptides. MaxQuant’s protein FDR filter was disabled, while 1% FDR was used to select high-confidence PSMs, and ambiguous peptides were filtered out. The parameter “Digestion Mode” was set to “unspecific” and modifications were not permitted. All other parameters were left as default values. All other parameters were left as default values. After MaxQuant peptide searches, a more stringent FDR filtering strategy was used 100. A class specific FDR was calculated as the number of decoy smORF hits divided by the number of target smORF hits. 1% class specific FDR was applied to the smORF PSMs.  The search parameters of PEAKS 8.0 were a fragmentation mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; without modifications. The results were filtered by a 1% FDR, but with a significance threshold not less than 20 (equivalent is P-value < 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Physcomitrella, Peptidome

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Fesenko
IBCH RAS


