### Accession
PXD008215

### Title
Aurora B kinase disrupts the extended conformation of lattice-bound Kinesin-13 MCAK

### Description
We reveal that MCAK has a compact conformation in solution using cross-linking and electron microscopy. When MCAK is bound to the microtubule ends, it adopts an extended conformation with the N terminus and neck region of MCAK interacting with the microtubule. Also Aurora Bphosphorylation does not alter MCAK conformation in solution. Aurora B interferes with the extended conformation of MCAK on microtubules to decrease the affinity of MCAK for microtubules and reduces its depolymerase activity in a graded fashion.

### Sample Protocol
The mixing ratio of bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) to complex was determined for MCAK using 5 ug aliquots and using a protein-to-cross-linker ratio (w/w) of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 respectively. As the best condition, we chose the ratio that was sufficient to convert most of MCAK into a dimeric form as judged by SDS-PAGE analysis. 10 ug of MCAK was mixed with 20 ug of BS3 dissolved in cross-linking buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7, 200 mM potassium acetate pH 7.6) and incubated on ice for 1 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 2.5 M ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min on ice. For MCAK-microtubule cross-linking, 10 ug of microtubules were preactivated using a mixture of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (Sulfo-NHS) with w/w ratio (microtubules:EDC:Sulfo-NHS of 1:1:2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 20 minutes later, 10 ug of MCAK was added. The mixture was incubated for 1h, before quenching with 2.5 M ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min on ice. The reaction mix were separated on a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis–Tris SDS-PAGE gel. Cross-linked complex proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested following standard procedures. Cross-linked peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips. Peptides were analyzed on LTQ Orbitrap Velos coupled with Dionex Ultimate 30000RSLC nano system. Peptides were analyzed using a high/high strategy: both MS spectra and MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.6.683). Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, BS3 (including BS3 modification); Max missed cleavages, 4; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; cross-linkable amino acids, N-terminus, lysine, serine, tyrosine and threonine; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH. FDR was estimated using XiFDR on 5% residue level.

### Publication Abstract
Kinesin-13 motors regulate precise microtubule dynamics and limit microtubule length throughout metazoans by depolymerizing microtubule ends. Recently, the kinesin-13 motor family member MCAK (also known Kif2C) has been proposed to undergo large conformational changes during its catalytic cycle, as it switches from being in solution to being bound to microtubules. Here, we reveal that MCAK has a compact conformation in solution through crosslinking and electron microscopy experiments. When MCAK is bound to the microtubule ends, it adopts an extended conformation with the N-terminus and neck region of MCAK interacting with the microtubule. Interestingly, the region of MCAK that interacts with the microtubule is the region phosphorylated by Aurora B and contains an end binding (EB) protein-binding motif. The level of phosphorylation of the N-terminus results in a graded microtubule depolymerase activity. Here, we show that the N-terminus of MCAK forms a platform to integrate Aurora B kinase downstream signals and in response fine-tunes its depolymerase activity during mitosis. We propose that this allosteric control mechanism allows decoupling of the N-terminus from the motor domain of MCAK to allow MCAK depolymerase activity at kinetochores.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mcak, Microtubules, Aurora b

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, UK  Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, German

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, UK  Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, German


