### Accession
PXD021081

### Title
Short-term mild temperature-stress-induced alterations in C. elegans phosphoproteome

### Description
Exposure to mild early-life stresses can slow down the aging process, in which protein phosphorylation might be an essential regulator. Currently, the understanding of phosphorylation-based regulatory networks under mild early-life stress remains elusive. Herein, we systematically analyzed the phosphoproteomes of C. elegans, which were treated with three kinds of mild temperature (15°C, 20°C, and 25°C) from two different short-term groups (10 min and 60 min). By utilizing iTRAQ-based quantitative phosphoproteomic approach, a total of 18187 phosphorylation sites from 3330 proteins were identified. Volcano plots illustrated that the phosphorylation abundance of 374 proteins (15°C) and 347 proteins (25°C), were significantly changed, respectively. Gene ontology, KEGG pathway and protein-protein interaction network analysis revealed that these phosphoproteins were mainly involved in metabolism, translation, development, and lifespan determination. Motif analysis of kinase substrates suggested that MAPK, CK and CAMK were most likely involved in the adaption processes. Moreover, 16 and 14 aging-regulated proteins underwent phosphorylation modifications under the mild stress of 15°C and 25°C, respectively, indicating these proteins might be important for maintaining long-term health. Further experiments of lifespan confirmed that the candidate phosphoproteins, e.g.; EGL-27, XNP-1, and GTBP-1 could regulate lifespan at 15°C, 20°C, and 25°C, and showed increased tolerance to heat and oxidative stresses. In summary, our findings provided a wealth of datasets to better understand the phosphorylation mechanism of mild early-life stresses in C. elegans.

### Sample Protocol
4.1 Culturing and Sampling To achieve age-synchronized L1 populations, eggs were isolated initially from gravid adult nematodes as previously described [43]. The age-synchronized L1 worms were cultivated on NGM plates at 20°C. Late L4 worms were obtained from age-synchronized L1 on NGM plates at 20°C. At late L4 stage, worms were separated into three groups and treated at 15°C, 20°C and 25°C, respectively. The late L4 nematodes growing at 20°C were treated at different temperatures (15°C, 20°C, and 25°C) for different time (10 and 60 min), and then quickly frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. 4.2 Protein extraction, digestion, and iTRAQ labeling Briefly, worms was resuspended by lysis buffer (4 M Guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB and proteases inhibitor) and sonicated for 6 min (5 s sonication with 2 s intervals) in ice incubation. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000g for 20 min at 4 °C, and protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin as previously described [44]. Peptide mixtures were labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer's protocol. Samples (L4, 15°C_10 min, 20°C _10 min, 25°C_10 min, 15°C_60 min, 20°C _60 min, 5°C_60 min, and the mixture of the seven samples) were labeled with 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121-reagent, respectively. 4.3 Peptide fractionation using high pH HPLC  The labeled peptides were pooled with same amount each and then fractionated using Dionex UltiMate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A high pH reverse phase separation was employed as the first dimensional separation. HPLC separation of iTRAQ-labeled samples was performed by Extend-C18 analytical column (2.6 µm, 100 mm × 3 mm) using Solvent A (10 mM NH4Cl, pH 10.0) and Solvent B (10 mM NH4Cl and 80% ACN). 300 μg of the generated peptides were loaded onto the column using mobile phase A, and the flow rate was set as follows: 0.1 mL/min for 10 min, 0.1-0.2 mL/min in 1 min and 0.2 mL/min for 34 min. The separation gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 11 min, 0-40% B in 25 min, 40-100% B in 2 min, 100% B for 2min, 100-0% B in 2 min, and 0% B for 2min. Fractions were collected from the sixth minute with 1-min intervals in the next 40-min gradient, and the 40 fractions were mixed into 12 fractions.   4.4 Phosphopeptide enrichment  Peptide fractionations were mixed to 12 tubes and lyophilized. Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 affinity chromatography was carried out as reported before [45]. 4.5 Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis     LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)) and then analyzed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptide separation was performed using the following method: 2-5% B in 2 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min, 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400-1,600, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and maximum ion injection time (IIT) of 100 ms) and followed by 15 MS/MS scans of the most intense ions using HCD (normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35; isolation width of 2 m/z; resolution of 15,000; AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IIT of 100 ms). Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
4.7 Data analysis Raw data was processed by Proteome Discover (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and matched against the C. elegans database (20161228, 17,392 sequences) scoring through the Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Data was searched using the following parameters: up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethylation on cysteine, iTRAQ 8-plex on lysine and N-terminal as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine, phosphoralytion on STY (serine, threonine and tyrosine) as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results with only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01. Functional annotation of phosphoproteins was performed by David bioinformatics resources according to G. Dennis et al. [46]. Subcellular location was predicted through Wolf PSORT [47]. Protein–protein networks were analyzed using STRING [19]. Motif analysis of kinase substrates was extracted from the data through Motif-X [48]. Kinase-substrate phosphorylation network (KSPN) were constructed by submitting differentially expressed phosphopeptides through using iGPS 1.0 software [23].

### Publication Abstract
Exposure to mild early-life stresses can slow down aging, and protein phosphorylation might be an essential regulator in this process. However, the mechanisms of phosphorylation-based signaling networks during mild early-life stress remain elusive. Herein, we systematically analyzed the phosphoproteomes of <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>, which were treated with three mild temperatures (15 &#xb0;C, 20 &#xb0;C, and 25 &#xb0;C) in two different short-term groups (10 min and 60 min). By utilizing an iTRAQ-based quantitative phosphoproteomic approach, 18,187 phosphosites from 3330 phosphoproteins were detected in this study. Volcano plots illustrated that the phosphorylation abundance of 374 proteins and 347 proteins, were significantly changed at 15 &#xb0;C and 25 &#xb0;C, respectively. Gene ontology, KEGG pathway and protein-protein interaction network analyses revealed that these phosphoproteins were primarily associated with metabolism, translation, development, and lifespan determination. A motif analysis of kinase substrates suggested that MAPK, CK, and CAMK were most likely involved in the adaption processes. Moreover, 16 and 14 aging-regulated proteins were found to undergo phosphorylation modifications under the mild stresses of 15 &#xb0;C and 25 &#xb0;C, respectively, indicating that these proteins might be important for maintaining long-term health. Further lifespan experiments confirmed that the candidate phosphoproteins, e.g., EGL-27 and XNP-1 modulated longevity at 15 &#xb0;C, 20 &#xb0;C, and 25 &#xb0;C, and they showed increased tolerance to thermal and oxidative stresses. In conclusion, our findings offered data that supports understanding of the phosphorylation mechanisms involved in mild early-life stresses in <i>C. elegans</i>. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021081.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; c. elegans; mild temperature; lifespan; mild stresses

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Jichang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University


