### Accession
PXD030038

### Title
Engineering human SH2 domains for targeted phospho-proteomics

### Description
A comprehensive analysis of the phosphoproteome is essential for understanding molecular mechanisms of human diseases. However, current tools to enrich phosphotyrosine are limited in their applicability and scope. Here, we engineered new superbinder SH2 domains that enrich diverse sets of phosphotyrosine peptides. We used phage display to select a Fes SH2 domain variant with high affinity for phosphotyrosine (superFes-SH2, sFes1) and solved the structure of sFes1 bound to a phosphopeptide. We performed systematic structure-function analyses of the superbinding mechanisms of sFes1 and superSrc-SH2 (sSrc1), another SH2-superbinder. We grafted the superbinder motifs from sFes1 and sSrc1 into 17 additional SH2 domains and confirmed increased binding affinity for specific phosphopeptides. Using mass spectrometry, we demonstrated that SH2 superbinders have distinct specificity profiles and superior capabilities to enrich phosphotyrosine peptides. Finally, combinations of SH2 superbinders as affinity purification tools showed that unique subsets of phosphopeptides can be enriched with unparalleled depth and coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation K-562 cells (ATCC, CCL-243) were cultured in IMDM-ATCC with 10% FBS (37 °C, 5% CO2). Cells were rinsed (PBS), snap-frozen, stored at -80 °C. In addition, K562 cells were treated with STI571 (Gleevec, 1 µM final concentration, 1 h, 37 °C) followed by incubation with 500 µM pervanadate (20 min, 37 °C). Treatment was halted, cells rinsed, pelleted, stored at -80 °C. Cells were lysed in 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris pH 8.2, subjected to freeze/thaw/vortex cycles, sonicated, and centrifuged. Protein amount was determined by BCA. Proteins were reduced (5 mM TCEP, 30 min, 37 °C), alkylated (15 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min, 20 °C, darkness), and quenched (5 mM TCEP). Lysate was diluted (80% ethanol, 0.4-0.8 µg/µL) followed by automated protein aggregation capture using a KingFisher (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, magnetic carboxylate beads (1:1 mixture hydrophobic:hydrophilic beads; 4:1 beads:protein) were diluted in H2O, mixed, collected. Beads were washed in 80% ethanol. Lysate and beads were mixed, then washed in 80% ethanol. Beads were mixed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then transferred to microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). Proteins were digested with trypsin (1:100 trypsin:protein, overnight, 37 °C). Digestion was stopped with formic acid (FA), supernatant separated from beads. Peptides were dried (SpeedVac) and stored at -80 °C.  Phosphopeptide enrichment with Ti/Zr-IMAC We performed IMAC using sequentially Ti-IMAC-HP and Zr-IMAC-HP magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences) on a KingFisher. 200 µg digest were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). 400 µg each of Ti-IMAC-HP and Zr-IMAC-HP beads were added to 500 µL ACN. Ti-IMAC-HP beads were mixed, collected and equilibrated in 500 µL loading buffer (5 min, 3x). Ti-IMAC-HP beads and peptides were incubated (15 min), beads collected. Beads were washed (3 min) in 500 µL loading buffer, then 500 µL 80% ACN, 1% TFA, then 500 µL 10% ACN, 0.2% TFA with beads collected at each step. Phosphopeptides were eluted (2% NH4OH, 15 min). Digest was subjected to a second enrichment using Zr-IMAC-HP, performed as described for Ti-IMAC-HP. Eluates were acidified (5% TFA final concentration), combined, and applied to a 10 mg Cerex Atlas (Tecan) column (pre-equilibrated with 100% ACN and 0.1% TFA/H2O). Bound peptides were washed (1.5 mL 0.1% TFA) and eluted in 3 steps with 250 µL 15% ACN/0.1% TFA/H2O, 30% ACN/0.1% TFA/H2O, and 70% ACN/0.1% TFA/H2O. Samples were dried (SpeedVac), resuspended, loaded on Evotips (Evosep) following the vendor’s protocol.  pTyr peptide enrichment with SH2 domain superbinders Phosphopeptide enrichment with superbinders was performed on a KingFisher. Streptavidin MagBeads (GenScript) were tested for binding capacity (AVIDITY method). 100 µL of streptavidin MagBeads (45 nmol/mL capacity) were added to 400 µL Buffer 1 (10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5), mixed, collected, and washed in 500 µL Buffer 1 (3x, 3 min, beads collected at each step). Next, Streptavidin beads and 100 µg superbinder in 600 µL Buffer 1 were mixed for 1 h. Beads were collected and washed in 600 µL Buffer 1 (3 min). Digest was resuspended in 200 µL 0.1 M Tris 8.5, 150 mM NaCl and mixed with collected superbinder beads for 1 h. Streptavidin MagBeads with bound superbinder were collected and washed in 600 µL Buffer 1 (3x, 3 min) and in 600 µL H2O (1x, 3 min), with beads collected at each step. Peptides were eluted in 0.15% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) (15 min). Eluate was applied to a 10 mg Atlas Cerex column as described above. To test combinations of superbinders, different engineered SH2 domains were mixed in equal amounts for a total of 100 µg and the mixture was processed as described above for individual superbinders.  LC-MS analysis Samples were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EvoSep One LC system and Evo Easy-Spray adapter (Evosep). Peptides were eluted at low pressure from Evotips and separated on an analytical column (25 x 0.0150 mm, 1,9 μm dp) connected to a stainless-steel emitter (Evosep) using an Evosep pre-programmed 88-min gradient (extended method 15 SPD) with 0.1% FA in Milli-Q water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (mobile phase B). Survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the mass range 375-1550 m/z at 120,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3e6 and maximum ion injection time (IT) at 20 ms. Peptides were fragmented above a threshold of 2.5e4 by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a resolution of 30,000, AGC target 1e6, maximum IT 60 ms, TopN of 15, an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 28%. Charge state z = 1, unassigned charges and z ≥ 6 were rejected; dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Spray voltage of 1900 V in positive mode and RF lens at 30% were used.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML using msconvert (ProteoWizard, version 3.0.21068) with “peakPicking true 1-” and “zeroSamplesremoveExtra” filters. mzML files were searched with Comet (version 2021.01 rev. 0) against the reviewed UniProt/SwissProt Homo sapiens proteome containing 20,386 proteins (downloaded October 12, 2021), appended with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP), and randomized decoys. The search was performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment bin tolerance of 0.02 m/z, and up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethyl (+57.021464 Da) on cysteine was used as fixed modification, oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine and tryptophan, and phosphorylation (+79.966331 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modification. The search results were processed and statistically validated with the Trans-Proteomic-Pipeline (v6.0.0 OmegaBlock) including PeptideProphet, iProphet and PTMProphet. PeptideProphet was run with accurate mass binning, Expect Score as discriminant and one f-value distribution for all charge states. Decoy hits were used to pin down the negative distribution and the non-parametric model was enabled. PeptideProphet results were further processed with iProphet to refine peptide-spectrum match (PSM) probabilities. Correct localization of modified residues was determined with PTMProphet considering phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine as well as oxidation on methionine and tryptophan, a minimum PSM probability for computation of 0.9 and 20 ppm MS2 peak tolerance. A minimum iProphet probability of 0.9 was applied in each experiment corresponding to an error rate of <0.01, and only peptides with a minimum PTMProphet mean best probability of 0.75 were considered for further analysis. pTyr sites were determined using the reference proteome and an in-house Perl script.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive analysis of the phosphoproteome is essential for understanding molecular mechanisms of human diseases. However, current tools used to enrich phosphotyrosine (pTyr) are limited in their applicability and scope. Here, we engineered new superbinder Src-Homology 2 (SH2) domains that enrich diverse sets of pTyr-peptides. We used phage display to select a Fes-SH2 domain variant (superFes; sFes<sup>1</sup>) with high affinity for pTyr and solved its structure bound to a pTyr-peptide. We performed systematic structure-function analyses of the superbinding mechanisms of sFes<sup>1</sup> and superSrc-SH2 (sSrc<sup>1</sup>), another SH2 superbinder. We grafted the superbinder motifs from sFes<sup>1</sup> and sSrc<sup>1</sup> into 17 additional SH2 domains and confirmed increased binding affinity for specific pTyr-peptides. Using mass spectrometry (MS), we demonstrated that SH2 superbinders have distinct specificity profiles and superior capabilities to enrich pTyr-peptides. Finally, using combinations of SH2 superbinders as affinity purification (AP) tools we showed that unique subsets of pTyr-peptides can be enriched with unparalleled depth and coverage.

### Keywords
Human, Protein engineering, Phosphoproteomics, K562, Src homology 2 domains, Sh2 superbinders, Phosphotyrosine, Synthetic biology, Mass spectrometry, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Ulrike Kusebauch

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA


