### Accession
PXD030198

### Title
Quantitative LC-MSMS of mouse lemur liver during early and late winter

### Description
Grey mouse lemurs (Microcebus murinus) are a primate species, which exhibits strong physiological seasonality in response to environmental energetic constraint. They notably accumulate large amounts of lipid reserves during early winter, which are thereafter mobilized during late winter, when food availability is very low. In addition, they develop glucose intolerance in late winter only. To decipher how the hepatic mechanisms may support such metabolic flexibility, we analyzed the liver proteome of captive lemurs, which seasonal regulations of metabolism and reproduction are comparable to their wild counterparts, during the phases of either constitution or use of fat reserves.

### Sample Protocol
Adult male grey mouse lemurs born in captivity were sampled (liver biopsies) during the first then second half of the inter period (N=5 in each period), seasonal variations of physiological functions being entrained by alternating periods of summer-like long photoperiod (14 h of light / day) and winter-like short photoperiod (10 h of light / day) under artificial light. After extraction, protein samples were electrophoresed (SDS-PAGE gels) to obtain six separated protein bands. After colloidal Coomassie blue staining, protein bands were excised then proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gels, and analyzed on a UPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo). The system was fully controlled by Xcalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Each sample was first concentrated/desalted on a trap column (Symmetry C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) at 1% B at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 min. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at 60°C using a 65 min gradient from 1-35% B at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The source temperature was set to 250°C with a spray voltage of 1.8kv. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges with the lock-mass option being enabled (445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense precursors per full scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalised collision energy of 27eV) and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors was set to 60 sec. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Peak lists were created using default parameters and searched using the Andromeda search engine (revert mode) implemented in MaxQuant against a protein database derived from the latest annotation of the Microcebus murinus (TaxID 30608) genome in Refseq (Refseq Assembly accession GCF_000165445.2; Assembly Name Mmur_3.0). Only the longest proteins per gene (coding DNA sequences) were retained, and after elimination of any redundancy, the database contained 39712 protein sequences to which sequences of common contaminants were added (247 entries; contaminants.fasta included in MaxQuant). The first search was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and 4.5 ppm for the main search after recalibration. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The second peptide research option was enabled. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications during the search. A maximum number of two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins were accepted during identification. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a 2-minute time window after retention time alignment. Both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine residues) peptides were considered for quantification while shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Proteins identified with a single peptide and those exhibiting a single unique peptide were not considered for quantification. Only proteins with at least four of five values per group as well as the ones “absent” (i.e. 0 values in a group) were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grey mouse lemur, Lc-msms, Liver, Seasonality

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


