### Accession
PXD025718

### Title
Evaluation of Therapeutic Potential of Resveratrol-Loaded Nanostructured Lipid Carriers on Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay Patients Fibroblasts

### Description
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a neurological disease characterized by autosomal recessive mutations in the sacsin gene (SACS), that cause in patients progressive cerebellar atrophy, damage of the peripheral nerves, and significant retinal changes and cognitive impairment. No effective therapies have been proposed for ARSACS, even if some evidences suggest that powerful antioxidant agents can be considered a therapeutic tool. Resveratrol (Res) is a natural polyphenol compound derived from vegetal sources, the application of which in biomedicine is increasing in the latest years because of its significant therapeutic effects, in particular in neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we provide evidences about its potential exploitation in the treatment of ARSACS. Because of the low solubility of resveratrol in physiological media, a nanoplatform based on nanostructured lipid carriers is here proposed for its encapsulation and delivery. Resveratrol-loaded nanostructured lipid carriers (Res-NLCs) have been synthetized, characterized, and tested on healthy and ARSACS patient fibroblasts. Nanovectors displayed optimal stability and biocompatibility, and excellent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. A comprehensive investigation at gene (with real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)) and protein (with proteomics) level demonstrated the therapeutic potential of Res-NLCs, encouraging future investigations on pre-clinical models.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, patient fibroblasts were seeded (2•104 cells/cm2) and left overnight to attach; thereafter cultures have either treated or not (as control) with 140 µg/mL of Res-NLCs for 24 h. Samples were lysed, reduced, and alkylated in 50 µL LYSE buffer (Preomics) at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 s. 50 µg of lysates samples were digested by adding trypsin and LysC at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme:protein content, respectively, and incubated at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were processed by iST protocol.

### Data Protocol
Resulting peptides were analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Elution was performed using a 200 cm uPAC C18 column (PharmaFluidics) mounted in the thermostated column compartment maintained at 50°C. At first, it was applied a concentration gradient from 5% to 10% of buffer B (80% ACN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) coupled with a flow gradient from 750 nL/min to 350 nL/min for 15 min. Then, peptides were eluted with a 114 min linear gradient from 10% to 55% of buffer B at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120 K  in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z and with a standard AGC target. Advanced peak detection was enabled for MS1 measurements. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 30% and with a Custom AGC target. For precursor selection, the least abundant signals in the three ranges 375-575 m/z, 574-775 m/z and 774-1500 m/z were prioritized. Dynamic Exclusion was set at 25 s. MaxQuant software,79 version 1.6.17.0, was used to process the raw data. The false discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of proteins, peptides. and PSM (peptide-spectrum match) was set to 0.01. A minimum length of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 December 2020). In the processing the variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option “match between runs” to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanostructured lipid carriers, Oxidative stress, Resveratrol, Arsacs

### Affiliations
IRCCS G. Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Bartolucci
IRCCS G. Gaslini


