### Accession
PXD004179

### Title
Sulfolobus islandicus PTM and quantitative study using bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Protein posttranslational methylation and acetylation have been reported to occur in archaea, including the genus Sulfolobus, but have never been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Among important Sulfolobus proteins carrying such modifications are the chromatin proteins that have been described to be methylated and acetylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in that aspect. To get more insight into the extent of these modifications and their dynamics during the different growth steps of the thermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus , we performed a global and deep proteomics analysis using a combination of high-throughput bottom-up and top-down proteomics approaches on a single high-resolution mass spectrometer. 1,931 methylation sites on 751 proteins were found by the bottom-up analysis, with methylation sites of 424-526 proteins monitored throughout three cell culture growth stages: Early, Mid and Late. The previously described aKMT4 methyltransferase was found to be potentially responsible for this massive modification.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and washed three times with the sample buffer (20 mM Tris acetate, pH 6 and complete protease inhibitor cocktail). 100 µg of each S. islandicus sample was dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 8 M urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min, then digested at 37°C in 8M urea using sequencing grade Lys-C (Promega, USA) at 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 4 h and with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) in 1 M urea at 37°C overnight. The resulting digested sample was purified using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Ireland), dried on Speedvac and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Fasta files for the E. coli strain K12 (reference proteome, version from May 2016) and S. islandicus LAL14/1 (December 2014) were downloaded from Uniprot, common contaminants database was furnished with MaxQuant. Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (25) was used for protein search and label-free relative quantitation. Briefly, Acetyl (protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) and Methylation (K) were used as variable modifications, trypsin/P was used as an enzyme with maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor and fragment tolerances were 5 ppm and 18 ppm, respectively, peptide and protein identification FDRs were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational methylation has been reported to occur in archaea, including members of the genus Sulfolobus, but has never been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Among important Sulfolobus proteins carrying such modification are the chromatin proteins that have been described to be methylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in that aspect. To get more insight into the extent of this modification and its dynamics during the different growth steps of the thermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus LAL14/1, we performed a global and deep proteomic analysis using a combination of high-throughput bottom-up and top-down approaches on a single high-resolution mass spectrometer. 1,931 methylation sites on 751 proteins were found by the bottom-up analysis, with methylation sites on 526 proteins monitored throughout three cell culture growth stages: early-exponential, mid-exponential, and stationary. The top-down analysis revealed 3,978 proteoforms arising from 681 proteins, including 292 methylated proteoforms, 85 of which were comprehensively characterized. Methylated proteoforms of the five chromatin proteins (Alba1, Alba2, Cren7, Sul7d1, Sul7d2) were fully characterized by a combination of bottom-up and top-down data. The top-down analysis also revealed an increase of methylation during cell growth for two chromatin proteins, which had not been evidenced by bottom-up. These results shed new light on the ubiquitous lysine methylation throughout the S. islandicus proteome. Furthermore, we found that S. islandicus proteins are frequently acetylated at the N terminus, following the removal of the N-terminal methionine. This study highlights the great value of combining bottom-up and top-down proteomics for obtaining an unprecedented level of accuracy in detecting differentially modified intact proteoforms. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD003074 and PXD004179.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Sulfolobus islandicus, Archaea, Label-free quantitation, Methylation, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Unité de Spectrométrie de Masse Structurale et Protéomique, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Unité de Spectrométrie de Masse Structurale et Protéomique, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France


