### Accession
PXD022371

### Title
Neuroserpin Is Strongly Expressed in the Developing and Adult Mouse Neocortex but Its Absence Does Not Perturb Cortical Lamination and Synaptic Proteome

### Description
Neuroserpin is a serine protease inhibitor that regulates the activity of tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) in the nervous system. Neuroserpin is strongly expressed during nervous system development as well as during adulthood, when it is predominantly found in regions eliciting synaptic plasticity. In the hippocampus, neuroserpin regulates developmental neurogenesis, synaptic maturation and in adult mice it modulates synaptic plasticity and controls cognitive and social behavior. High expression levels of neuroserpin in the cerebral cortex starting from prenatal stage and persisting during adulthood suggest an important role for the serpin in the formation of this brain region and in the maintenance of cortical functions. In order to uncover neuroserpin function in the cerebral cortex, in this work we performed a comprehensive investigation of its expression pattern during development and in the adulthood. Moreover, we assessed the role of neuroserpin in cortex formation by comparing cortical lamination and neuronal maturation between neuroserpin-deficient and control mice. Finally, we evaluated a possible regulatory role of neuroserpin at cortical synapses in neuroserpin-deficient mice. We observed that neuroserpin is expressed starting from the beginning of corticogenesis until adulthood throughout the cortex in both glutamatergic projection neurons and GABA-ergic interneurons. However, in the absence of neuroserpin we did not detect any alteration in cortical layer formation, in soma size, in dendritic length, and the ultrastructure. Furthermore no significant quantitative changes could be observed in the proteome of cortical synapses could be observed upon Neuroserpin deficiency. We conclude that, although strongly expressed in the cerebral cortex, absence of neuroserpin does not lead to developmental abnormalities, and does not perturb composition of the cortical synaptic proteome.

### Sample Protocol
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines, the institutional guidelines from the animal facility of the University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Germany, and were registered at the local animal care agency (Behörde für Lebensmittelsicherheit und Veterinärwesen, registration number ORG-739). Neuroserpin knockout mice (Ns-/-) have been described before (Madani et al., 2003), they were backcrossed to a C57BL/6J background for at least ten generations and wild-type (wt) littermates were used as controls.  Synaptosome isolation Brains were collected from Ns-/- mice and wt littermates (four animals per group, all males, 60 weeks of age), cerebral cortex was dissected and directly processed. Synaptosomes were prepared following the protocol published in (Phelan and Gordon-Weeks, 1997) with some modifications: Tissues were homogenized in solution A containing protease inhibitor cocktail (complete, Mini, EDTA-free, Roche) using a dounce homogenizer. After the isolation, synaptosomes are recovered from the sucrose gradient, diluted in 4 volumes of solution A-protease inhibitor cocktail and pelleted by centrifugation for 30 min at 26’000 x g, 4°C. The synaptosome pellet was snap-frozen and stored at -80°C. After thawing, samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 20’000 x g, 4°C and the pellet was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.  Tryptic digestion for mass spectrometric analysis Protein pellets from cortical synaptosomes were lysed in triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer (TEAB, Thermo Fisher) with 1% w/w sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma Aldrich), boiled at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated 5 times at 30% using a probe sonicator to destroy DNA . 30 µg protein were used for tryptic digestion. Disulfide bridges were reduced in the presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at 60°C for 30 min and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min in the dark at 37°C. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at a 1:100 ratio (enzyme to protein) and digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. The reaction was quenched and SDC was precipitated using 1% formic acid (FA, Fluka). Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 14’000 x g, the supernatant was transferred into a new tube and lyophilized using a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator.   LC-MS/MS measurement  Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a quadrupole-iontrap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher) coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher). 1 µg of tryptic peptides was injected into the chromatographic system via an autosampler, purified and desalted using a reversed phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap; 100 μm x 2 cm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size; Thermo Fisher) and transferred to a a reversed phase column for chromatographic seperation (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18; 75 μm x 50 cm, 100 Å pore size, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher). Trapping was done for 5 min at a flow rate of 15 µl/min with 99% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 1% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). Separation and elution of peptides were achieved by a linear gradient from 1 to 30% solvent B in 70 min at a flow rate of 3 µl/min. Eluted peptides were ionized using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1800, transferred into the mass spectrometer and analysed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 120 milliseconds or until a charge density of 2x105 ions (AGC Target) was reached. Fourier-transformation-based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed covering a mass range of 400-1300 m/z with a resolution of 120.000 at m/z = 200. Peptides with charge states between 2+ - 5+ above an intensity threshold of 1000 were isolated within a 1.6 m/z isolation window in Top speed mode for 3 seconds from each precursor scan and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30% using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS2 scanning was performed using an orbitrap mass analyser, covering a mass range of 380-1500 m/z with a orbitrap resolution of 15’000 at m/z = 200 and accumulated for 60 ms or to an AGC target of 1x105. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented peptides was applied for 15 seconds after precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Raw data obtained from LC-MS/MS measurements was processed with MaxQuant in the version 1.6.2.10 (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.6.2.10) using the integrated Andromeda algorithm. For protein identification, measured MS2 spectra were searched against theoretical fragment-spectra of tryptic peptides, generated from a reviewed murine Swissprot FASTA database obtained in February 2020, containing 17015 entries. All samples were handled as individual experiments. The Carbamethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, removal of the initiator methionine at the protein N-terminus and the conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 6000 Da were identified with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Only peptides with maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage sites were considered. For peptide identification, matching between runs was included, using a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes between individual runs. The error tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first precursor search and to 4.5 ppm for the following main search. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. A false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold <0.01, using a reverted decoy peptide databases approach was set for peptide identification. Label free quantification was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. For quantification, all identified razor and unique peptides were considered. The label minimum ratio count was set to 1.  For quantification of Reelin, ADAMTS-4 and aggrecan expression and cleavage, soma size and dendrite length, statistical comparison among groups was determined using Student’s t-test (wt vs. Ns-/-). Means +/- SD are reported, statistical significance was set at * p≤0.05, ** p≤0.01 and *** p≤0.001. The following statistical softwares were used: GraphPad Prism version 5.0 (GraphPad Software) and Excel (Microsoft-Office). For mass spectrometric analysis, the ProteinGroups.txt result file from MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.5.8.5). The quantitative LFQ Intensity values for protein groups were used as main columns. The relative protein abundance for each protein group were transformed into log2 values and normalized by subtraction of the median, for each column. Protein lists were filtered for proteins, quantifiable in at least 3 samples of each group of wt and Ns-/-.  To initially assess the performance of synaptical cortex isolation, enrichment analysis using DAVID functional annotation toll in the version 6.8 was performed to determine the predominant tissue distribution (UP_TISSUE) as well as the main cellular compartment (GOTERM_CC) of identified proteins. A Fishers Extract Test was used to measure the gene enrichment in annotation terms. A modified Fischers Extract p-value of p<0.05 was applied. P- values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg correction. A minimum protein count of 2 was applied to identify enriched genesets.   Euclidian distance based unsupervised clustering as well as principle component analysis was performed to estimate the distinguishability of compared groups. Student’s t-test was performed to identify statistically differential abundant proteins between wt and neuroserpin-deficient mice (p-value <0.05). Only proteins exceeding a Cutoff of 1.5 foldchange difference between the queried groups were classified as differences of biological origin and considered  in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Cerebral cortex, Development, Neuroserpin, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Center for Diagbostik, Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Germany

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanna Galliciotti
Center for Diagbostik, Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Germany


