### Accession
PXD016226

### Title
Identification of proteins from the secretory / excretory products (SEPs) of the branchiuran ectoparasite Argulus foliaceus

### Description
A. foliaceus secretory / excretory products (SEPs) were collected from 560 active adult parasites and identified and characterised using LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Adult argulids were collected directly from fish hosts, rainbow trout, from Loch Fad on the Isle of Bute, Scotland, UK. A total of 560 adult male and female parasites were used. Between five and nine parasites (depending on the parasite sizes) were placed in 1.5 mL sterile Eppendorf tubes containing 1 mL of artificial freshwater, prepared as described by Klüttgen et al. (39). Artificial freshwater without parasites was used as a negative control (50 x 1.5mL sterile tubes of 1 mL of artificial freshwater). Tubes were incubated at 10°C overnight (18 h). The following day all parasites were alive and active and water samples expected to contain SEPs from A. foliaceus were pooled into 2 x 50 mL sterile Falcon tubes and the negative controls pooled into an additional 50 mL sterile tube. These samples and the control were rapidly chilled to -70°C and maintained frozen until used for sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Secretion/excretion samples and the negative control were thawed on ice and centrifuged at 4000xg for 30 min to concentrate proteins of >3kDa through 3kDa cut-off centrifugal filters. A dilution series of A. foliaceus SEP samples for SDS-PAGE analysis was set up for different stains, one for silver stain and one for Coomassie stain. The concentrated sample (1:1) was combined with 2 x SDS sample buffer (SDS reducing buffer; 2.5mL 0.5 M Tris-HCL pH 6.8, 2 mL glycerol, 4 mL10% SDS, 0.31g dithiothreitol (DTT), 2 mg bromophenol blue and DW added to give 10 mL). Then doubling dilutions with RNAse free water of 1/4 and 1/8 dilutions were made. The samples were kept on ice then denatured at 100°C in boiling water for 5 min then centrifuged (Micsolite, Thermo IEC) for 2 min at 16000xg. Five µL of 2-250 kDa mixed range pre-stained molecular weight markers (Precision Plus Protein™ Standards- BIORAD) were used to estimate the size of proteins and loaded into two Precast 12-well Polyacrylamide gels (12% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad)) followed by 15µL of the samples in each well in descending order of sample concentration. The gels were run at 130 Volts for 75 min followed by washing with DDW for 5 min. After electrophoresis, fixed proteins were visualised with QC colloidal Coomassie stain (Bio-Rad) and silver stain using a silver staining kit (ProteoSilver ™- PROTSIL1-1KT). The gel was scanned using a benchtop scanner (EPSON expression 1680 Pro) and kept at 4°C in a sealed polyethylene bag with DDW until sent for gel and liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-ESI-MS/MS). The lane of the ½ sample dilution was selected for MS/MS analysis. The gel lane was excised and sliced horizontally from top to bottom to yield a series of 24 equal gel slices of 2.5 mm depth. Each of the resulting gel slices was then subjected to standard in-gel destaining, reduction, alkylation and trypsinolysis procedures . Digests were transferred to low-protein-binding HPLC sample vials immediately prior to LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data, formatted as Mascot Generic Format (mgf), was imported into ProteinScape™ V3.1 (Bruker Daltonics) proteomics data analysis software for downstream mining of a custom Argulus database. This custom database was constructed from the transcriptome databases (in the absence of a full Argulus genome sequence)) and comprised 60257 sequences in total (unpublished data). Database searches were conducted utilising the Mascot™ V2.5.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Mascot search parameters were set in accordance with published guidelines (42) and to this end, fixed (carbamidomethyl “C”) and variable (oxidation “M” and deamidation “N, Q”) modifications were selected along with peptide (MS) and secondary fragmentation (MS/MS) mass tolerance values of 0.5 Da whilst allowing for a single 13C isotope. Protein identifications obtained from each of the 25 individual gel slices were compiled using the “protein list compilation” feature within ProteinScape, which parses the data to remove redundancies.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Argulus

### Affiliations
Moredun Resaerch INstitute
Head of Proteomic Facility

### Submitter
Kevin Mclean

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Inglis
Head of Proteomic Facility


