### Accession
PXD012733

### Title
USP9X phosphopeptide mapping - We previously identified the deubiquitylase USP9X as a G2/M-specific CDC14B interactor (PXD012732). The functional connection of these proteins has been further investigated by a quantitative comparison of USP9X phosphorylation in WT vs CDC14B-overexpressing HEK 293Tcells (ATCC® CRL-3216™). The approach identified USP9X serine 2563 as a specific CDC14B target. Phosphorylation at USP9XS2563 has been confirmed by in-house phosphospecific antibodies.

### Description
We previously identified the deubiquitylase USP9X as a G2/M-specific CDC14B interactor (PXD012732). The functional connection of these proteins has been further investigated by a quantitative comparison of USP9X phosphorylation in WT vs CDC14B-overexpressing HEK 293Tcells (ATCC® CRL-3216™). The approach identified USP9X serine 2563 as a specific CDC14B target. Phosphorylation at USP9XS2563 has been confirmed by in-house phosphospecific antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
For synchronization in mitosis HEK 293T cells were treated with nocodazole. FLAG-USP9X expressing cells grown in either “heavy” (K-6/R-10) (control) or “light” (K-0/R-0) medium (CDC14B over expression) were lysed in buffer containing Tris /HCl pH 7.5 50mM, NaCl 250mM, EDTA 1mM, Triton X-100 0.1%, NaF 50 mM and protease inhibitors (PIN, TPCK, TLCK, Na-Vanadate, DTT, glycerol-bisphosphate, PMSF). After immunoprecipitation beads were washed four times in lysis buffer. For analysis by mass spectrometry, proteins were eluted from FLAG-M2 beads (Sigma, A2220) using FLAG peptide (Sigma, #F3290) at a final concentration of 1mg/ml. MS sample preparation was performed as described previously (Gloeckner, Boldt, and Ueffing 2009). Briefly, precipitated eluates were re-dissolved in 50mM Ammoniumbicarbonate pH8.0 supplemented with 0.2% RapiGestTM (Waters) surfactant and reduced/ alkylated by DTT/ Idoacetamide prior to over night proteolysis with trypsin (Promega). Proteolysis was followed by hydrolysis of the surfactant by TFA according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For the identification of phosphorylation sites, samples subjected o phosphopeptide enrichment using the PhosphoCatch kit (Promega) and following Manufacturer’s protocols. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, all samples were desalted with StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Vacuum-dried samples were re-dissolved in 0.5% TFA and subsequently subjected to LC-MS/MS-analysis on an Ultimate 3000 Nano-RSLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Tryptic peptide mixtures were automatically injected and loaded at a flow rate of 6 μl/min in 98% buffer C (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water) and 2% buffer B (80% actetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) onto a nano trap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Dionex). After 5 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Dionex) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 147 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 min. The eluted peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). References: Gloeckner, C. J., K. Boldt, and M. Ueffing. 2009. 'Strep/FLAG tandem affinity purification (SF-TAP) to study protein interactions', Curr Protoc Protein Sci, Chapter 19: Unit19 20.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) against the human subset of the Swiss-Prot database (release 2016_08; 20177 entries) with the following settings: Lys-6/Arg-10 (referred as “heavy” label) and Lys-0/Arg-0 (referred as “light” label) as isotopic pairs (multiplicity=2); Carbamidomethyl as fixed and Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as well as Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine-phosphorylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mitosis secures cellular integrity and its failure critically contributes to the development, maintenance, and treatment resistance of cancer. In yeast, the dual phosphatase Cdc14 controls mitotic progression by antagonizing Cdk1-mediated protein phosphorylation. By contrast, specific mitotic functions of the mammalian Cdc14 orthologue CDC14B have remained largely elusive. Here, we find that CDC14B antagonizes CDK1-mediated activating mitotic phosphorylation of the deubiquitinase USP9X at serine residue 2563, which we show to be essential for USP9X to mediate mitotic survival. Starting from an unbiased proteome-wide screening approach, we specify Wilms' tumor protein 1 (WT1) as the relevant substrate that becomes deubiquitylated and stabilized by serine 2563-phosphorylated USP9X in mitosis. We further demonstrate that WT1 functions as a mitotic transcription factor and specify CXCL8/IL-8 as a target gene of WT1 that conveys mitotic survival. Together, we describe a ubiquitin-dependent signaling pathway that directs a mitosis-specific transcription program to regulate mitotic survival.

### Keywords
Usp9x, Cdc14b

### Affiliations
(1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
DZNE

### Submitter
Johannes Gloeckner

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Johannes Gloeckner
(1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany


