### Accession
PXD032843

### Title
Multi-omics analysis identifies drivers of protein phosphorylation

### Description
Phosphorylation of proteins is a key step in the regulation of many cellular processes including activation of enzymes and signaling cascades. Phosphorylated peptides (phosphopeptides) can be detected and quantified by mass spectrometry. The abundance of a phosphopeptide is determined by both the abundance of its parent protein and the proportion of target sites that are phosphorylated.  We quantified phosphopeptides, proteins, and transcripts in heart, liver, and kidney tissue samples from female and male pair from 58 strains of the Collaborative Cross strain panel.  We mapped ~700 phosphorylation quantitative trait loci (phQTL) across the three tissues and applied genetic mediation analysis to identify causal drivers of phosphorylation. We identified kinases, phosphatases, cytokines, and other factors, including both known and potentially novel interactions between target proteins and genes that regulate site-specific phosphorylation. We observed coordination of phosphorylation across multiple sites within a protein and across proteins that form complexes. Our analysis highlights multiple targets of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1), a regulator of mitochondrial function that shows reduced activity in the NZO/HILtJ mouse, a polygenic model of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome sample preparation and data analysis for the CC liver tissue was described previously1. We also collected kidney and heart tissues along with liver tissue. Singly housed CC mice had their food removed six hours prior to euthanasia and tissue harvest. Tissues were dissected, weighed, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Pulverized heart and kidney tissue were syringe-lysed in 8 M urea and 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor. BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 15 mM DTT. 100 μg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and re-suspended in 100 μL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The proteins were digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio with Lys-C. After digestion, 50 μL of each sample were combined in a separate tube and used as the 16th sample in all 8 tandem mass tag (TMT) 16plex, rather than the 11plex used previously for liver tissue. 50 μL of each sample were aliquoted, and 12 μL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. 100 μg TMT reagent (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131N, 131C, 132N, 132C, 133N, 133C, 134N) in 10 μL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 1 μL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass-spec. Total intensities were determined in each channel to calculate normalization factors. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, 16 samples were combined in 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors.  High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) was used to enrich the phosphorylated peptides (phosphopeptides) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Flow through and washes from phosphopeptide enrichment were combined, dried, and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as described before. The fractions were collected onto a 96 well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Meanwhile, the eluant from the phosphopeptide enrichment was desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using a Comet-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database search included all entries from an indexed Ensembl database version 90 (downloaded:10/09/2017). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 1.000 Da for MS3 analysis and 50ppm for MS2 analysis, respectively. TMT tags on lysine residues, peptide N termini (+304.207 Da for heart and kidney tissues and +229.163 Da for liver tissue), and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. In addition, for phosphopeptide analysis, phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were included as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to FDR < 0.01. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs from all three tissues were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a peptide FDR < 0.01 and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR < 0.01, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR <0.001. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genetic mapping, Phosphorylation, Collaborative cross, Phqtl, Tmt

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School


