### Accession
PXD008137

### Title
Determination of disulfide bridges of human PGAP4 protein

### Description
To determine disulfide bonds of human PGAP4 protein

### Sample Protocol
CHO cells stably expressing 3FLAG-hPGAP4(Q26K)-3HA were lysed in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 protease inhibitor cocktail. After centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 C, supernatant was loaded to a column of 500 µl of FLAG-M2 beads at 4 C. After washing with 10 ml PBS containing 1% Triton X-100, 3FLAG-hPGAP4(Q26K)-3HA was eluted by PBS containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) and 150 µg/ml 3FLAG peptide. Eluted samples were precipitated by TCA. Pellet was resolved in 1 SDS-sample buffer without -mercaptoethanol to keep disulfide bridges. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel and stained by Imperial Protein Stain.

### Data Protocol
To determine disulfide bridges in PGAP4, bands were excised after SDS-PAGE under non-reducing conditions and were subjected to in-gel digestion by chymotrypsin either without or with reduction and alkylation with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide (+DTT). Peptides from the digested samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Peptides corresponding to PGAP4 were identified by database searching in-house MASCOT Server. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da for Orbitrap and linear ion trap, respectively. Dehydrogenation of cysteine and oxidization of methionine were set as dynamic modification.

### Publication Abstract
Many eukaryotic proteins are anchored to the cell surface via the glycolipid glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI). Mammalian GPIs have a conserved core but exhibit diverse N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) modifications, which are added via a yet unresolved process. Here we identify the Golgi-resident GPI-GalNAc transferase PGAP4 and show by mass spectrometry that PGAP4 knockout cells lose GPI-GalNAc structures. Furthermore, we demonstrate that PGAP4, in contrast to known Golgi glycosyltransferases, is not a single-pass membrane protein but contains three transmembrane domains, including a tandem transmembrane domain insertion into its glycosyltransferase-A fold as indicated by comparative modeling. Mutational analysis reveals a catalytic site, a DXD-like motif for UDP-GalNAc donor binding, and several residues potentially involved in acceptor binding. We suggest that a juxtamembrane region of PGAP4 accommodates various GPI-anchored proteins, presenting their acceptor residue toward the catalytic center. In summary, we present insights into the structure of PGAP4 and elucidate the initial step of GPI-GalNAc biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Disulfide bridges, Pgap4

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases
NIPS

### Submitter
Tetsuya Hirata

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases


