### Accession
PXD023278

### Title
Targeted Quantification of the Lysosomal Proteome in Complex Samples

### Description
The lysosome, as the main degradative organelle of eukaryotic cells, is involved in numerous cellular processes. A defect in one of its proteins often results in lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs). For the study of lysosomal proteins, mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as the method of choice. Lysosomal proteins are, however, low-abundant, restricting the analysis of lysosomal proteins in unbiased approaches to the investigation of lysosome-enriched fractions. The use of targeted MS provides an attractive alternative to analyze lysosomal proteins in a complex background. In this study, the two targeted MS approaches data-independent acquisition (DIA) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) were compared with regard to their ability to analyse lysosomal proteins. These experiments were conducted with samples of different complexity: low-complex lysosome-enriched fractions, medium-complex mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), and high-complex liver whole tissue lysate. While both MS approaches were able to identify and quantify lysosomal proteins, PRM outperformed DIA, especially in high-complex samples.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosome-enriched fractions were received from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), using superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs). MEF cells were harvested and livers were extracted from three months old male C57BL/6 mice. Both MEFs and livers were lysed in 4% SDS. After denaturation (10 min, 95°C), sonification and centrifugation, the protein-containing supernatants were used for further sample processing. The proteins of all sample types were precipitated using the chloroform/methanol extraction method. The proteins were then tryptically digested using RapiGest and subsequently desalted by Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, Milford, USA). Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The separation of peptides on in-house-packed analytical columns was performed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with linear gradients of 60/120/240 minutes from 5%-35% 90% ACN/0.1% FA. For DIA spectral library generation, 240 minutes data dependent acquisition (DDA) runs were performed, acquiring survey spectra at a mass range of m/z 350-1,200, a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target setting of 4e5. MS/MS fragmentation was performed with charge state 2-4 peptides using HCD (collision energy 27%) in top speed mode (cycle time 3 sec). Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 and fragmented ions were excluded from further fragmentation for 120 seconds. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) runs, one MS1 scan was performed with a mass range of m/z 350-1,200, a resolution of 120,000, 20ms maximum injection time, and an AGC target setting of 5e5. Static DIA MS2 scans covered the m/z range with gradient-specific acquisition settings as followed: (gradient length [min]/number of scans/precursor isolation windows width [m/z]/cycle time [sec]; 60/24/35.9/2.34; 120/36/24.1/3.44; 240/58/15.2/5.45.The HCD collision energy was set to 27% and DIA MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an AGC target setting of 1e6. For PRM analyses, MS1 spectra were acquired with a mass range of m/z 300-1,500 at a resolution of 60,000, a maximum injection time of 118 ms, and an AGC target setting of 4e5. Peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation width of m/z 1.2 and fragmented by HCD with a collision energy of 27%. MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range of m/z 200-2000, a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 54 ms and an AGC target setting of 5e4.

### Data Protocol
For DIA library generation, DDA *.raw files were analyzed with the Pulsar search engine integrated in Spectronaut (Version: 14.7.20, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The Mus musculus Uniprot database (release date: 09.09.2019 with 17,023 entries), in combination with the cRAP database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) which contains common contaminants, was used for database searching with Spectronaut standard settings. In brief, trypsin cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites was defined, propionamide (cysteine) was set as fixed and oxidation (methionine) as variable modification, and three to six fragment ions were selected for library generation, dependent on the intensity of the respective peptide. The high-precision iRT concept (dynamic) was applied for retention time alignment. Matching of mass tolerances for precursors, fragment ions, as well as peak extraction windows were determined automatically by Spectronaut. Only MS precursor information was utilized for peak detection and interference correction was enabled. Global normalization was performed for individual runs based on the median abundance. Data were filtered by with a 1% FDR cut off on the precursor and protein level (q-value < 0.01). P-value determination and unsupervised clustering were performed through the post-analysis pipeline of Spectronaut with default parameters (distance metric: Manhattan Distance; linkage strategy: Ward’s method; multiple testing correction: Storey’s method). For PRM analyses, a spectral library was generated using a subset of the previously published DDA dataset with Skyline, applying a cut-off score of 0.95. Ambiguous peptide matches were excluded, and the library was filtered for peptides which were manually selected to be included in the assay. For analysis of PRM data, acquired *.raw files were loaded into Skyline daily version 20.2.1.315. Automated fragment ion selection by Skyline was utilized (6 ions/peptide) with the exception of the peptides with the sequence SLQPLYR and GSFSLSVR, for which only 5 fragment ions matched, using the following criteria: maximum mass error of 10 ppm for MS and MS/MS spectra (centroid mode) and charge states of 1+/2+ for b- and y-ions as well as 2+/3+ for precursor ions. Integration boundaries of iRT peptides were inspected manually and corrected, if necessary. Experimental data were only reviewed when Skyline reported a peak truncation and peptides with truncated peaks or no MS/MS signal were excluded from further analysis. Peptide-centric reports were exported and further processed in MS Excel and for peptide and protein quantification, the summed area under the curve (AUC) of fragment ions was used. For all analyses, only peptides were considered with quantitative values in all three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic cells, lysosomes play a crucial role in the breakdown of a variety of components ranging from small molecules to complex structures, ascertaining the continuous turnover of cellular building blocks. Furthermore, they act as a regulatory hub for metabolism, being crucially involved in the regulation of major signaling pathways. Currently, ~450 lysosomal proteins can be reproducibly identified in a single cell line by mass spectrometry, most of which are low-abundant, restricting their unbiased proteomic analysis to lysosome-enriched fractions. In the current study, we applied two strategies for the targeted investigation of the lysosomal proteome in complex samples: data-independent acquisition (DIA) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Using a lysosome-enriched fraction, mouse embryonic fibroblast whole cell lysate, and mouse liver whole tissue lysate, we investigated the capabilities of DIA and PRM to investigate the lysosomal proteome. While both approaches identified and quantified lysosomal proteins in all sample types, and their data largely correlated, DIA identified on average more proteins, especially for lower complex samples and longer chromatographic gradients. For the highly complex tissue sample and shorter gradients, however, PRM delivered a better performance regarding both identification and quantification of lysosomal proteins. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXDD023278.

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Lysosomes, Parallel reaction monitoring, Label-free quantification, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical Faculty Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Peter Robert Mosen

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical Faculty Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn, Germany


