### Accession
PXD011961

### Title
Shifts in Ribosome Engagement Impact Key Gene Sets in Neurodevelopment and Rett Syndrome Neurons

### Description
Translation of many transcripts is highly regulated in the developing brain, and disturbance of translational regulation machinery contributes to neurodevelopmental disorders. In neural progenitor cells, for example, several critical pro-differentiation genes are transcribed, but their translation is repressed to allow rapid translation when appropriate signals to differentiate are received. This layer of translational regulation makes it challenging to directly correlate RNA and protein levels in stem cells and neurons. During early neural development, translation is regulated by several pathways that can impact neuron fate and function. The mTOR-mediated signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the induction of neuron differentiation, axon and dendrite development, and gliogenesis, while being key in the maintenance of pluripotent and neural stem cells {Wang:2013hg}{Agrawal:2014ek}{Ka:2014fq}. Dysregulation of the translation repressor eIF4E-binding protein 2 (4EBP2), a downstream target of mTORC1,   leads to an increased ratio of excitatory to inhibitory synaptic inputs and autistic-like behaviors {Gkogkas:2013fh}. The Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP), which is encoded by the FMR1 gene {Verkerk:1991hu}, is an RNA binding protein (RBP) that regulates translation through multiple mechanisms {Richter:2015ii}. Loss of expression of FMR1 causes Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), the most common inherited intellectual disability as well as the most prevalent single-gene cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). FMRP typically functions as a translational repressor {Li:2001ds} and some studies suggest that FXS results from an inability of neurons to achieve regulated local translation, particularly in response to stimuli {Richter:2015ii}. This suggests important roles for control of translation in stem cells and neurons, and an association with significant risk for neurodevelopmental disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were used following approval by the Sick Kids Research Ethics Board (REB).  Samples were placed in tissue lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5mM DTT).  Samples were placed on ice for 30 minutes and sonicated for 5 pulses, 10 seconds each at 3.5 amplitude setting (Qsonica XL-2000 Sonicator).  Lysates were spun down at 14000g, supernatants were transferred to a clean centrifuge tube and protein was quantitated using Pierce Coomasie protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).  10µg of protein was alkylated in 15mM iodoacetimide, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (200µl total volume) solution for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark.  Samples were trypsin (Sigma) digested in a 1:50 substrate:enzyme ratio overnight in a 37oC incubator with constant shaking.  Digestion reaction was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Samples were spun down at 14000g and supernatant transferred to a clean tube.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry RAW files were uploaded into MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (www.coxdocs.org) and searched with built-in Andromeda search engine against a Human SwissProt protein database (January 2015 release, 89,649 entries)  The following parameters were used for the search: trypsin/P enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set to fixed modification; with oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, N-terminal protein acetylation and ubiquitination of lysine set as variable modifications; first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm against a small ‘human-first-search’ database for the purpose of mass recalibration and main search was performed at 4.5 ppm; contaminants were included in the search; database was reversed for the purpose of calculating the peptide and protein level false-discover rate (FDR) at 1%; match between runs was set to a 0.7 min window; LFQ minimum-ratio count was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of translation during human development is poorly understood, and its dysregulation is associated with Rett syndrome (RTT). To discover shifts in mRNA ribosomal engagement (RE) during human neurodevelopment, we use parallel translating ribosome affinity purification sequencing (TRAP-seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on control and RTT human induced pluripotent stem cells, neural progenitor cells, and cortical neurons. We find that 30% of transcribed genes are translationally regulated, including key gene sets (neurodevelopment, transcription and translation factors, and glycolysis). Approximately 35% of abundant intergenic long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are ribosome engaged. Neurons translate mRNAs more efficiently and have longer 3' UTRs, and RE correlates with elements for RNA-binding proteins. RTT neurons have reduced global translation and compromised mTOR signaling, and &gt;2,100 genes are translationally dysregulated. NEDD4L E3-ubiquitin ligase is translationally impaired, ubiquitinated protein levels are reduced, and protein targets accumulate in RTT neurons. Overall, the dynamic translatome in neurodevelopment is disturbed in RTT and provides insight into altered ubiquitination that may have therapeutic implications.

### Keywords
Ms proteomics, Rnaseq, Rett syndrome

### Affiliations
UHN
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
UHN


