### Accession
PXD025504

### Title
Bacillus cereus growth in aerobiosis condition

### Description
Proteome profiles of Bacillus cereus at early, middle, and late exponential growth phases established by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
At the end of exponential growth, aerobic bacteria have to cope with the accumulation of endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS). One of the main targets of these ROS is cysteine residues in proteins. This study uses liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry to detect significant changes in protein abundance and thiol status for cysteine-containing proteins from <i>Bacillus cereus</i> during aerobic exponential growth. The proteomic profiles of cultures at early-, middle-, and late-exponential growth phases reveals that (i) enrichment in proteins dedicated to fighting ROS as growth progressed, (ii) a decrease in both overall proteome cysteine content and thiol proteome redox status, and (iii) changes to the reduced thiol status of some key proteins, such as the transition state transcriptional regulator AbrB. Taken together, our data indicate that growth under oxic conditions requires increased allocation of protein resources to attenuate the negative effects of ROS. Our data also provide a strong basis to understand the response mechanisms used by <i>B. cereus</i> to deal with endogenous oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Redox state, Reactive oxygen species, Aerobiosis, Growth, Bacillus, Cysteines, Proteomics, Bacteria, Redox-sensitive proteins

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


