### Accession
PXD009431

### Title
Taphonomy and Negative Results: An Integrated Approach to Ceramic-bound Protein Residue Analysis

### Description
Despite the growing body of evidence demonstrating that proteins can survive for thousands to even millions of years in selected contexts, there are relatively few examples of the successful recovery and identification of archaeological protein residues from ceramic artifacts. Claims of positive results are sometimes contentious and frequently challenged. One source of confusion in the debate is a general lack of consideration for the taphonomic histories of ceramic-bound proteins. To gain insight into this issue, we conducted an integrated, mass-spectrometry-based study examining ceramic-bound protein that was experimentally aged over the course of 12 months. By documenting the degradation of proteins after 1, 6 and 12 months of aging, we were able to provide insight into our lack of meaningful results obtained from a selection of archaeological ceramics.

### Sample Protocol
Subsections of archaeological or experimental samples were removed via a sanitized grinding tool and then pulverized in sterilized mortar and pestles. 2 grams of the resulting powders were placed in amber glass vials with 5 mL of 2% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate in purified water. After 1 minute of vortexing, vials were placed in an autoclave at heated to 108C for one hour in order to facilitate protein extraction. The resulting supernatants were centrifuged to remove ceramic, stored cold to precipitate SDS, concentrated using 3 kD molecular weight cutoff columns, digested and purified using filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) cartridges, and then further concentrated via C18 zip tips prior to LC-MS analysis. All procedures were performed in a dedicated lab, and particular effort (e.g., use of gloves, masks, flow hoods) was devoted to minimizing the risks of laboratory-derived contamination of samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data files were processed using Agilent Chemstation software in order to identify peaks. Peak lists were exported in mascot generic format (.mgf) and analyzed using the Mascot MS/MS search engine (against the SWISSPROT database), with trypsin as the digestion enzyme, 1 missed peak allowed, ion mass tolerance of 0.8, parent mass tolerance of 1.4, and a significance threshold of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ceramics, Archaeological proteins, Taphonomy

### Affiliations
University of North Texas
Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas

### Submitter
andrew barker

### Lab Head
Dr Barney Venables
Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas


