### Accession
PXD022557

### Title
Sex Impacts Cardiac Function and the Proteome Response to Thyroid Hormone in Aged Mice

### Description
Background: Sex and age have substantial influence on thyroid function. Sex influences the risk and clinical expression of thyroid disorders (TDs), with age a proposed trigger for the development of TDs. Cardiac function is affected by thyroid hormone levels with gender differences.  Accordingly, we investigated the proteomic changes involved in sex based cardiac responses to thyroid dysfunction in elderly mice.  Methods: Aged (18-20 months) male and female C57BL/6 mice were fed diets to create euthyroid, hypothyroid, or hyperthyroid states. Serial echocardiographs were performed to assess heart function. Proteomic changes in cardiac protein profiles were assessed by 2-D DIGE and LC-MS/MS, and a subset confirmed by immunoblotting. Results: Serial echocardiographs showed ventricular function remained unchanged regardless of treatment. Heart rate and size increased (hyperthyroid) or decreased (hypothyroid) independent of sex. Pairwise comparison between the six groups identified 55 proteins (≥ 1.5-fold difference and p < 0.1). Compared to same-sex controls 26/55 protein changes were in the female hypothyroid heart, whereas 15/55 protein changes were identified in the male hypothyroid, and male and female hyperthyroid heart.  The proteins mapped to oxidative phosphorylation, tissue remodeling and inflammatory response pathways.  Conclusion: We identified both predicted and novel proteins with gender specific differential expression in response to thyroid hormone status, providing a catalogue of proteins associated with thyroid dysfunction.  Pursuit of these proteins and their involvement in cardiac function will expand our understanding of mechanisms involved in sex-based cardiac response to thyroid dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Crushed heart tissue was sent to Applied Biomics (Hayward, CA) for 2D-DIGE and LC-MS/MS. In short, samples were labeled with CyDye DIGE fluors (size and charge matched) and subjected to IEF and SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the gel was scanned using Typhoon TRIO (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL). Each scan reveals one of the CyDye signals. The ImageQuant (version 6) (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) software is used to generate the image presentation data including the single and overlay images. A comparative analysis of all spots was performed using DeCyder software (version 6.5) (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL). The protein expression ratio cut-off of 1.5-fold difference and p ≤ 0.1 was used in comparing same-sex control and treatment groups or males to females of same treatment. Protein spots of interest were picked from the 2D gel with the Ettan Spot Picker (Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, UK). The 2D gel spots underwent in-gel trypsin digestion to generate peptides. The peptides were subjected to MALDI-TOF MS and TOF/TOF tandem MS/MS performed on an AB SCIEX TOF/TOF™ 5800 System (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA). The resulting peptide mass and associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to GPS Explorer workstation equipped with MASCOT search engine (Matrix science) to search the database of National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant (NCBInr) or Swiss-Prot database. Candidates with either protein score C.I.% or Ion C.I.% greater than 95 were considered significant. An n = 3animals/sex/treatment was used for these experiments.

### Data Protocol
The gene-annotation enrichment analysis software, DAVID  Bioinformatics Resources 6.8, was utilized to acquire molecular function (MF) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway information to protein sequences obtained. A search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (STRING, http://string-db.org/) was used to construct protein-protein interactions between the proteins. The searchable database of regulatory elements and their inferred target genes, GeneHancer embedded in GeneCards (www.genecards.org, was used to ascertain potential thyroid hormone receptor binding sites

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Lc-ms/ms, Thyroid hormone, Aged

### Affiliations
1. Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle  Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 2. Division of Cardiology, Department od=f Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
Seattle Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Dolena Ledee

### Lab Head
Dr Dolena Ledee
1. Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle  Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 2. Division of Cardiology, Department od=f Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA


