### Accession
PXD032996

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa extracellular vesicles

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacterial and (outer membrane vesicles) extracellular vesicles proteome were analysed. Different types of PAO1, dellys and pJNlys were lysed in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate and virulence factors analysed

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria or purified OMVs (n=3 biological) from PAO1, dellys and pJNlys were lysed in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and quantified by microBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were normalized (10 μg protein) and reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, DTT) for 45 min at 25°C, alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide) for 30 min at 25°C in the dark, before the Sera‐Mag-based workflow. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing grade trypsin (enzyme:substrate 1:50, Promega V5113) overnight at 37°C with agitation (1,000 rpm). Peptide digests were acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid (FA), centrifuged at 20,000g for 1 min, the supernatant extracted, frozen at -80°C (30 min) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then reconstituted in 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, 23290) with samples normalized for immediate analysis or stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. Tandem mass spectra were searched as a single batch against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa database (UniProt, UP000002438, Oct 2021; 5,564) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme (C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with  2 missed cleavage sites, search tolerance 7 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da, 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match, 5% at a protein level, with target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels employed. Contaminants, and reverse identification were excluded from further data analysis. ‘Match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant and label-free protein quantitation (maxLFQ) was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virulence, Extracellular vesicles, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteome

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


