### Accession
PXD010173

### Title
O-GlcNAc pattern of sOGT regulates its substrate selectivity and function

### Description
O-GlcNAcylation occurs on thousands of proteins involved in various cellular events. O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), one of the enzymes responsible for protein O-GlcNAcylation, is known to be auto-O-GlcNAcylated at multiple sites. However, the role of O-GlcNAcylation on OGT is still unknown. Here, we report the role of O-GlcNAcylation on short form OGT (sOGT). By LC-ETD-MS analysis and western blot, we show that sOGT was mainly O-GlcNAcylated in the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs with T12 and S56 being two “key” sites. T12 was a predominant O-GlcNAcylation site and the absence of S56 O-GlcNAcylation enhanced sOGT O-GlcNAcylation level. We found that O-GlcNAcylation of sOGT did not affect the enzyme activity but increased its binding to substrate proteins. S56A bound to and hence glycosylated more proteins, while T12A associated with fewer substrates. Proteomic studies combined with cell proliferation/cell cycle analyses indicated that S56A substantially enhanced cell proliferation, while T12A reduced it, and T12A led to a G2/M cell cycle arrest, due to O-GlcNAcylation of diverse proteins. These findings demonstrate that the O-GlcNAc pattern on sOGT modulates its function in cells by targeting different proteins.

### Sample Protocol
O-GlcNAc sOGT was digested in gel with trypsin, the resultant peptides were fractionated with an EASY-spray source and nano-LC UltiMate 3000 high performance liquid chromatography system equipped with EASY-Spray PepMap C18 Columns (15 cm; particle size, 3μm; pore size, 100 Å; ThermoFisher, US) (Thermo Fisher) and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). HPLC separation was achieved with a linear gradient from 3% to 40% buffer B for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile phase A: 1.95% ACN, 97.95% H2O, 0.1% FA; mobile phase B: 79.95% ACN, 19.95% H2O, 0.1% FA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. A full-scan survey MS experiment (m/z range from 375 to 1600; automatic gain control target, 1,000,000 ions; resolution at 400 m/z, 60,000; maximum ion accumulation time, 50 ms) was acquired with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and the ten most intense precursor ions were each fragmented by CID and ETD. The CID fragmented ion spectra were acquired using an ion trap analyzer (automatic gain control target, 10,000 ions; maximum ion accumulation time, 100 ms). The ETD fragmentation ion spectra were also acquired using the iontrap analyzer, and the activation time of ETD was set to 100ms.The MS2 scanning model was set to the centroid mode. The other conditions included a capillary temperature of 200 °C and an S-lens RF level of approximately 60%.

### Data Protocol
The raw file was identified using the pFind 2.1 software to search the database and its reversed database1. The protein sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot_swissprot plus Uniprot_TrEMBL, and the following modifications were defined: static modification of Carbamidomethyl (Cys); dynamic modification of GlcNAc 203.079 Da (Ser and Tyr), deamination (Asn), Oxidation (Met) and Acetylation (Lys). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance of the precursor ion was set to 20 ppm, and the fragmentation ions were set to 0.5Da. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was estimated and applied to all data sets at the total peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is a ubiquitous protein glycosylation playing different roles on variant proteins. <i>O</i>-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is the unique enzyme responsible for the sugar addition to nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Recently, multiple <i>O</i>-GlcNAc sites have been observed on short-form OGT (sOGT) and nucleocytoplasmic OGT (ncOGT), both of which locate in the nucleus and cytoplasm in cell. Moreover, <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of Ser<sup>389</sup> in ncOGT (1036 amino acids) affects its nuclear translocation in HeLa cells. To date, the major <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation sites and their roles in sOGT remain unknown. Here, we performed LC-MS/MS and mutational analyses to seek the major <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation site on sOGT. We identified six <i>O</i>-GlcNAc sites in the tetratricopeptide repeat domain in sOGT, with Thr<sup>12</sup> and Ser<sup>56</sup> being two "key" sites. Thr<sup>12</sup> is a dominant <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation site, whereas the modification of Ser<sup>56</sup> plays a role in regulating sOGT <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation, partly through Thr<sup>12</sup><i>In vitro</i> activity and pulldown assays demonstrated that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation does not affect sOGT activity but does affect sOGT-interacting proteins. In HEK293T cells, S56A bound to and hence glycosylated more proteins in contrast to T12A and WT sOGT. By proteomic and bioinformatics analyses, we found that T12A and S56A differed in substrate proteins (<i>e.g.</i> HNRNPU and PDCD6IP), which eventually affected cell cycle progression and/or cell proliferation. These findings demonstrate that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation modulates sOGT substrate selectivity and affects its role in the cell. The data also highlight the regulatory role of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation at Thr<sup>12</sup> and Ser<sup>56</sup>.

### Keywords
O-glcnac pattern;sogt;site mapping;functional regulation

### Affiliations
college of pharmacy, Nankai university,Tianjin, 300353, China
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lianwen Zhang
college of pharmacy, Nankai university,Tianjin, 300353, China


