### Accession
PXD025212

### Title
Biochemical and Proteomic proteomic changes in the roots of M4 grapevine rootstock in response to nitrate availability

### Description
In this project a proteomic comparative analysis was used to analyse the changes induced by different nitrate availability in roots of M4 grapevine rootstock. Plants, previously adapted to hydroponic condition, were grown for 5 weeks, afterwards nitrogen was removed from the growing medium for eight days to obtain N-starved plants. After this period, the analysis compared plants maintained in absence of nitrogen with plants exposed to 10 mM nitrate for 30 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteome from roots was extracted by phenol-based method. Protein fraction was then purified by methanol-based and acetone precipitation. The final pellet was then dissolved in SDS-buffer. The protein concentration was determined by the 2-D Quant Kit. Samples were purified by partial SDS-PAGE. Each sample was divided in three gel slices, which were individually in-gel digested by trypsin.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry experiments were conducted with an Agilent 6520 Q-TOF mass spectrometer equipped with an HPLC Chip Cube, performing a data dependent nLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Sample profiles were reconstructed by combining the chromatograms obtained for all the three slices. For spectrum interpretation the search was conducted by SpectrumMill against the Vitis (ID 3603) protein database downloaded from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and concatenated with the reverse one. Protein abundance was normalized as the percentage with respect to the abundance of all validated proteins in the sample. The analysis was performed using three biological samples for each condition (n = 3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vitis; mineral plant nutrition; perennial crop; nitrate; root proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences-Production, Landscape, Agroenergy, Università degli Studi di Milano,Italy.
Università degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
Luca Espen

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Espen
Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences-Production, Landscape, Agroenergy, Università degli Studi di Milano,Italy.


