### Accession
PXD041203

### Title
Murine podocyte mitochondrial complexsome analysis

### Description
Proximity labeling discovered a few mitochondrial cristae organizing proteins as NDUFS4 interacting protein. However proximity labeling is unable to differentiate between a direct interaction or a mere close association between NDUFS4 and cristae forming proteins. Additionally, it does not specify if the association of NDUFS4 with these proteins occurs in the context of individual complexes or RSCs. Consequently, to explore whether these cristae forming proteins comigrate and are retained within different complexes in RSCs, we performed complexsome profiling analysis on isolated mitochondria from HG-treated Ndufs4 overexpressed podocytes, with HG-treated cells as control. We separated ETC complexes with BN-PAGE, sliced five distinct bands representing distinct RSCs, labeled 1–5, after Coomassie blue staining, followed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Individual gel pieces were subjected to in-gel digestion using LysC+trypsin enzyme. The peptides were dried in a speed vac and dissolved in 10µl of 5%methanol containing 0.1% formic acid buffer. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using nanoLC1000 system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a two-column setup with precolumn (2cm X 100µmI.D.) and analytical column (20cm x 75µmI.D.) filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptide elution was done using a 110min discontinuous gradient of 90% acetonitrile buffer (B) in 0.1%formic acid at 200nl/min (2-30%B: 86min, 30-60%B: 6min, 60-90%B: 8min, 90-50%B: 10min). The MS instrument was operated in data dependent mode with MS1 acquisition in Orbitrap (120000 resolution, AGC 5e5, 50ms injection time) followed by MS2 in Ion Trap (Rapid Scan, HCD 30%, AGC 5e4). The cycle time was set to 3 sec and dynamic exclusion to 5sec.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with Mascot algorithm against mouse NCBI refseq database updated 2020_0324. The precursor ion tolerance and product ion tolerance were set to 20ppm and 0.5Da respectively. Maximum cleavage of 2 with Trypsin enzyme, dynamic modification of oxidation (M), protein N-term acetylation, deamidation (N/Q) and destreak (C) was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR). The gene product inference and quantification were done with label-free iBAQ approach using ‘gpGrouper’ algorithm (PMID: 30093420).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Podocyte, Complexsome, Respiratory supercomplex, Mouse

### Affiliations
Division of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Farhad R. Danesh
Division of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX


