### Accession
PXD042930

### Title
Assessment of the nematocidal potency of ABX464 analogues and target deconvolution in Caenorhabditis elegans by thermal proteome profiling

### Description
Global challenges with anthelmintic failure and resistance development lends impetus to the development of new nematocides (anthelmintics) with novel mechanism(s) of action. The free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is as an important model organism used for drug discovery and  a powerful tool for anthelmintic screening, evaluation and target deconvolution. Previously, we conducted a whole-organism phenotypic screen of the ‘Pandemic Response Box’ (from Medicines for Malaria Venture, MMV) and identified a hit compound, called ABX464, with activity against C. elegans. Here, we explored this nematocidal pharmacophore on C. elegans, and then tested a series of 46 analogues for human hepatoma (HepG2) toxicity, revealing five compounds whose potency was similar or greater than that of ABX464. Subsequently, we employed thermal proteome profiling (TPP), protein structure prediction and an in silico docking algorithm to identify prime ABX464-target candidates. Taken together, the findings from this study contribute significantly to the early-stage drug discovery of a new nematocide based on ABX464. Future work is aimed at validating the ABX464-protein interactions identified here, and at assessing of ABX464 and associated analogues against a panel of parasitic nematodes, towards the development of a new anthelmintic with a novel mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
5.1.3. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP)    Thermal proteome profiling was performed as per previously established protocols (Jafari et al., 2014; Taki et al., 2022).  5.1.3.1. Preparation of protein extracts from C. elegans  500,000 L4s of C. elegans were prepared as per section 5.1.1, collected by centrifugation (2,000 x g for 5 min) and frozen at -80 °C following the removal of the supernatant. Subsequently, the frozen pellet was ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, transferred to a 10 mL tube, suspended in 3 mL ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.0) containing 0.5 % (v/v) nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol (NP-40) and lysed by gentle aspiration/expulsion using a 5 mL sterile syringe with a 22-gauge needle. Subsequently, the supernatant was collected from this suspension following centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), adjusted to 2 mg/mL and divided into six 250 μL aliquots/replicates (each containing 500 μg protein). 5.1.3.4. LC-MS/MS analysis, and protein identification/annotation  LC-MS/MS was performed on the Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm ~ 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 2 % (v/v) CH3CN containing 0.05% ( v/v) TFA for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) in water and 100% (v/v) CH3CN in 0.1 % (v/v) FA (solvent B), both supplemented with 5%  DMSO. The gradient was at 300 nL/min from (i) 0–6 min, 3 % B; (ii) 6–7 min, 3–4 % B; (iii) 7–82 min, 4–25 % B; (iv) 82–86 min, 25–40 % B; (v) 86–87 min, 40–80 % B; (vi) 87–90 min, 80–80 3 % B; (vii) 90-90.1 min, 80–3 % B and equilibrated at 3 % B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, with spray voltage at 1.9 kV, source temperature at 275 °C, MS1 at 120,000 resolution, normalised AGC target of 300 % and maximum IT time of 25 ms. The top 3 second method was used and selecting peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 – 7 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 5e3 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 0.7 m/z, and precursors were fragmented using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 35, a resolution of 30,000 (TurboTMT activated), a normalised AGC target of 200% and automated IT time.  Mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant80 495 for the identification and quantification of peptides/proteins. Proteins were matched to those inferred from the reference genome (PRJNA13758) for C. elegans. The MaxQuant default methods were used for reporter MS2 TMT based workflow. The TMT reagent was corrected for natural carbon isotopes and incomplete stable isotope incorporation. Fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Variable modifications are oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus.

### Data Protocol
The protein data produced by MaxQuant was taken for analysis in R (v.4.1.2). Decoy proteins, contaminant proteins, proteins only identified by modified peptides, and proteins that were identified by less than 2 razor or unique peptides were removed. Corrected reporter ion intensities were then divided by the intensity of the 37 °C channel. Due to the marked decrease in overall protein abundance with increasing temperature, protein abundance ratios were grouped by treatment temperature and subjected to quantile normalisation using the limma (v3.50.0)82. Proteins were filtered to retain only those with non-zero values for each sample, and these were taken for subsequent analysis.  Thermal profiles of quantified proteins were assessed using the package NPARC (version 1.6.0) (Childs et al., 2019), which fits nonparametric models to the temperature profile data under null and alternative hypotheses; p-values were then calculated from F-statistics with empirically estimated degrees of freedom, as described in the NPARC package documentation (Perrin et al., 2020). Melting profiles were plotted and manually inspected for top ranking protein hits that were statistically significant (Benjamini-Hochberg- adjusted p-values were < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Global challenges with treatment failures and/or widespread resistance in parasitic worms against commercially available anthelmintics lend impetus to the development of new anthelmintics with novel mechanism(s) of action. The free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is an important model organism used for drug discovery, including the screening and structure-activity investigation of new compounds, and target deconvolution. Previously, we conducted a whole-organism phenotypic screen of the 'Pandemic Response Box' (from Medicines for Malaria Venture, MMV) and identified a hit compound, called ABX464, with activity against C. elegans and a related, parasitic nematode, Haemonchus contortus. Here, we tested a series of 44 synthesized analogues to explore the pharmacophore of activity on C. elegans and revealed five compounds whose potency was similar or greater than that of ABX464, but which were not toxic to human hepatoma (HepG2) cells. Subsequently, we employed thermal proteome profiling (TPP), protein structure prediction and an in silico-docking algorithm to predict ABX464-target candidates. Taken together, the findings from this study contribute significantly to the early-stage drug discovery of a new nematocide based on ABX464. Future work is aimed at validating the ABX464-protein interactions identified here, and at assessing ABX464 and associated analogues against a panel of parasitic nematodes, towards developing a new anthelmintic with a mechanism of action that is distinct from any of the compounds currently-available commercially.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling; lc-ms/ms; caenorhabditis elegans

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


