### Accession
PXD011817

### Title
Protein composition of the extracellular matrix in idiopathic germ cell aplasia

### Description
The somatic microenvironment supports spermatogonial stem cell differentiation into sperm. Extracellular matrix (ECM) plays multiple roles in the stem cell niche, including self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation and survival of spermatogonial cells.  The pathophysiology of male infertility might be representative of a progressive degenerative process of the testicular tissue, including ECM, rather than a defective genetic background, thus outlining the existence of chronic etiological agents/pathways. In this context, we sought to identify potential causative factors responsible for a number of modifications of the testicular somatic microenvironment associated with idiopathic germ cell aplasia in human beings. Proteomic analysis of the decellularized ECM was performed to study testis parenchyma from 10 idiopathic non-obstructive azoospermic (iNOA) men, dichotomized according to positive sperm retrieval versus germ cell aplasia. Germ cell aplasia was characterized by an increased nuclear distribution of the retinoic acid receptor  in Sertoli cells which was associated with decreased expression of the ECM markers, Nidogen-2 and Heparan sulfate proteoglycan-2. Decreased levels of the interstitial matrisome associated Factor IX and its regulator VKORC1 were instead coupled with decreased signaling of vitamin K in Leydig cells. This study identified pathogenetic signature of the somatic testicular microenvironment and provide mechanistic insights into the molecular determinants of human idiopathic germ cell aplasia.

### Sample Protocol
Testicular specimens were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT, Bio-Optica, Milan, Italy) compound and stored at -80°C. OCT-embedded testis tissue was available from 10 iNOA men and was used for ECM purification and biochemical characterization. The ECM was isolated as previously described (1) and the proteins were identified by nanoLiquid-chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). Briefly, ECMs were weighed, cut in small pieces and dissolved (1/5 weight/volume) in a buffer containing 5M urea, 2M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 2% Zwittergent and 10 μl/ml protease inhibitors using a plastic potter. After 24h shaking at 1400 rpm at room temperature, the samples were centrifuged at 14000 rpm at 4 °C for 15minutes. The recovered supernatant was analyzed to determine total protein concentration using BioRad protein assay and BSA as standard. Sixteen μg of total protein from each sample were in-solution digested using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. Samples were desalted using Stage tips C18 columns (ThermoScientific) and injected in a capillary chromatographic system (EasyLC, Proxeon Biosystem). A gradient of eluents A (pure water with 2% v/v ACN, 0.5% v/v acetic acid) and B (ACN with 20% v/v pure water with 0.5% v/v acetic acid) was used to achieve separation (0.15 μL/min flow rate) (from 10 to 35% B in 230minutes, from 35 to 50% B in 5minutes and from 50 to 70% B in 30minutes). MS analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 (2): label-free protein quantification was based on the intensities of precursors, both as protein intensities and normalized protein intensities (LFQ intensities). Peptides and proteins were accepted with a FDR less than 1%, two minimum peptides per protein with one unique. The experiments were performed in technical triplicates and searches were made against the UniProt_ Human Complete Proteome_ cp_hum_2015_04.  1. Genovese, L. et al. Cellular localization, invasion, and turnover are differently influenced by healthy and tumor-derived extracellular matrix. Tissue Eng Part A 20, 2005-2018, (2014). 2. Cox, J. et al. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10, 1794–1805 (2011).

### Data Protocol
Hierarchical clustering was obtained using MeV software (v. 4.9.0) with p<0.005 considered for statistical significance. The significantly differently expressed proteins were compared to the “Total Human Matrisome” database (3) in order to better characterize the ECM composition in terms of core matrisome or matrisome associated proteins.  3. Naba, A. et al. The extracellular matrix: Tools and insights for the "omics" era. Matrix biology: journal of the International Society for Matrix Biology 49, 10-24, (2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; male infertility; label-free quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Urological Research Institute DiBit2, Scientific Institute San Raffaele Via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan - Italy Tel: +39-02-2643.6351; Fax. +39-02-2643.5659
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Massimo Alfano
Urological Research Institute DiBit2, Scientific Institute San Raffaele Via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan - Italy Tel: +39-02-2643.6351; Fax. +39-02-2643.5659


