### Accession
PXD017840

### Title
Complexome profiling of human cybrids laking mitochondrial genes Cox1 or Cox2

### Description
Mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) complexes I, III and IV are associated into large molecular structures named supercomplexes (SCs) or respirasomes, whose functional roles remain to be fully understood. Biochemical analyses in a diversity of OXPHOS-deficient cellular and animal models support the idea that one of the SCs function is to confer stability to individual MRC complexes, in particular to complex I (CI). To gain insight into the mechanisms that regulate the structural interdependences among MRC complexes, we performed complexome profiling of human cybrids laking mitochondrial genes Cox1 or Cox2 and compared protein assemblies and intermediates to control 143B cells.

### Sample Protocol
Blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid) (Wittig et al. 2006). Each lane was cut into 60 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 1500 rpm. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for 1 hour at 56°C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoactamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50  mmol/L ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*10E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 10E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analysed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.6.1.0). The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2.  Following variable modifications were selected: at N-terminus acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), as fixed modification carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines.  Human reference proteom set from Uniprot (Download2/2018, 71785 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Identifications from reverse decoy data base, by site and known contaminants were excluded.  Abundance profiles were generated by NOVA software [Giese et al. 2015] using intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values from MaxQuant. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between controls and  mutants. Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex III dimer (483695 Da), Complex IV (220156 Da), complex V (618824Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing complex I, III dimer and one copy of complex IV (1663827Da) was used for native mass calibration. The equation [f(x)=10048E6*e^(0.1188x), R2=0.9978] obtained by exponential regression was used to calculate the native masses of each slice.  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I, III, and IV can associate into larger structures termed supercomplexes or respirasomes, thereby generating structural interdependences among the individual complexes yet to be understood. In patients, nonsense mutations in complex IV subunit genes cause severe encephalomyopathies randomly associated with pleiotropic complex I defects. Using complexome profiling and biochemical analyses, we have explored the structural rearrangements of the respiratory chain in human cell lines depleted of the catalytic complex IV subunit COX1 or COX2. In the absence of a functional complex IV holoenzyme, several supercomplex I+III<sub>2</sub> species coexist, which differ in their content of COX subunits and COX7A2L/HIGD2A assembly factors. The incorporation of an atypical COX1-HIGD2A submodule attenuates supercomplex I+III<sub>2</sub> turnover rate, indicating an unexpected molecular adaptation for supercomplexes stabilization that relies on the presence of COX1 independently of holo-complex IV formation. Our data set the basis for complex I structural dependence on complex IV, revealing the co-existence of alternative pathways for the biogenesis of "supercomplex-associated" versus individual complex IV, which could determine physiological adaptations under different stress and disease scenarios.

### Keywords
Supercomplexes, Mitochondria, Cybrids, Complexome profiling

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Laboratory of Mitochondrial Disorders, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Ugalde
Laboratory of Mitochondrial Disorders, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain


