### Accession
PXD002379

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomic profiling of maize opaque endosperm mutants

### Description
Reduced prolamin (zein) accumulation and defective ER-body formation occurs in maize opaque endosperm mutants opaque2 (o2), floury2 (fl2), defective endosperm*B30 (DeB30), and mucronate (Mc) whereas other opaque mutants such as opaque1 (o1) and floury1 (fl1) are normal in these regards. This suggests that other factors contribute to kernel texture. We used a LC-MS/MS proteomics approach to compare non-zein proteins of nearly isogenic opaque mutants. In total, 2762 proteins were identified that were enriched for biological processes such as protein transport and folding, amino acid biosynthesis, and proteolysis. Amino acid analysis of top proteins revealed qualitative changes in lysine abundance contributing to the overall lysine increase. Principal component analysis and pathway enrichment suggested that the mutants partition into three groups: Mc, DeB30, fl2 and o2; o1; and fl1. Indicator species analysis revealed mutant-specific proteins, and highlighted ER secretory pathway components that are enriched in selected groups of mutants, albeit with no common proteins across all mutants. Most significantly changed proteins were related to stress or defense and zein partitioning into the soluble fraction for Mc, DeB30, o1 and fl1 specifically. We suggest that ER stress is a universal trigger of opacity regardless of qualitative or quantitative changes in zein accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Maize plant material Nearly isogenic lines for maize opaque mutants were developed at the University of Arizona, and maintained at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Plants used for proteomic analysis were grown in Sunshine MVP (formerly metro-mix 200) soil under 16 hour day length cycles. Plants were grown in day temperature ranging from 27 to 29°C and night temperature between 21 and 23°C. The plants were self-pollinated and developing kernels were harvested by plunge freezing whole ears in liquid nitrogen at 20 days after pollination (DAP).  Zein and non-zein fractionation and SDS-PAGE analysis For each opaque mutant and the reference W64a WT, we used four biological replicate ears. Three whole kernels were taken from each ear and were fractionated into alcohol-soluble zeins and aqueous non-zeins using the Wallace method.30 Zein and non-zein fractions were checked for integrity by SDS-PAGE and total protein was quantified by BCA colorimetric assay. Non-zeins were suspended in 8M urea with 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and shipped on dry ice to University of California-Davis Proteomic Core for in-gel trypsin digest and proteome evaluation by LC-MS/MS.  Sample preparation and trypsin digestion Protein samples were precipitated according to manufacture protocols using a ProteoExtract Protein Precipitation Kit from CalBiochem. The resulting protein pellet was solubilized in 100µL of 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). 200mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5mM and samples were incubated for 30min at 37°C. Next, 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 15mM and incubated for 30min at room temperature, followed by the addition of 20 µL DTT to quench the IAA reaction. Lys-C/trypsin (Promega) was next added in a 1:25 ratio (enzyme:protein) and incubated at 37°C for four hours. Samples were then diluted to <1M urea by the addition of 50mM AMBIC and digested overnight at 37°C. The following day, samples were desalted using C18 Macro Spin columns (Nest Group) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis LC separation was done on a Waters Nano Acquity UHPLC (Waters Corporation) with a Proxeon nanospray source. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and roughly 3µg of each sample was loaded onto a 100 micron x 25 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated on a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 0.1% formic acid (A) and 100% acetonitrile (B) with a flow rate of 300nL/min. A 60 minute gradient was ran with 5% to 35% B over 100 minutes, 35% to 80% B over 3 minutes, 80% B for 1 minute, 80% to 5% B over 1 minute, and finally held at 5% B for 15 minutes. Mass spectra were collected on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-dependent mode with one MS precursor scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. A dynamic exclusion of 15 seconds was used. MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and a target of 1 × 106 ions or a maximum injection time of 30ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 and a target of 5 × 104 ions or a maximum injection time of 50ms. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) value of 27. Unassigned charge states as well as +1 and ions >+5 were excluded from MS/MS fragmentation. Database searching Tandem mass spectra were extracted and were analyzed using X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE 2013.02.01.1). X! Tandem was set up to search the Uniprot__20130710_VpC4HL database (124576 entries assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and the Uniprot__20140311_skARqM database (65822 entries). X! Tandem was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Reduced prolamin (zein) accumulation and defective endoplasmic reticulum (ER) body formation occurs in maize opaque endosperm mutants opaque2 (o2), floury2 (fl2), defective endosperm*B30 (DeB30), and Mucronate (Mc), whereas other opaque mutants such as opaque1 (o1) and floury1 (fl1) are normal in these regards. This suggests that other factors contribute to kernel texture. A liquid chromatography approach coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomics was used to compare non-zein proteins of nearly isogenic opaque endosperm mutants. In total, 2762 proteins were identified that were enriched for biological processes such as protein transport and folding, amino acid biosynthesis, and proteolysis. Principal component analysis and pathway enrichment suggested that the mutants partitioned into three groups: (i) Mc, DeB30, fl2 and o2; (ii) o1; and (iii) fl1. Indicator species analysis revealed mutant-specific proteins, and highlighted ER secretory pathway components that were enriched in selected groups of mutants. The most significantly changed proteins were related to stress or defense and zein partitioning into the soluble fraction for Mc, DeB30, o1, and fl1 specifically. In silico dissection of the most significantly changed proteins revealed novel qualitative changes in lysine abundance contributing to the overall lysine increase and the nutritional rebalancing of the o2 and fl2 endosperm.

### Keywords
Er stress, Upr, Proteomics, Opaque, Non-zein, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Maize, Endosperm

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, Center for Plant Science Innovation, Beadle Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE

### Submitter
Shangang Jia

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Holding
Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, Center for Plant Science Innovation, Beadle Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE


