### Accession
PXD019446

### Title
A primary human T-cell spectral library to facilitate large scale quantitative T-cell proteomics

### Description
Comprehensive spectral libraries are essential in sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) based high throughput proteomic studies. Even though SWATH-MS assays provide robust quantitative proteomics data its applications to human T-cell studies are limited by the lack of a human T-cell spectral library. To address this resource gap, we generated a high-quality spectral library containing data for 3,941 unique proteins from primary human T-cells across genetically unrelated donors. SWATH-MS analysis of 18 primary T-cell samples using the new human T-cell spectral library identified and quantified 3,022 proteins at 1% FDR, whereas the larger Pan-human spectral library identified and quantified 2,794 proteins, with only 34% overlap. Combining the two libraries resulted in 4,061 proteins, covering ~50% of proteins in immune-related pathways. Overall, this data suggests DDA-MS is suited to discovery projects through to its enhanced sensitivity and SWATH-MS is suited to high-throughput projects.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) separated from buffy coats obtained from Red Cross Blood Bank were used in spectral library generation experiments. PBMCs isolated from one buffy coat was in vitro activated using CD3/28 Dynabeads (Thermofisher, USA) at 1:1 cell to bead ratio in RPMI 1640 medium, 10% foetal calf serum (Gibco, USA) and 50 units/ml penicillin and 50μg/ml streptomycin. This ‘R10’ culture medium was used in vitro to expand T-cells over 7 days at 370C in a humidified, 5% CO2 incubator to obtain activated CD3+ T-cells (sample identifier: SPLib1_HuTcell). Three samples of ex vivo CD3+ T-cells were also isolated using Pan-human T-cell magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) from PBMCs separated from three buffy coats (sample identifiers: SPLib2_HuTcell, SPLib3_HuTcell and SPLib4_HuTcell).  Obtained four T-cell samples were lysed separately in a lysis buffer composed of 100 mM TEAB (Thriethylammonium bicarbonate) (Sigma, USA), 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Bio-Rad laboratories, USA), 5mM MgCl2 (Sigma, USA) supplemented with 1x Roche complete protease inhibitors (Sigma, USA). An aliquot of 600 μg of protein as quantified by Pierce BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was reduced in 20 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma, USA) at 75°C for 10 min. After cooling the sample for 10 min at room temperature, 0.5 M Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) (Sigma, USA) was added for a final concentration of 40 mM, and kept for 30 min in the dark to alkylate the proteins. The detergent removal was performed by the filter aided sample preparation method using a 10 ml, 10 KDa Amicon molecular weight cutoff filter tube (Merk Millipore, USA) while sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma, USA) at protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1 was used to digest proteins. The resulting peptides were desalted using a Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, USA), lyophilized with a speed vacuum prior to fractionation in Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent technologies, USA) using a 24 cm, pH 3-10 IPG strip (GE Health Care, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each fraction was lyophilized and then resuspended in 30 µL of H2O with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) for mass spectrometry analysis. For mass spectrometry analysis, each peptide fraction was lyophilized and resuspended in 30 µL of MS grade water with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) spiked with the indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (1:100) (Biognosys, Switzerland). Peptide samples were chromatographically separated by a 10 uL injection on an Eksigent cHiPLCTM-nanoflex system (AB Sciex, USA) using a 15 cm long ChromXP C18-CL column (particle size 3 µm, 120 Å, 200 µm x 6 mm). A pre-concentration step (10 min) was performed employing a ChromXP trap (C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å, 200 µm x 6 mm) before commencement of the gradient. A flow rate of 500 nl/min was used for all experiments. The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (100 acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) were used for the three consecutive linear gradients (90 min in total) for peptide elution: 5-10% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) over 2 min, 10-40% solvent B over 58 min and 40-50% solvent B over 5 min. A final gradient from 50% to 95% solvent B in 10 min was used to clean the column. Eluates from the RP-HPLC column were directly injected into the NanoSpray II ionisation source of a TripleTOF 5600 MS/MS System (AB Sciex, USA) operated in positive ion electrospray mode. The peptides and the DDA-MS acquisition protocol were created using Analyst 1.5.1 software (AB Sciex, USA) in which a 300–2000  (m/z) precursor mass range with 250 ms accumulation time and 100–2000 (m/z) product mass range with 100 ms accumulation time were selected in all the analysis. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 50 counts and a charge state of +2 to +4 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion spectra for a maximum of 10 of the most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA-MS data was analysed through transproteomic pipeline (TPP) and OpenMS to generate the primary human T-cell spectral library. In brief, after converting DDA-MS data into mzML file format (msconvert, ProteoWizard), each data set was searched using X!Tandem with k-score plugin and Comet against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human reviewed database with added decoy database and iRT sequence. Search parameters were set as; parent mass error of ±50 ppm, fragment mass error of ±0.05 Da, trypsin digestion allowing two missed cleavages while carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) were included as fixed and variable modifications respectively. Results were then scored and combined with peptideProphet and iProphet, respectively to proceed with the false discovery rate (FDR) calculation using MAYU. Data were filtered through the iProphet probability cut-off corresponding to protein FDR at 1% as calculated by MAYU and spectraST was then used to generate individual spectral libraries normalised to iRT peptides. After building a consensus spectral library by combining individual libraries.  Spectrast2tsv (msproteomicstools 0.8.0) was used to generate the final assay library compatible with SWATH-MS windows from 300-2000 m/z mass range. The assay libraries were generated compatible with PeakView (.tsv), Skyline or Spectronaut (.csv) and OpenSWATH (TraML). Decoy sequences were added to OpenSWATH assay library using OpenSWATH decoy generator.

### Publication Abstract
Data independent analysis (DIA) exemplified by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) provides robust quantitative proteomics data, but the lack of a public primary human T-cell spectral library is a current resource gap. Here, we report the generation of a high-quality spectral library containing data for 4,833 distinct proteins from human T-cells across genetically unrelated donors, covering ~24% proteins of the UniProt/SwissProt reviewed human proteome. SWATH-MS analysis of 18 primary T-cell samples using the new human T-cell spectral library reliably identified and quantified 2,850 proteins at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). In comparison, the larger Pan-human spectral library identified and quantified 2,794 T-cell proteins in the same dataset. As the libraries identified an overlapping set of proteins, combining the two libraries resulted in quantification of 4,078 human T-cell proteins. Collectively, this large data archive will be a useful public resource for human T-cell proteomic studies. The human T-cell library is available at SWATHAtlas and the data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD019446 and PXD019542) and PeptideAtlas (PASS01587).

### Keywords
Human, Spectral library, Primary t-cells, Swath

### Affiliations
Senior lecturer, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Saliyapura, Sri Lanka
Visiting Scientists, Precision and Systems Biomedicine group, QIMR Berghofer Medical Reserach Institute, Brisbane, Australia
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4006

### Submitter
Harshi Weerakoon

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4006


