### Accession
PXD004909

### Title
A. niger LC-MS/MS different carbon sources

### Description
The A. niger strain N400 was cultured with different carbon sources.

### Sample Protocol
Culture conditions - A. niger N400 was grown in batch fermentations with the following culture conditions: Mycelium of A. niger N400 was pre-grown for 18 h in minimal medium supplemented with 100 mM sorbitol as sole carbon source and equal amounts of biomass were transferred to controlled fermenters containing minimal medium with the following carbon source compositions: sorbitol 100 mM (reference condition), 5 mM mannose, 5 mM arabinose, 5 mM rhamnose, or sorbitol 100 mM plus either 0.1 mM xylose, 1 mM glucose or 60mM glucose. The initial pH of these cultures was set at pH 4.0. After inoculation, the pH of the fermenter cultures dropped, and was controlled at a lower limit of pH 3.5. Two hours after inoculation, mycelium was taken and cellular fractions enriched for plasma membranes were obtained. Preparation of cell free extracts for proteomic analysis - Mycelium samples were washed with a 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.6 containing 150 mM NaCl, and resuspended in the same solution containing 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail, were mechanically disrupted using a French press (8000 psi). Cell free extracts were centrifuged for 5 min at low speed (500 g). Pellet was discarded and supernatants were then centrifuged during 20 min at medium speed (5,000 g). Pellet was discarded and the remaining supernatants were centrifuged for 120 min at high speed (~85,000 g). Obtained pellets were resuspended using a Dounce homogenizer in 1 mL of a 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.6 containing 250 mM sucrose.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS - Membrane-bound proteins were solubilised by mixing sample volumes (25 μg of protein), with equal volumes of a 2x solution of 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, with 1 M 6-aminocaproic acid and 10 g L−1 of n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside, followed by an incubation step in a thermoblock, for 1 h at 20°C and vigorous stirring (1000 rpm). Later, samples were sonicated for 15 min, and centrifuged at 22000 g, in a benchtop centrifuge, for 30 min. Obtained supernatants were concentrated using MMicrocon YM-10 columns.  Samples were loaded into a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, which was run until the loaded samples entered the gel. The gel was stained using Page Blue staining and rinsed with ultrapure water. Each sample-gel lane was cut into one slice (approx. 1 cm2), sliced into smaller pieces of about 1 mm3 and transferred into microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were destained and equilibrated through three washing steps using the following solutions: 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (incubated 5 min), ABC/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) (incubated 5 min) and neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min). These washing steps were repeated two times. The gel samples were then swelled in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 56°C to reduce protein disulfide bonds. Subsequently, the DTT solutions were removed and samples were alkylated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in ABC, for 20 min, at room temperature, in the dark. The 2-chloroacetamide solutions were removed, and samples were again washed twice with: neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min), ABC (incubated 5 min) and neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min). Approximately 150 μL of digestion buffer, containing sequencing grade modified trypsin (12.5 ng/μL) in ABC, was added to each sample, making sure that all gel pieces were kept wet during digestion (adding, if necessary, additional ABC solution). Protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C. Peptide digestion products were extracted by adding 50 μL of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by an incubation step in a thermoblock for 20 min, at room temperature and vigorous stirring (1400 rpm). Gel pieces were then subjected to 20 s sonication in a water bath, centrifuged and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The peptide extraction step was then repeated once by washing the gel pieces with buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) followed by the mentioned incubation and sonication steps. Supernatants from both extractions were pooled and samples were placed in a vacuum centrifuge for acetonitrile evaporation util 20-40 μL were left. Samples were acidified by addition of TFA (1:1, v/v) and peptide clean-up procedure, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, was performed.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were identified and quantified using the maxQuant software. The peptides were mapped against the annotated A. niger ATCC1015 in silico proteome obtained from the JGI database (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Aspni7/Aspni7.home.html) using the default settings of the maxQuant software (variable modifications: oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term); enzyme used: trypsin/P; fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (cys)), except for the variables affecting the label free quantification. For this, the multiplicity was set to 1, and the parameters for label-free quantification as well as the iBAQ and peak property calculations were selected. Only proteins with 2 or more unique peptide hits were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sorbitol, Xylose, Arabinose, Aspergillus niger, Rhamnose, Lc-ms/ms, Mannose, Shotgun proteomics, Glucose

### Affiliations
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Dorett Odoni

### Lab Head
Dr Vitor A. P. Martins dos Santos
Wageningen University


