### Accession
PXD018552

### Title
Analysis of CD5 interactome in primary mouse CD4+ T cells

### Description
CD4+ T cells were isolated from gene-targeted mouse expressing a One-Strep-tag (OST) at the C terminus of the CD5 protein, briefly expanded in vitro and we analyzed the interactome of their OST-tagged CD5 protein. Affinity purification of the OST tagged protein was performed using Streptactin beads, from T cells either non-stimulated, stimulated 30s, 120s or 300s with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibodies, or 300s with pervanadate. Each AP-MS purification is associated with a corresponding control (purification from CD4+ T cells isolated from WT mice, cultured and stimulated in the same conditions). The number of replicate biological experiments was n=3 for all conditions (time-points), and each sample was analyzed once by single-run nanoLC-MS, resulting in 30 raw files.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, and expanded for 48 hours in culture. CD4+ T cells from OST mice and wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated with antibodies (incubation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4, followed by one round of washing and then cross-linkage with a purified Rabbit anti-Rat for 30s, 120s, or 300s at 37°C) or with pervanadate (300s). Stimulation was stopped by the addition of twice concentrated lysis buffer and postnuclear lysates were then used for affinity purification on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads. Proteins were eluted from the beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. Following affinity purification, protein samples were air dried in a Speed-Vac concentrator, reconstituted in SDS 5%, ammonium bicarbonate 50mM and processed for trypsin digestion using a S-trap micro device (Protifi) according to manufacturer protocol. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 17 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, Pepmap C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 10%-45% gradient of solvent B over 60min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software.  MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 15000, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 22ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis of the the each interactome. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries in the UniProt protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2016_09). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the proteins across biological replicates and stimulation time points, only unique and non-modified peptides were considered to calculate protein intensity, and the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tcr, Signalosome, Ap-ms, Primary cd4+ t cell, Interactome

### Affiliations
CNRS/IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structurale Biology, CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Burlet-Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structurale Biology, CNRS, Toulouse


