### Accession
PXD035418

### Title
Regulation and physiological function of proteins for heat tolerance in cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) genotypes under controlled and field conditions

### Description
The expression of heat shock proteins is considered a central adaptive mechanism to heat stress. This study investigated the expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) and other stress-protective proteins against heat stress in cowpea genotypes under field (IT-96D-610 and IT-16) and controlled (IT-96D-610) conditions. Plants in the control environment were under 25/20°C (day/night) in a warm chamber and 40/25 °C in a hot chamber. In the field, plants grew at Eensaamheid with 26 to 28°C and at Marapyane with 30 to 32°C monthly average maximum temperatures. Heat stress response analysis of proteins at 72 h in the controlled environment showed 270 differentially regulated proteins identified using label-free quantitative proteomics in IT-96D-610 plants. These plants expressed HSPs and chaperones (BAG family molecular chaperone 6 (BAG6), Multiprotein bridging factor1c (MBF1C) and cold shock domain protein 1 (CSDP1)) in the controlled environment. However, IT-96D-610 plants expressed a wider variety of small HSPs and more HSPs in the field. IT-96D-610 plants also responded to heat stress by exclusively expressing chaperones (DnaJ chaperones, universal stress protein and heat shock binding protein (HSBP)) and non-HSP proteins (Deg1, EGY3, ROS protective proteins, temperature-induced lipocalin and succinic dehydrogenase). Photosynthesis recovery and induction of proteins related to photosynthesis, were better in IT-96D-610 because of the concurrent induction of heat stress response proteins for chaperone functions, protein degradation for repair and ROS scavenging proteins and PSII operating efficiency (Fq’/Fm’) than IT-16. This study contributes to identification of thermotolerance mechanisms in cowpea that can be useful in knowledge-based crop improvement.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The three youngest fully expanded leaf samples per plant were harvested from two adjacent plants in the middle row of each plot and combined in the field and four replicate plants from each chamber per time point in the phytotron. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and transported on ice to the laboratory for analysis.On the same day, a phenol extraction protocol (Isaacson et al., 2006) was used to prepare total protein extracts from four biological replicates. Pellets were recovered and impurities were removed three times in chilled methanol (4°C) by centrifuging at 5 0000 g for 10 min. The pellets were dried in a lamina flow and stored at -80°C and later transported to the Centre for Proteomic and Genomic Research (Cape Town, WC, South Africa) for analysis. Protein solubilisation and quantification TEAB buffer (1000 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma T7408; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma 71736; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 5% SDS 50 mM TEAB) was used to suspend protein pellets. After heating for 10 min at 96°C, protein samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 10 min. Proteins were quantified using the QuantiPro BCA assay Kit (Sigma QPBCA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) by following the manufacturer’s protocol. On-bead hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and trypsin digestion To reduce the proteins, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP; Sigma 646547; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to 50 μg protein on a protein LoBind plate (Merck, 0030504.100; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, GER) to a final 10 mM TCEP and incubated for one h at 60°C. After cooling, samples were alkylated by incubating for 15 min at room temperature with methylmethanethiosulphonate (MMTS; Sigma 208795; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) which was added to a final 10 mM MMTS. Aliquotes of HILIC magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences, HLC010; 2B Scientific, Stonesfield, Oxfordsh., UK) were prepared followed by disposing of the shipping solution. Then beads were rinsed twice with 250 μl of wash buffer (15% acetonitrile, 100 mM ammonium acetate (Sigma 14267; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) pH 4.5) each time for one min. After which a suspension of beads was prepared to 5 mg/ml with loading buffer (30% acetonitrile, 200 mM ammonium acetate pH 4.5). Equal volumes of HILIC magnetic beads to that of alkylated protein samples were added at a ratio of 5:1 (beads: total protein) and the plate was incubated at 900 revolutions per minute (RPM) on a shaker for 30 min at room temperature to allow the proteins to bind to the beads. The beads were rinsed with 500 μl of 95% acetonitrile for one min with four repeats. Trypsin was added to the proteins at a ratio of 1:10 [trypsin solution (Trypsin (Promega PRV5111; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM TEAB): total protein] and the plates were shaken on a shaker for four h at 37°C to allow protein digestion. Then proteins were dried after disposal of the supernatant and suspended with loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 2.5% acetonitrile) for liquid chromatography. Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis Solutions of each peptide sample were made using 0.1% formic acid (Sigma 56302; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 2% acetonitrile (Burdick & Jackson BJLC015CS; Honeywell, Charlotte, NC, USA) and analysed through LC-MS using a Q-Exactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system. Samples were loaded and trapped on a C18 trap column (PepMap100, 9027905000, 300 μm × 5 mm × 5 μm) followed by 3 min of washing. Peptides were eluted on an analytical column after the valve was switched and chromatographically separated using Waters nanoEase (Zenfit) M/Z Peptide CSH C18 column (186008810, 75 μm × 25 cm × 1.7 μm). Peptides were eluted with solvent A (liquid chromatography water (Burdick and Jackson BJLC365; Honeywell, Charlotte, NC, USA), 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and separated through a multi-step gradient at 300 nL min-1. In the first step the gradient changed 98 - 95% in solvent A and 2 - 5% in solvent B over 5 min and then changed 95 - 82% (solvent A) and 5 - 18% (solvent B) over 40 min; 82 - 70% (solvent A) and 18 - 30% (solvent B) over 10 min, 70 - 20% (solvent A) and 30 - 80% (solvent B) over 2 min. After the gradient was held at 20% (solvent A) and 80% (solvent B) for 10 min, it was finally returned to 98% (solvent A) and 2% (solvent B), then the column was conditioned for 15 min. Data were obtained by operating Proxeon stainless steel emitters (Thermo Fisher TFES523; Waltham, MA, USA). The positive ion mode was used to operate the mass spectrometer at a capillary temperature of 320°C and the electrospray voltage of 1.95 kV was applied.

### Data Protocol
Data from the LC-MS analysis was obtained by operating Xcalibur v4.1.31.9, Chromeleon v6.8 (SR13), Orbitrap MS v2.9 (build 2926) and Thermo Foundations 3.1 (SP4) software. Proteins were quantified label-free using Progenesis QI for Proteomics v2.0 (Non-linear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The raw data was processed through peak picking, running alignment, and normalisation through which singly charged spectra was discarded. Only valid proteins with a minimum of two unique peptides were reported and four biological replicates per condition were quantified using non-conflicting peptides. Regulated proteins were identified as those that have fold change ≥ 2 and q-value < 0.05 where fold change is the number of times by which the protein increased (+ value) or decreased (- value) in stressed plants compared to control (phytotron chamber at day/night temperatures of 25/20°C and Eensaamheid site for the controlled environment and field studies, respectively). Databases were interrogated using Byonic software v2.6.46 (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA, USA) and a V. unguiculata database with protein accession numbers were sourced from the DOE Joint Genome Institute (Lonardi et al., 2019) and downloaded on 28/09/2018. Protein annotations were sourced from the Phytozome database using the V. unguiculata v1.1 gene set for cowpea genome (Lonardi et al., 2019). The main database, Phytozome 13 (Lonardi et al., 2019) and supporting database, UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2019) were used to search for Gene Ontology (GO) terms Biological process, Molecular function and Cellular component of the identified proteins. Functional categories of proteins were classified using Biological processes GO terms and analysed using literature (S. Li et al., 2019; Vessal et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020; Q. Zhao et al., 2018) and UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2019). For proteins with no information on Biological processes GO terms, orthologues were taken from Arabidopsis thaliana, Medicago truncatula and G. max.

### Publication Abstract
The expression of heat shock proteins is considered a central adaptive mechanism to heat stress. This study investigated the expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) and other stress-protective proteins against heat stress in cowpea genotypes under field (IT-96D-610 and IT-16) and controlled (IT-96D-610) conditions. Heat stress response analysis of proteins at 72&#x2009;h in the controlled environment showed 270 differentially regulated proteins identified using label-free quantitative proteomics in IT-96D-610 plants. These plants expressed HSPs and chaperones [BAG family molecular chaperone 6 (BAG6), Multiprotein bridging factor1c (MBF1C) and cold shock domain protein 1 (CSDP1) in the controlled environment]. However, IT-96D-610 plants expressed a wider variety of small HSPs and more HSPs in the field. IT-96D-610 plants also responded to heat stress by exclusively expressing chaperones [DnaJ chaperones, universal stress protein and heat shock binding protein (HSBP)] and non-HSP proteins (Deg1, EGY3, ROS protective proteins, temperature-induced lipocalin and succinic dehydrogenase). Photosynthesis recovery and induction of proteins related to photosynthesis were better in IT-96D-610 because of the concurrent induction of heat stress response proteins for chaperone functions, protein degradation for repair and ROS scavenging proteins and PSII operating efficiency (Fq'/Fm') than IT-16. This study contributes to identification of thermotolerance mechanisms in cowpea that can be useful in knowledge-based crop improvement.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Label-free protein quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Plant ecophysiology lab, ADepartment of Biological Sciences, University of Cape Town, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Tonny Selinga

### Lab Head
Dr Samson Chimphango
Department of Biology, Plant ecophysiology lab, ADepartment of Biological Sciences, University of Cape Town, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa


