### Accession
PXD011628

### Title
MHCquant: Automated and reproducible data analysis for immunopeptidomics

### Description
Personalized multi-peptide vaccines are currently being discussed intensively for tumor immunotherapy. In order to find epitopes - short, immunogenic peptides - suitable to elicit an immune response, human leukocyte antigen-presented peptides from cancer tissue samples are purified using immunoaffinity purification and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Here we report on a novel computational pipeline to identify peptides from large-scale immunopeptidomics raw data sets. In the conducted experiments we benchmarked our workflow to other existing mass spectrometry analysis software and achieved higher sensitivity. A dataset of 38 HLA immunopeptidomics raw files of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 10 healthy volunteers and 4 JY cell lines was used to assess the performance of the pipeline at each processing step. In addition, 66 isotope labeled known HLA-presented peptides were spiked into the JY cell extracts decreasing in concentration by log10 steps from 100 fmol to 0.1 fmol.

### Sample Protocol
HLA molecules were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification using the pan-HLA class I-specific W6/32 molecular antibody to extract HLA ligands. HLA peptide extracts were separated by nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50 μm x 25 cm PepMap rapid separation liquid chromatography column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in an online-coupled LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top speed collision-induced dissociation fragmentation method and data-dependent acquisition (DDA).

### Data Protocol
The MHCquant workflow was constructed using the OpenMS C++ framework (v2.4). Identification, post-scoring and quantification were performed using the recently developed OpenMS adapters to Comet (v2016.01 rev. 3), Percolator (Percolator 3.01) and the tool FeatureFinderIdentification for targeted label-free quantification. For the benchmark analysis we utilized MHCquant (rev 1.2.6), MS-GF+ (v2017.01.13) – implemented within the same OpenMS Workflow, MaxQuant (v1.6.3.3), SequestHT and Mascot (v2.2.04) – used within ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 and PEAKS within Peaks Studio (v8.5).

### Publication Abstract
Although mutations may represent attractive targets for immunotherapy, direct identification of mutated peptide ligands isolated from human leucocyte antigens (HLA) on the surface of native tumour tissue has so far not been successful. Using advanced mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, we survey the melanoma-associated immunopeptidome to a depth of 95,500 patient-presented peptides. We thereby discover a large spectrum of attractive target antigen candidates including cancer testis antigens and phosphopeptides. Most importantly, we identify peptide ligands presented on native tumour tissue samples harbouring somatic mutations. Four of eleven mutated ligands prove to be immunogenic by neoantigen-specific T-cell responses. Moreover, tumour-reactive T cells with specificity for selected neoantigens identified by MS are detected in the patient's tumour and peripheral blood. We conclude that direct identification of mutated peptide ligands from primary tumour material by MS is possible and yields true neoepitopes with high relevance for immunotherapeutic strategies in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Benchmark, Mhc

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen Germany, Center for Bioinformatics, University of Tübingen, Germany, Quantitative Biology Center, University of Tübingen, Germany, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Germany,

### Submitter
Leon Bichmann

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Oliver Kohlbacher
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen Germany, Center for Bioinformatics, University of Tübingen, Germany, Quantitative Biology Center, University of Tübingen, Germany, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Germany,


