### Accession
PXD010920

### Title
Proteome profiling of cultivated Echerichia coli isolates from Crohn's disease patients

### Description
One of the dysbioses often observed in CD patients is an increased abundance of Escherichia coli (10-100 fold compared to healthy individuals) [Gevers et al., 2014]. E. coli isolates collected from CD and healthy patients were cultivated on LB medium  at aerobic conditions up to medium log phase and their total proteomes were analysed by shotgun proteomics by HPLC-MS/MS. Refs.  Gevers D, Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Vazquez-Baeza Y, Van Treuren W, Ren B, et al. The treatment-naive microbiome in new-onset Crohn’s disease. 2014. Cell Host Microbe 15: 382–92.

### Sample Protocol
Patients and samples In this study we used Escherichia coli isolates achieved from feces, ileum biopsy and liquid ileal content of Crohn’s disease (CD) patients and ileal content and feces of healthy patients. Samples from CD patients were collected during diagnostic endoscopy at Central Scientific Institute of Gastroenterology (Moscow Clinical Research Centre, Moscow), State Scientific Center of Coloproctology (Ministry of Health of Russian Federation, Moscow) and Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine (Federal Medico-Biological Agency, Moscow).  Feces from healthy patients were collected in Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine (Federal Medico-Biological Agency, Moscow). Most material collections were performed in Moscow, however, some samples from CD patients were achieved by specialists of FRCCPCM during official visits to the hospitals in other regions of Russian Federation: Khabarovsk (2 patients), Syktyvkar (2 patients), Nizhny Novgorod (2 patients). Material collection was approved by local Ethics Committees, patients gave written informed consent for research and publication of data.   E. coli isolation and cultivation Isolation of E. coli was performed as described in Rakitina et al., 2017.  Tryptic digestion of E. coli proteins Bacterial pellet was resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 0.5 mg/ml of lyzozyme and 1/10 volume of protease inhibitor mix. The suspension was incubated for 1 h at +4oC. Then the sample was diluted with 10x volume of 100 mM tris-HCl pH 8.0 with 0.5% SDS and 2.5% EDTA. Cells were lyzed with ultrasonication for 2 min. Nuclease mix (Promega) was added according to the manufacturer protocol and samples were incubated for 15 min at +4oC. Proteins were extracted with urea that was dissolved in each sample up to 6M concentration and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After centrifugation for 10 min at 12 000 g, protein concentration was measured in supernatant by Bradford assay (Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay, BioRad).  The alcylation was performed as follows. 20 mM of reducing agent tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added and samples were incubated at 37oC for 30 min. Then 30 mM of iodacetamide was added (IAA) and samples were kept at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. To avoid chemical modifications and remove the unreacted IAA, samples were treated with 10 mM TCEP and incubated for 20 min at RT. Protein hydrolysis was performed by trypsin (20 ug per sample, Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) for 16 h at at room temperature. After that samples were diluted with 6x volume of 100 mM tris-HCl pH 8.0 and protein hydrolysis was performed by addition of trypsin (20 ug per sample, Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in 0.1 % SDS and incubation at 37oC for 17h. At this point trypsinolysis stopped by addition of 10% TFA and incubation at 37oC for 30 min. After centrifugation for 10 min at 12 000 g, supernatant was collected and cleaned with cartridges C18 (Discovery DSC-18 Tube, (Supelco)) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Achieved peptide extracts were dried at SpeedVac (Labconco) and dissolved in 15 ul of LC-MS-MS sample buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid.  HPLC-MS/MS analysis The HPLC-MS/MS analysis of the tryptic peptides was carried out using an µltimate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a maXis qTOF after the HDC-cell upgrade (Bruker) with a nano-electrospray source. The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed on a trap-elute system: trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 mm x 0.3 mm, particle diameter 5 µm, Dionex) and column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 150 mm x 75 µm, particle diameter 3.5 µm, Agilent). The gradient parameters were as follows: 5-35% acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, the column flow 0.3 µl/min. The gradient duration was 120 min. The positive MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired using an AutoMSMS mode (the capillary voltage 1700, the curtain gas flow is 4 l and the temperature is 170o C, the spectra rate 4 Hz, 20 precursors, m/z range 200-1500, the active exclusion after 2 spectra, release after 0.5 min). The lists of compounds (mgf files) were generated after a lock mass calibration (m/z 445.1200) with a Compass DataAnalysis (Bruker).   Samples list. 104 HPLC-MS/MS runs were performed: 65 samples for 43 isolates from 30 CD patients (17 male, 12 female, median age 30), 35 samples for 19 isolates from 7 healthy patients (7 male, median age 19), and 4 lab strains samples.  Samples list with the corresponding information concerning isolates, patients, diagnosis etc is given in file: samples_list.xls  Refs. Rakitina DV, Manolov AI, Kanygina AV, Garushyants SK, Baikova JP, et al.,. Genome analysis of E. coli isolated from Crohn's disease patients. BMC Genomics. 2017 Jul 19;18(1):544. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3917-x.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative analysis. The protein identification was performed by the peptide search with a Mascot Data Search with the following parameters: Peptide Mass Tolerance 0,05 Da, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0,1 Da, variable modifications Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M), cutting enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage per peptide was allowed.  Peptide search for protein identification was performed versus database of proteins (peptides).  Databases for protein search by Mascot search were created as follows: 1) Ecoli-16032016-kerat.fasta (92,600 sequences; 32,006,615 residues) - was created by translation and annotation by PROKKA 1.7 of 14 CD E. coli isolates and 12 isolates from healthy patients (summarized and described in Rakitina, 2017). Similar proteins (>80% homology at >80% sequence) were united and the one showing maximum similarity with the other group members was used as representative. The database included: total sequences 92600, total residues 32006615. On the average, the cut-off ion score was >30 as an indicator of identity (p-value <0.05). From search results vs this database *mztab files were created). 2) Nissle1917_goodProt_kerat.fasta (5,114 sequences; 1,577,015 residues) - was formed on the basis of genomes of genome of typical symbiotic E. coli strain.  On average, individual ions scores > 17 indicated identity or extensive homology (p<0.05).  3) Escherichia_coli_LF82_uid161965-1.fasta (4,498 sequences; 1,431,908 residues) - was formed on the basis of genomes of genome of typical CD E. coli strain. On average, the cut-off ion score > 17 indicated identity or extensive homology (p<0.05).  Aminoacid sequences of trypsin (Promega) and Human keratins were added to all databases to avoid misinterpretation of contaminating proteins.  The protein was considered as identified by no less than two unique peptides with the score above the threshold. The protein abundances were evaluated by a label-free method using an emPAI (Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index) determined by Mascot Data Search for each identified protein [Shinoda et al., 2010].   Refs. Gevers D, Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Vazquez-Baeza Y, Van Treuren W, Ren B, et al. The treatment-naive microbiome in new-onset Crohn’s disease. 2014. Cell Host Microbe 15: 382–92.  Shinoda K, Tomita M, Ishihama Y. emPAI Calc–for the estimation of protein abundance from large-scale identification data by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics. 2010;26:576–7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp700.

### Publication Abstract
One of the dysbioses often observed in Crohn's disease (CD) patients is an increased abundance of <i>Escherichia coli</i> (10-100 fold compared to healthy individuals) (Gevers et&#xa0;al., 2014). The data reported is a large-scale proteome profile for <i>E. coli</i> isolates collected from CD patients and healthy individuals. 43 isolates were achieved from 30 CD patients (17 male, 12 female, median age 30) and 19 isolates from 7 healthy individuals (7 male, median age 19). Isolates were cultivated on LB medium at aerobic conditions up to medium log phase. Protein extraction was performed with sodium deoxycholate (DCNa) and urea, alcylation with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and iodacetamide. Protein trypsinolysis was performed as described in (Matyushkina et&#xa0;al., 2016). Total cell proteomes were analysed by shotgun proteomics with HPLC-MS/MS on a&#xa0;maXis qTOF mass-spectrometer. The data including HPLC-MS/MS raw files and exported Mascot search results was deposited to the PRIDE repository project accession: PXD010920, project https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD010920.

### Keywords
Proteome, Crohn's disease, Hplc-ms/ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia
Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Daria Rakitina

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Yurievich Fisunov
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia


