### Accession
PXD021425

### Title
Proteomics Tool Spike-in dataset analyzed on a timsTOF Pro

### Description
Label-free proteomics enables the unbiased quantification of thousands of proteins across large sample cohorts. Commonly used mass spectrometry-based proteomic workflows rely on data dependent acquisition (DDA). However, its stochastic selection of peptide features for fragmentation-based identification inevitably results in high rates of missing values, which prohibits the integration of larger cohorts as the number of recurrently detected peptides is a limiting factor. Peptide identity propagation (PIP) can mitigate this challenge, allowing to transfer sequencing information between samples. However, despite the promise of these approaches, current methods remain limited either in sensitivity or reliability and there is a lack of robust and widely applicable software. Here we prepared a tool spike-in data set which can be used to evaluate PIP on timsTOF Pro data.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were pelleted from cell culture, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cell pellet was reconstituted in 100 μL of 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. Each sample was probe-sonicated for 4x 15 seconds at 10% frequency with storage on-ice between cycles of homogenization. Samples were centrifuged at 15.000x g, 4°C for 30 minutes to pellet any remaining cell- and tissue-debris, followed by transfer of the supernatant into new reaction tubes and protein quantification using a bicinchoninic acid assay. Proteins were denatured for 5 minutes at 95°C. Disulfide-bonds were reduced with Dithiothreitol (5 mM) at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated using chloroacetamide (15 mM) at 23°C for 30 minutes. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a table-top thermomixer at 500 rpm using sequencing-grade modified trypsin in ddH2O. Upon overnight protein digestion, each sample was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated at 37°C and 500 rpm for 30 minutes, in order to cleave and precipitate RapiGest. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 15.000x g, at 23°C for 30 minutes to pellet the RapiGest precipitate and recover the peptide-containing supernatant to a new reaction tube. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C. E. coli lyophilized sample (Bio-Rad) was re-suspended in ddH2O to achieve a stock concentrations of 2 μg/μL. 100 μL (200 μg) were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by reduction and alkylation using Dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 37°C for 1-hour and chloroacetamide (40 mM) at 23°C for 45 minutes at 500 rpm. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a table-top thermomixer at 700 rpm using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in ddH2O. Upon overnight protein digestion, each sample was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C. Spike-in samples were prepared by mixing HeLa sample with 0%, 3%, 4.5%, 6%, 7.5% or 9% (wt/wt) of E. coli sample (n=3). Peptides were separated using the Bruker nanoElute system fitted with an analytical column (Aurora Series Emitter Column with CSI fitting, C18, 1.6 μm, 75 μm x 25 cm) (Ion Optics). The outlet of the analytical column with a captive spray fitting was directly coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) mass spectrometer using a captive spray source. Solvent A was ddH2O (Biosolve Chimie), 0.1% (v/v) FA (Biosolve Chimie), 2% acetonitrile (ACN) (Pierce, Thermo Scientific), and solvent B was 100% ACN in ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The samples were loaded at a constant maximum pressure of 900 bar. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.4 μL per minute at 55°C. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 2 to 17% in 60 minutes, then from 17 to 25% in 30 minutes, then from 35 to 37% in a further 10 minutes, and then to 95% in 10 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 10 minutes at 95% solvent B. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via the standard Bruker captive spray source at default settings. The glass capillary was operated at 3500 V with 500 V end plate offset and 3 L/minute dry gas at 180°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 100 to 1700 and a 1/k0 range from 0.6 to 1.6 V*s/cm2 with 100 ms ramp time were acquired with a rolling average switched on (10x). The duty cycle was locked at 100% and the TIMS mode was enabled. All timsTOF and nanoElute methods were default provided by Bruker.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0). The search was performed against the UniProt database consisting of reviewed human and E. coli proteins (September 2019, 24644 entries). The Andromeda search engine was used with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modification. Match between runs was enabled with match time window set to 1 min and alignment time window set to 20 min. The search type for protein quantification was set to standard. Quantification intensities were calculated by the default fast MaxLFQ algorithm with minimal ratio count set to 1. Require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons was disabled. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Second peptide search for the identification of chimeric MS2 spectra was enabled. Not mentioned MaxQuant settings were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Label-free proteomics by data-dependent acquisition enables the unbiased quantification of thousands of proteins, however it notoriously suffers from high rates of missing values, thus prohibiting consistent protein quantification across large sample cohorts. To solve this, we here present IceR (Ion current extraction Re-quantification), an efficient and user-friendly quantification workflow that combines high identification rates of data-dependent acquisition with low missing value rates similar to data-independent acquisition. Specifically, IceR uses ion current information for a hybrid peptide identification propagation approach with superior quantification precision, accuracy, reliability and data completeness compared to other quantitative workflows. Applied to plasma and single-cell proteomics data, IceR enhanced the number of reliably quantified proteins, improved discriminability between single-cell populations, and allowed reconstruction of a developmental trajectory. IceR will be useful to improve performance of large scale global as well as low-input proteomics applications, facilitated by its availability as an easy-to-use R-package.

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Ion mobility spectrometry

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Mathias Kalxdorf

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
DKFZ Heidelberg


