### Accession
PXD015976

### Title
Low dose perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS) augment hepatic steatosis and shift the sera lipidome in a high fat high carbohydrate diet.

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is most prevalent form of liver disease, affecting over 30% of Americans. Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) represent a family of environmental toxicants that have infiltrated the living world. This study explores diet-PFAS interactions and their potential role in the increasing global incidence of NAFLD. Male C57BL/6 mice were fed with either a low-fat diet (11% kcal from fat) or a high fat (58% kcal from fat) high carbohydrate (42g/L) diet with or without PFOS or PFHxS in feed (0.0003% w/w) for 29 weeks. Proteomic, lipidomic, and gene expression measurement techniques were utilized to explore mechanistic pathways. With administration of a high fat high carbohydrate (HFHC) diet, PFOS and PFHxS augmented macrovesicular steatosis, indicative of fatty liver. There was a clear shift in the lipidome of the serum phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylethanolamines, and triglycerides with PFAS exposure. Finally, chain length exerted significant influence on tissue partitioning and the resulting hepatic gene and protein signatures of PFHxS and PFOS in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Hepatic protein samples (500 µg) were spiked with 2 µg BSA and denatured with 25 µL DTT (100 mM) at 35°C for 30 min in a shaking water bath (100 rpm). After denaturation, samples were alkylated in the dark with 25 µL IAA (200 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were subsequently concentrated using the cold water, methanol and chloroform (1:2:1) precipitation method (centrifugation at 12000 rpm, 5min at 10°C). Protein pellet was washed with ice-cold methanol and then suspended in 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) containing 3% w/v sodium deoxycholate (DOC). One hundred of the reduced and alkylated protein sample was taken for digestion (500 µg protein was taken due to poor pellet formation. However, only 250 µg protein was digested with trypsin). Further, TPCK-treated trypsin (10 µg) was added to samples at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein) and samples were transferred into digestion tubes (PCT MicroTubes, Pressure Biosciences Inc.,Easton, MA). The barocycler was run at 35°C, for 90 cycles with 60 sec per pressure-cycled (50 sec high pressure, 10 sec ambient pressure, 25 kpsi). Further, 100 µL of digested peptides sample was mixed with 10 µL of ACN (1:1, v/v containing 5% formic acid) to precipitate detergent. Samples were spun to remove the pellet and 100 µL supernatant was collected (12000 rpm for 5 min at 10°C). Subsequently, twenty microliters of the resulting peptide solution were injected on the analytical column and were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. The SWATH-MS proteomics was conducted on an Acquity UHPLC HClass system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). The separation of the peptides was achieved using a runtime of 60 min at 100 μL/min and a linear gradient method. The complete description of the method has been previously published (Jamwal et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Opensource softwares, MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox, 2016) and Perseus (Tyanova, Temu, Sinitcyn, et al., 2016) were used to assess global changes and total proteins detected. Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) was utilized to determine relative expression for targeted proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty liver disease, Nafld, Pfhxs, Hepatotoxicity, Pfos, High fat diet

### Affiliations
Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, 02881, USA
University of Rhode Island

### Submitter
Marisa Pfohl

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Slitt
Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, 02881, USA


