### Accession
PXD020910

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS Proteomics of human liver microsomes

### Description
We report label-free quantification of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (XME), transporters, redox enzymes, proteases and nucleases in 20 human liver microsomal samples.  More than 3500 proteins were identified and quantified. These data can be used in physiologically based pharmacokinetic models to predict appropriate drug doses for a wide variety of drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein content of human liver microsomes (HLMs) from paediatric samples (n = 27) was estimated using the Bradford assay.  Sodium deoxycholate was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 10% (w/v). The mixture was mixed well and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. For protein digestion, the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used with minor modifications, in order to optimize for microsomal samples. Protein digestion was achieved by adding trypsin (trypsin/protein ratio 1:25) followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation (14000g, 20 min) first by elution using100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) followed by a second elution using 0.5 M sodium chloride. The eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (3% (v/v) acetonitrile in water with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid) and desalted using a C18 column (Nest group, USA). The peptides were again dried using a vacuum concentrator and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis. Dried peptides samples were resuspended in 100 μL of loading buffer, and 1.0 μL of each sample was loaded on an UltiMate 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatography to an online Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were reversed-phase separated over a 90 min gradient. Data were acquired in the positive ion mode in a data-dependent manner alternating between survey MS and MS/MS scans. MS scans were performed over the range of 100−1500 m/z, with 60 000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3 × 106 , and 100 ms maximal injection time.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using a customised database, which included human UniprotKB proteome (UP000005640), containing 71,790 sequences (Oct 2019), supplemented with forward and reverse sequences, in addition to 5 in-house QconCAT sequences (designed for the analysis of human enzymes and transporters) and 4 sequences of standard proteins (ALBU_BOVIN, MYG_HORSE, CYC_BOVIN and ADH1_YEAST).  Mass tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ions. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed for trypsin/P digestion. Peptide false discovery rate was set as 1% and peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acid length were considered. Evidence data files were used for targeted and global proteomic data analysis.  After initial processing the MaxQuant data were stripped of protein identifiers and rebuilt.  A global razor was constructed by assigning any non-unique peptides to as many proteins for which unique peptides could be detected.  This was done on a dataset by dataset basis, so that if a unique peptide was detected in one or more samples in any dataset, non-unique peptides could be used as a basis for quantification in the other samples.  The razor involves first ranking proteins by number of detected peptides and then by order in “Human Proteome CAPKR10”.  This bespoke database (21234 sequences) was constructed from the reduced (one sequence, one protein) Uniprot Human Protein fasta file, available at with additional proteins (from the full Uniprot database used by MaxQuant) added when they are detected in our samples.  Finally, this database is organized so that intact proteins are favoured over fragments and cDNA-derived proteins, and long primary sequences are favoured over short sequences.  This database contains a small number of single nucleotide polymorphic variants of the ABC transporters ABCB3 and ABCC6.

### Publication Abstract
ABC transporters (ATP-binding cassette transporter) traffic drugs and their metabolites across membranes, making ABC transporter expression levels a key factor regulating local drug concentrations in different tissues and individuals. Yet, quantification of ABC transporters remains challenging because they are large and low-abundance transmembrane proteins. Here, we analysed 200 samples of crude and membrane-enriched fractions from human liver, kidney, intestine, brain microvessels and skin, by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 32 (out of 48) ABC transporters: ABCD3 was the most abundant in liver, whereas ABCA8, ABCB2/TAP1 and ABCE1 were detected in all tissues. Interestingly, this atlas unveiled that ABCB2/TAP1 may have TAP2-independent functions in the brain and that biliary atresia (BA) and control livers have quite different ABC transporter profiles. We propose that meaningful biological information can be derived from a direct comparison of these data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Adult livers

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Jill Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK


