### Accession
PXD029993

### Title
Perfluorinated alkyl substances affect the growth, physiology and root proteome of hydroponically grown maize plants

### Description
Poly- and perfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of persistent organic pollutants. Plants can accumulate PFAS but their effect on plant physiology at the molecular level is not understood yet. We used hydroponically-grown maize plants treated with a combination of eleven different PFAS (each at 100 µg L-1) to investigate their bioaccumulation and effects on the growth, physiology and their impact on the root proteome. From the root proteome analysis, we identified 75 differentially abundant proteins, mostly involved in cellular metabolic and biosynthetic processes, translation and cytoskeletal reorganization. Results were validated using quantitative real-time PCR and further substantiated using amino acid and fatty acid profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Roots from control and PFAS-treated maize plants (100 µg L-1) collected at 8 days post treatment were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 10× volume of cold acetone/10% TCA/0.07% beta-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were allowed to precipitate for 2 h at −20°C and samples were centrifuged at 35,000g at 4°C for 30 min.  Protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone and dried. Proteins were solubilized in 6 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, and 2% CHAPS for 1 h at 6°C under constant shaking. Protein extracts were centrifuged at 19,000g for 20 min at 10°C and protein concentration was determined by SDS-PAGE densitometry against BSA as reference standard. 60 µg of proteins for each sample were reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. After digestion, peptides samples desalted with C18 cartridges. 5 µg of each sample were dried under vacuum and kept for label-free proteomic analysis, the remaining solutions were dried under vacuum and used for TMT labeling.  Samples were labelled with 6-plex TMT reagents (tags 126, 127, 128 for controls and 129, 130, 131 for treated plants), mixed in equal amounts, and fractionated by SCX (50, 100, 150, 200 and 350 mM KCl). SCX fractions were dried under vacuum, suspended in 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid (FA)and desalted using C18 cartridges. Peptides were eluted and dried under vacuum. LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ion source capillary was set to 200 °C and spray voltage was fixed at 1.25-1.35 kV. For label-free analysis, samples were suspended in 10 µL of 3% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA.1 µg of each sample was loaded into a trap column (NanoEase Symmetry300, C18, 5 µm, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µL min-1. The peptide mixture was separated in a pico-frit capillary column (11 cm, 75 µm internal ID, 15 µm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 material (Aeris Peptide 3.6 μm XB-C18, Phenomenex), using a flow rate of 250 nL min-1 and a linear gradient of ACN/0.1% FA from 3 to 50% in 90 minutes. The instrument operated in a Top10 data-dependent mode (full scan at 60000 resolution, MS/MS scans at lower resolution in the linear trap). For TMT-labelled samples, 2 µg of each SCX fraction was analyzed: the peptide mixture was separated with a linear gradient of ACN/0.1% FA from 3 to 50% in 90 minutes, at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. The instrument operated in a data-dependent mode: a full MS scan at 60000 resolution was followed by the MS/MS scan of the three most intense ions. Both CID and HCD fragmentations were performed on the same precursors. Raw data were subjected to database search (see below) and all identified peptides were used to generate a static excluding list. All samples were analyzed a second time using the same chromatographic and instrumental settings, except for the application of the excluding list.

### Data Protocol
Label-free LC−MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant software v.1.5.1.2 coupled to Andromeda search engine. Proteins were searched against the Maize section of the UniProt database (Zea mays, version 2020-01-27, 99254 sequences). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively, while trypsin was set as enzyme with up to 1 missed cleavage allowed. A FDR of 0.01, both at the peptide and protein level, was used to filter the results. A minimum of two peptides was required for protein identification and only unique peptides were used for quantification. Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified using the Label Free Quantification (LFQ) parameter calculated by the software and statistical significance was verified using a Student’s T-test. Proteins that were statistically significant at p ≤ 0.05 and had fold change (FC) ≥ 1.3 and ≤ −1.3 were considered. LC-MS/MS data of TMT-labelled samples were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Mascot search engine version 2.2.4 (Matrix Science). Search was carried out against the maize sequences in UniProt (Zea mays, version 2020-01-27, 99254 sequences) concatenated with a database of common contaminants often found in proteomics experiments. Trypsin was set as enzyme with up to 1 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine, 6-plex TMT at N-termini and 6-plex TMT at -Lys were set as fixed modifications. Peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. For protein identification, a minimum of two unique peptides with a q value ≤ 0.01 was required. Proteins were grouped in protein families according to the principle of maximum parsimony. For protein quantification, the reporter mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Relative peptide abundances were estimated after normalization by the software. A Z test was performed on the protein ratios “treated/control” to identify  DAPs. Proteins that were statistically significant at p ≤ 0.05 and had fold change (FC) ≥ 1.2 and ≤ −1.2 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Poly- and perfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of persistent organic pollutants causing serious global concern. Plants can accumulate PFAS but their effect on plant physiology, especially at the molecular level is not very well understood. Hence, we used hydroponically-grown maize plants treated with a combination of eleven different PFAS (each at 100&#xa0;&#x3bc;g&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup>) to investigate their bioaccumulation and effects on the growth, physiology and their impact on the root proteome. A dose-dependent decrease in root growth parameters was evidenced with a significant reduction in the relative growth rate, fresh weight of leaves and roots and altered photosynthetic parameters in PFAS-treated plants. Higher concentration of shorter PFAS (C &lt; 8) was detected in the leaves, while long-chain PFAS (C &#x2265; 8) were more retained in roots. From the root proteome analysis, we identified 75 differentially abundant proteins, mostly involved in cellular metabolic and biosynthetic processes, translation and cytoskeletal reorganization. Validating the altered protein abundance using quantitative real-time PCR, the results were further substantiated using amino acid and fatty acid profiling, thus, providing first insight into the altered metabolic state of plants exposed to PFAS from a proteomics perspective.

### Keywords
Pfc; pfas; quantitative proteomics; tmt; hydroponics; persistent organic pollutants; plants; stress.

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


