### Accession
PXD012061

### Title
Comparison of the composition and interaction partners of the Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex in cancer cells

### Description
The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex is essential for normal development in metazoans and has direct implications in a range of human diseases. Amongst all classes of chromatin remodeling complexes, the NuRD complex has been the most recalcitrant to analysis. This is, in part, due to difficulties with producing the intact complex recombinantly. Using affinity-purification followed by mass spectrometry, we determined the stoichiometry of the NuRD complex from three cancer cell lines representing three different human tissues. We also analysed the data to determine the interactome of the NuRD complex and identified potential NuRD interactors.

### Sample Protocol
The NuRD complex was purified as previously described (Hong et al., EMBO J, 2015; Low et al., JBC, 2016). Purified samples were digested with endo-lysC and trypsin and analysed by DDA-LC-MS/MS. The Q-Exactive Plus was used for mass analyses using HCD fragmentation.  Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Data generated was searched using MaxQuant (Cox et al., Nat. Biotech, 2008), version 1.5.6.5. Default settings were used with the ‘match between runs’, LFQ and iBAQ options selected. Oxidation (M) and carbamidomethyl (C) were set as variable and fixed modifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase complex (NuRD) is a widely conserved regulator of gene expression. The determination of the subunit composition of the complex and identification of its binding partners are important steps towards understanding its architecture and function. The question of how these properties of the complex vary across different cell types has not been addressed in detail to date. Here, we set up a two-step purification protocol coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to assess NuRD composition and interaction partners in three different cancer cell lines, using label-free intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Our data indicate that the stoichiometry of the NuRD complex is preserved across our three different cancer cell lines. In addition, our interactome data suggest ZNF219 and SLC25A5 as possible interaction partners of the complex. To corroborate this latter finding, in&#xa0;vitro and cell-based pull-down experiments were carried out. These experiments indicated that ZNF219 can interact with RBBP4, GATAD2A/B and chromodomain helicase DNA binding 4, whereas SLC25A5 might interact with MTA2 and GATAD2A.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Interactome, Shotgun proteomics, Ibaq, Nurd

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Mackay
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Australia


