### Accession
PXD004131

### Title
Human_MCF7_membrane -  Searching Missing Proteins Based on the Optimization of Membrane Protein Enrichment and Digestion Process

### Description
MCF7 cell was an important stabilized breast cancer cell in cancer research. A membrane proteomic method was developed and compared in this study. A membrane protein enrichment method composed of ultra-centrifugation and detergent-based extraction was first developed. Then in-solution digestion with detergents and eFASP (enhanced filter aided sample preparation) with detergents were compared with the time consuming in-gel digestion method. Our data indicated that ultra-centrifugation combined detergent-based extraction can effectively enrich membrane proteins with higher purity. Among the in-solution digestion methods, the eFASP combined with RapiGest method identified 1125 membrane proteins. Similarly, the eFASP combined with SDC identified 1069 membrane proteins, however, the in-gel digestion characterized 1091 membrane proteins. Totally, with the 5 digestion methods, 1390 membrane proteins were identified with ≥1 unique peptides, among which 1345 membrane proteins contain unique peptides ≥2. This is the biggest membrane protein datasets for MCF7 cell line and even breast cancer tissue samples. Interestingly, we realized that 9 missing proteins (MPs) present with one or more unique peptides. After verification, 4 of them were validated by synthesized peptide with amino acids larger than 9.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cell pellet (3 plates of each) was resuspended with cell lysis buffer A (5 mM Tris, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2 mM sodium fluoride and protease inhibitor cocktail) separately and disrupted by a Soniprep sonicator (Scientz, China) in ice. The debris was eliminated by centrifugation at 9,600×g for 15 min at 4 ℃. The supernatant was centrifuged at 120,000×g for 80 min at 4 ℃ to get crude membrane proteins. The pellet was resuspended in 0.1 M ice-cold Na2CO3 solution, incubated at 4 ℃ for 1 h with a vertical mixing apparatus (Scientz), and ultracentrifugated at 120,000×g for 80 min at 4 ℃ again. The membrane proteins in the pellet was solubilized with 150 μL Reagent A supplies in the Mem-PER ® kit and did further operations following the kit protocol. After removing of the upper phase, 100 μL lower phase and the insoluble parts were clarified and solubilized with buffer B (20 mM Tris, 20 mM DTT, 4 % SDS, pH 8.0). Aliquot parts of membrane protein fractions (50 μg each) were taken and precipitated with acetone (precooled to -20℃) for 1 h at -20 ℃ at a ratio of 9:1 (volume ratio, acetone/protein sample) and then centrifuged at 8,000×g for 15 min at 4 ℃ to get the pellet. The pellet was washed again with 90 % acetone and centrifuged at 8,000×g for 15 min at 4 ℃ to get the final membrane protein fractions. The protein concentrations of cell lysate and enriched membrane protein fractions were measured by 2-D-quant kit with small modification. Simply, the membrane protein fraction was diluted once with ddH2O because the kit can tolerate less than 2% SDS in the sample. The same aliquot of the total cell lysate (TCL), the supernatant after ultra-centrifugation (Super), and the solubilized membrane protein were ran on a modified 12 % SDS-PAGE gel (improved SDS concentration in gel composition and running buffer from 0.1 % to 0.2 %, to decrease the proteins aggregation in stacking gel) followed by Coomassie staining. The same amount of proteins were ran on 12 % SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to PVDF membrane, and incubated with anti-β-Actin antibody (dilution at volume ratio of 1:5000), anti-E-cadherin antibody (dilution at volume ratio of 1:200), or anti-α-tubulin antibody (dilution at volume ratio of 1:500) overnight at 4 ℃ after 5 % BSA blockage. After washed three times with TBS-T buffer, the membrane was incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA), followed by chemiluminescent detection with ECL detection reagent.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files produced by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and the control datasets of PXD000442  PXD000066  and PXD002619  (downloaded from PRIDE database, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (v2.0.0.802) against overlap queries (20,055 entries, including 2949 membrane proteins) between the Swiss-Prot database (release 2015.12) and the neXtProt database (release 2016.01). Key parameters for database searching including: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, cysteine carbamido methylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modiﬁcations, the tolerances of peptides and fragment ions were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The missed cleavage cutoff for protease digestion was set to two. Only the identiﬁcations satisfying the following criteria were considered: peptide length ≥7, FDR ≤ 1 % at both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
A membrane protein enrichment method composed of ultracentrifugation and detergent-based extraction was first developed based on MCF7 cell line. Then, in-solution digestion with detergents and eFASP (enhanced filter-aided sample preparation) with detergents were compared with the time-consuming in-gel digestion method. Among the in-solution digestion strategies, the eFASP combined with RapiGest identified 1125 membrane proteins. Similarly, the eFASP combined with sodium deoxycholate identified 1069 membrane proteins; however, the in-gel digestion characterized 1091 membrane proteins. Totally, with the five digestion methods, 1390 membrane proteins were identified with &#x2265;1 unique peptides, among which 1345 membrane proteins contain unique peptides &#x2265;2. This is the biggest membrane protein data set for MCF7 cell line and even breast cancer tissue samples. Interestingly, we identified 13 unique peptides belonging to 8 missing proteins (MPs). Finally, eight unique peptides were validated by synthesized peptides. Two proteins were confirmed as MPs, and another two proteins were candidate detections.

### Keywords
Human, Mcf7, Membrane

### Affiliations
BPRC
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Engineering Research Center for Protein Drugs, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, China

### Submitter
Wei Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Engineering Research Center for Protein Drugs, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, China


