### Accession
PXD000865

### Title
Mass spectrometry based draft of the human proteome

### Description
This PXD project contains two projects published on ProteomicsDB (https://www.proteomicsDB.org) as integral part of the publication. The first project entitled 'human body map' (https://www.proteomicsdb.org/#projects/42) involves the analysis of 36 different human tissues and body fluids. The second project entitled 'Cellzome adopted' includes a collection of raw files which comprises identifications of 'missing proteins'.

### Sample Protocol
Human tissue specimens were obtained from the bio bank of the TU München following approval of the study by the local ethics committee. Samples were collected within the first 30 minutes after resection, macroscopically resected by an experienced pathologist, snap frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen until use. Body fluids requiring no invasive procedures were provided by volunteers. Proteins were extracted under denaturing conditions and either separated by LDS-PAGE followed by in-gel protease digestion or digested in solution in the presence of chaotropic agents. Peptides were separated by ultra-high pressure nanoscale liquid chromatography on 75 μm x 40 cm reversed-phase columns using gradients of 2-32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO. The LC was coupled directly to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in data dependent mode and using either resonance-type or beam-type collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, tandem mass spectra were processed using Mascot Distiller and searched against Uniprot using Mascot and a target-decoy strategy. In parallel, raw MS files were also processed by MaxQuant/Andromeda. All search results and tandem mass spectra were imported into ProteomicsDB (https://www.proteomicsdb.org) and filtered at 1% PSM FDR and 5% local peptide length dependent FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomes are characterized by large protein-abundance differences, cell-type- and time-dependent expression patterns and post-translational modifications, all of which carry biological information that is not accessible by genomics or transcriptomics. Here we present a mass-spectrometry-based draft of the human proteome and a public, high-performance, in-memory database for real-time analysis of terabytes of big data, called ProteomicsDB. The information assembled from human tissues, cell lines and body fluids enabled estimation of the size of the protein-coding genome, and identified organ-specific proteins and a large number of translated lincRNAs (long intergenic non-coding RNAs). Analysis of messenger RNA and protein-expression profiles of human tissues revealed conserved control of protein abundance, and integration of drug-sensitivity data enabled the identification of proteins predicting resistance or sensitivity. The proteome profiles also hold considerable promise for analysing the composition and stoichiometry of protein complexes. ProteomicsDB thus enables navigation of proteomes, provides biological insight and fosters the development of proteomic technology.

### Keywords
Missing proteins, Human proteome, Human body map

### Affiliations
Technische Universitaet Muenchen Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Technische Universitaet Muenchen Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics


