### Accession
PXD016127

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Profiling for Predicting Grade of Dysplasia in Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm using Pancreatic Cyst Fluid

### Description
The increased number of pancreatic cyst lesions (PCLs) have been detected through the development of abdominal imaging techniques, such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). However, accurate classification of cystic lesions is difficult because of the lack of standardized diagnostic methods, and thus potentially unnecessary surgical resection has been performed on pancreatic cyst patients. Among four most common types of cystic lesions of pancreas, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN), serous cystic neoplasms (SCN), and solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs), IPMNs, the precursor lesion of pancreatic cancer, have been detected most frequently, and are subdivided into low-grade dysplasia (LGD), high-grade dysplasia (HGD), and invasive IPMN in accordance with their malignancy. To discover the potential biomarkers of the histological grades of IPMN, we investigated pancreatic cyst fluid proteins that are differentially expressed in accordance with the IPMN malignancy by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed 30 pancreatic cyst fluid samples of LGD (n=10), HGD (n=5), invasive IPMN (n=5), MCN (n=5), and SCN (n=5). After removing mucus and centrifuging the samples, only supernatant was used to sample preparation steps. For the construction of peptide library, pooled cyst fluid (composed of equal amounts of 30 individual cyst fluids), secreted proteins from PANC1, Mia Paca-2, BxPC3 and pooled cell lysates from these cell lines were additionally analyzed. Proteins of each sample were precipitated with acetone. After digestion step with filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method, the tryptic peptides were desalted by using in-house C18 StageTip columns. The desalted peptides for peptide library generation were further fractionated with High-pH reverse-phase peptide fractionation. The peptides were separated on Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) that was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer with an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files (120 files) from label-free quantification were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16 with built-in Andromeda search engine) to match the spectra against the Uniprot human database (version from December 2014; 88,171 protein entries, http://www.uniprot.org). In accordance with the target-decoy search strategy, search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% for identifying peptides, modification sites, and proteins. The database search was performed with the following parameters: digestion mode trypsin/P; main search and first search tolerances of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively; tolerance of up to 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; peptide length of at least 6 residues. Peptides were assigned to protein groups by the principle of parsimony. The retention times (RT) of all raw files were aligned through the “Match between runs” option in MaxQuant, which allows transferring MS/MS spectra and sequence information within designated RT window to other raw files that have insufficient MS/MS spectra to identify the sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of patients with pancreatic cystic lesions, particularly intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), is increasing. Current guidelines, which primarily consider radiological features and laboratory data, have had limited success in predicting malignant IPMN. The lack of a definitive diagnostic method has led to low-risk IPMN patients undergoing unnecessary surgeries. To address this issue, we discovered IPMN marker candidates by analyzing pancreatic cystic fluid by mass spectrometry. A total of 30 cyst fluid samples, comprising IPMN dysplasia and other cystic lesions, were evaluated. Mucus was removed by brief sonication, and the resulting supernatant was subjected to filter-aided sample preparation and high-pH peptide fractionation. Subsequently, the samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Using several bioinformatics tools, such as gene ontology and ingenuity pathway analysis, we detailed IPMNs at the molecular level. Among the 5834 proteins identified in our dataset, 364 proteins were differentially expressed between IPMN dysplasia. The 19 final candidates consistently increased or decreased with greater IPMN malignancy. CD55 was validated in an independent cohort by ELISA, Western blot, and IHC, and the results were consistent with the MS data. In summary, we have determined the characteristics of pancreatic cyst fluid proteins and discovered potential biomarkers for IPMN dysplasia.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cyst fluid, Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (ipmn), Mucinous cystic neoplasm (mcn), Biomarkers, Lc-ms/ms, Serous cystic neoplasm (scn)

### Affiliations
Joint faculty of Department of Biomedical Sciences & Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 Daehak0ro, Seoul, Korea
Seoul National University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Misol Do

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Joint faculty of Department of Biomedical Sciences & Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 Daehak0ro, Seoul, Korea


