### Accession
PXD028712

### Title
Cold stress and recovery in shoots and roots of Oryza sativa

### Description
Proteomics analyses of roots and shoots of O. sativa plants exposed to cold stress.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized plant tissue samples were homogenized, sonicated in tert-butyl methyl ether:methanol mixture (3:1). The resulting protein pellets were solubilized (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM AMBIC) and digested with trypsin. Portions of samples corresponding to 5 µg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously (e.g., Berková et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the O. sativa referenced proteome database (UP000059680 39947 ORYSJ) and common protein contaminants by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo). Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analyses. For each point, four biologically distinct samples were analyzed. The quantitative analysis was performed by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Wild <i>Solanum</i> accessions are a treasured source of resistance against pathogens, including oomycete <i>Phytophthora infestans</i>, causing late blight disease. Here, <i>Solanum pinnatisectum</i>, <i>Solanum tuberosum</i>, and the somatic hybrid between these two lines were analyzed, representing resistant, susceptible, and moderately resistant genotypes, respectively. Proteome and metabolome analyses showed that the infection had the highest impact on leaves of the resistant plant and indicated, among others, an extensive remodeling of the leaf lipidome. The lipidome profiling confirmed an accumulation of glycerolipids, a depletion in the total pool of glycerophospholipids, and showed considerable differences between the lipidome composition of resistant and susceptible genotypes. The analysis of putative resistance markers pinpointed more than 100 molecules that positively correlated with resistance including phenolics and cysteamine, a compound with known antimicrobial activity. Putative resistance protein markers were targeted in an additional 12 genotypes with contrasting resistance to <i>P. infestans</i>. At least 27 proteins showed a negative correlation with the susceptibility including HSP70-2, endochitinase B, WPP domain-containing protein, and cyclase 3. In summary, these findings provide insights into molecular mechanisms of resistance against <i>P. infestans</i> and present novel targets for selective breeding.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Cold, Cold recovery, Stress

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


