### Accession
PXD010569

### Title
Characterization of serine proteases from Canavalia ensiformis leaf

### Description
Serine proteases has been vastly reported to be found (and identified) only in seed extracts of Canavalia ensiformis (C. ensiformis), however, our group observed expressive serine protease activities in aqueous extracts from leaves, seeds, roots, and stem, especially in a leaf extract obtained with distillated water (CE-A). Additionally, this extract demonstrated very good stability in high temperatures and in the presence of chemical agents. In order to study the serine protease activity in leaves, CE-A was submitted to benzamidine-sepharose affinity column and an enriched fraction of serine proteases, named CE-ABza was purified 1.65 fold, yielding a total recovery of about 62%. Based upon zymographic analysis in a gelatin-SDS-PAGE-, the CE-ABza fraction presented an enzymatic activity band at approximately 90 kDa molecular mass region under non-reducing conditions and three bands at 17, 32 and also at 90 kDa under reducing condition. This fraction was able to hydrolyze, in a different way, peptidomimetic and protein substrates. The maximal activity was observed at basic pH values (8.0 to 9.5) and temperature about 40°C. These enzymes exhibited important thermal stability and were significantly inhibited by serine protease inhibitors, such as benzamidine and TPCK. Calcium, magnesium, manganese and zinc ions had a negative modulation on the CE-ABza activity. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach identified showed homology with 11 plant proteases from different legumes species, indicating their presence or demonstrating that CE-Bza proteases share specific region of the primary structure of theses enzyme, although the C. ensiformis genome and protein databases are yet to be publicly available. These results demonstrated that these molecules found in both the CE-A extract and the CE-ABza fraction presented important properties that could be used as potential pharmacological and biotechnological targets as therapeutic option. Besides, identification and characterization of C. ensiformis proteases contribute to the studies of plant enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteases present in CE-ABza, the eluate from the affinity chromatographic column was analyzed by a SDS-PAGE 12%. The gel protein bands were sliced across as illustrated in Figure 9, digested according to methodology of Shevchenko et al. (2006) with some modification  and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. To help extracting the tryptic peptides out of the gel, the samples were sonicated and the supernatants containing the peptides were partially dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Shevchenko et al., 1996; Shevchenko et al., 2006). The peptide mixture was injected into a NanoACQUITY UPLC chromatographic system (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to the Q-Tof microTM  mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) and eluted with a linear gradient composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. The chromatographic system consisted of a pre-reversed phase TRAP column (NanoAcquity UPLC 2G-VM TRAP 5 Μm, Symetry C18, 180 mm × 20 mm-Waters, USA) and a reversed-phase analytical column (nanoACQUITY BEH130 C18 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150 mm).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectral data were acquired in DDA (Data Dependent Analysis) in positive ion detection mode. The ToF mass analyzer was calibrated with ionic phosphoric acid “clusters” in the ranger of 50 to 2000 m/z. The M-H+= 588.8692 was used as a reference (“lock mass”) for accurate correction of the mass measurement. To perform the bioinformatics analyses, raw mass spectral data were processed on a Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) version 3.0 licensed software (Waters, Manchester, UK) and the processed data were searched against the NCBI non-redundant protein database (NCBInr) using the MASCOT search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com/). One trypsin missed cleavage site was allowed and the precursor as well as fragment ion tolerances were 0.5 Da and 0.3 Da, respectively. False-positive discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1%, significance threshold value p < 0.05 and peptide ions score ≥ 60.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Purification, Canavalia ensiformis, Serine proteases

### Affiliations
Departamento de Produtos Naturais, Laboratório de Bioquímica de Proteases e Inibidores de Proteases Naturais e Sintéticos, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz),Brasil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Rayane  Gon;alves

### Lab Head
Dr Raquel Elisa da Silva López
Departamento de Produtos Naturais, Laboratório de Bioquímica de Proteases e Inibidores de Proteases Naturais e Sintéticos, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz),Brasil


