### Accession
PXD003251

### Title
Comparative proteomics identifies host immune system proteins affected by infection with Mycobacterium bovis

### Description
Mycobacteria of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) greatly impact on human and animal health worldwide. Mycobacterial life cycle is complex and the mechanisms resulting in pathogen infection and survival in host cells are not fully understood. Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa) are natural reservoir hosts for MTBC and a model for mycobacterial infection and tuberculosis (TB). In the wild boar TB model, mycobacterial infection affects the expression of innate and adaptive immune response genes in mandibular lymph nodes and oropharyngeal tonsils and biomarkers have been proposed as correlates with resistance to natural infection. However, the mechanisms used by mycobacteria to manipulate host immune response are not fully characterized. Our hypothesis is that the immune system proteins under-represented in infected animals when compared to uninfected controls are used by mycobacteria to guarantee pathogen infection and transmission. To address this hypothesis, a comparative proteomics approach was used to compare host response between uninfected (TB-) and M. bovis-infected young (TB+) and adult animals with different infection status [TB lesions localized in the head (TB+) or affecting multiple organs (TB++)]. The results identified host immune system proteins that play an important role in host response to mycobacteria. Calcium binding protein A9, Heme peroxidase, Lactotransferrin, Cathelicidin and Peptidoglycan-recognition protein were under-represented in TB+ animals when compared to uninfected TB- controls but protein levels increased as infection progressed in TB++ animals when compared to TB- and/or TB+ adult wild boar. MHCI was the only protein over-represented in TB+ adult wild boar when compared to uninfected TB- controls. The results reported here suggested that M. bovis manipulates host immune response by reducing the production of immune system proteins. However, as infection progresses, wild boar immune response recover to limit pathogen multiplication and promote survival that also facilitates pathogen transmission.

### Sample Protocol
Young (Age 6-24 months; N=14) and adult (Age >24 months; N=15) Eurasian wild boar were included in the study. The animals were collected between hunting seasons 2009-2012 from Montes de Toledo, Spain in a region with 66±5% TB prevalence in wild boar. After necropsy, young animals were classified as TB- (N=5) or TB+ (N=9) based on the absence/presence of TB-compatible lesions and negative/positive for mycobacteria culture. Adult animals were classified as TB- (N=4), TB+ (N=5) or TB++ (N=6). The TB- animals were negative for mycobacteria culture and did not have TB-compatible lesions. The TB+ and TB++ animals were positive for mycobacteria culture and showed TB-compatible lesions localized in head organs (mandibular lymph nodes and/or oropharyngeal tonsils) or affecting multiple organs in the head and thorax, respectively. All animals positive for mycobacteria culture had infection with M. bovis. Samples of dissected mandibular lymph nodes were obtained by sagittal cross-section at half the length, and tissue fragments of approximately 2 cm3 were rapidly prepared and stored in liquid N for DNA, RNA and protein extraction. The remaining portion of the sample was used for culture and spoligotyping of mycobacteria. Proteins from mandibular lymph nodes were extracted using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen, Inc. Valencia, CA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions. Precipitated proteins from individual samples of each group (TB- and TB+ young animals and TB-, TB+ and TB++ adult animals) were resuspended in 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 with 4% SDS and protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific,San Jose, CA, USA) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. Protein extracts (150 µg per sample) were on-gel concentrated by SDS-PAGE as previously described [14]. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by staining with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific), excised, cut into 2 × 2 mm cubes and digested overnight at 37 °C with 60 ng/μl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 5:1 protein: trypsin (w/w) ratio in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.8 containing 10% (v/v) acetonitrile [15]. The resulting tryptic peptides from each band were extracted by 30 min-incubation in 12 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.8. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% and the peptides were finally desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried-down and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.  The desalted protein digests was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1×20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075×100 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 ml/min. Peptides were eluted using a 180-min gradient from 5 to 40% solvent B (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile). ESI ionization was done using a Fused-silica PicoTip Emitter ID 10 mm (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) interface. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 mscan), followed by fifteen data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 15), using an isolation width of 2 mass-to-charge ratio units, normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 sec periods.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were searched against the Uniprot-Sus scrofa database (34,207 entries in November 2015) (http://www.uniprot.org) using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 1 Da for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 was considered as condition for successful peptide assignments and at least two peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) per protein were the necessary condition for protein identification (Table S1).   Gene ontology (GO) analysis for biological process (BP) was done by Blast2GO software (version 3.0; www.blast2go.com) [16]. Two biological replicates with 2-5 pooled mandibular lymph node samples each were used for analysis. Identified proteins were grouped according to BP GO. Within each BP, the average number of PSMs for each S. scrofa protein were added and normalized against the total number of PSMs and compared separately in young and adult animals between TB- and TB+ or between TB-, TB+ and TB++ samples, respectively by Chi2-test (p=0.05). The average number of normalized PSMs for proteins in BPs with statistically significant differences between samples was then used to identify proteins with significant differences in representation within each BP by Chi2-test (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacteria of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) greatly impact human and animal health worldwide. The mycobacterial life cycle is complex, and the mechanisms resulting in pathogen infection and survival in host cells are not fully understood. Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa) are natural reservoir hosts for MTBC and a model for mycobacterial infection and tuberculosis (TB). In the wild boar TB model, mycobacterial infection affects the expression of innate and adaptive immune response genes in mandibular lymph nodes and oropharyngeal tonsils, and biomarkers have been proposed as correlates with resistance to natural infection. However, the mechanisms used by mycobacteria to manipulate host immune response are not fully characterized. Our hypothesis is that the immune system proteins under-represented in infected animals, when compared to uninfected controls, are used by mycobacteria to guarantee pathogen infection and transmission. To address this hypothesis, a comparative proteomics approach was used to compare host response between uninfected (TB-) and M. bovis-infected young (TB+) and adult animals with different infection status [TB lesions localized in the head (TB+) or affecting multiple organs (TB++)]. The results identified host immune system proteins that play an important role in host response to mycobacteria. Calcium binding protein A9, Heme peroxidase, Lactotransferrin, Cathelicidin and Peptidoglycan-recognition protein were under-represented in TB+ animals when compared to uninfected TB- controls, but protein levels were higher as infection progressed in TB++ animals when compared to TB- and/or TB+ adult wild boar. MHCI was the only protein over-represented in TB+ adult wild boar when compared to uninfected TB- controls. The results reported here suggest that M. bovis manipulates host immune response by reducing the production of immune system proteins. However, as infection progresses, wild boar immune response recovers to limit pathogen multiplication and promote survival, facilitating pathogen transmission.

### Keywords
Wild boar, Lc-ms/ms, Immune system

### Affiliations
University of Castilla- La Mancha
Proteomics Lab. SaBio research group. Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos, IREC (CSIC-UCLM.JCCM)

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
Proteomics Lab. SaBio research group. Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos, IREC (CSIC-UCLM.JCCM)


