### Accession
PXD014455

### Title
A sulfur-containing volatile emitted by potato-associated bacteria confers protection against late blight through direct anti-oomycete activity

### Description
Plant diseases are a major cause for yield losses and new strategies to control them without harming the environment are urgently needed. Plant-associated bacteria contribute to their host’s health in diverse ways, among which the emission of disease-inhibiting volatile organic compounds (VOCs). We have previously reported that VOCs emitted by potato-associated bacteria caused strong in vitro growth inhibition of the late blight causing agent Phytophthora infestans. This work focuses on sulfur-containing VOCs (sVOCs) and demonstrates the high in planta protective potential of S-methyl methane thiosulfonate (MMTS), which fully prevented late blight disease in potato leaves and plantlets without phytotoxic effects, in contrast to other sVOCs. Short exposure times were sufficient to protect plants against infection and MMTS also displayed curative effects. We further show that MMTS’s protective activity was not mediated by the plant immune system but lied in its anti-oomycete activity. Using quantitative proteomics, we determined that different sVOCs caused specific proteome changes in P. infestans, highlighting sulfur metabolism, protein translation and redox balance as main targets. This work brings new perspectives for sustainable protection against the devastating Irish Famine pathogen, while opening new research avenues on the role of sVOCs in the interaction between plants and their microbiome.

### Sample Protocol
P. infestans was grown on Rye agar medium (De Vrieze et al., 2015) at 18°C for ten days in one compartment of a bi-plate. The other compartment contained 300 g sVOC or DMSO as control, which were pipetted on agar plugs. Petri dishes were sealed with parafilm, packed in a plastic bag and incubated upside down for 24 hours at 18°C in the dark. Phytophthora mycelia were collected by scratching the agar surface with a glass coverslip and frozen. Samples were frozen, ground in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C before protein extraction. The protein extracts of the six different treatments from the three independent biological experiments (n=18) were prepared concomitantly. To this end fifty milligrams of frozen powder were resuspended into cold SDS- extraction buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS) supplemented with antiproteases (Complete, Sigma). Concentration of protein extracts was determined using Roti Nanoquant (Carl Roth). 30 µg protein extract per sample were separated on 1D-SDS PAGE and stained with Blue silver colloidal Coomassie (Candiano et al., 2004). Lanes were cut into 15 equidistant pieces and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion (Eymann et al., 2017). Resulting peptide mixes were desalted using C18 Zip Tips (Millipore).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were done using an EASY-nLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on in-house self-packed nano-LC columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing reverse-phase C18 material (3.6 µm, Aeris, phenomenex) and eluted by a non-linear binary gradient of 77 minutes from 5 % to 99 % solvent B (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v), 99.9 % acetonitrile (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nl min-1. Samples were measured in LTQ/Orbitrap parallel mode, survey scans in the Orbitrap were recorded with a resolution of 60,000 in a m/z range of 300 – 1,700 and the 20 most intense peaks were subjected to CID fragmentation in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion (30 sec) of precursor ions was enabled, single-charged ions as well as ions with unknown charge-state were excluded from fragmentation. Internal lock-mass calibration (lock mass 445.120025) was enabled. Database searching and quantification was performed using MaxQuant software v1.5.7.0 (Cox und Mann, 2008). MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against a Phytophtora infestans T30-4 database (uniprot version 2017-08-09; containing 17,612 entries) using following parameters: protease trypsin, two missed cleavages allowed, variable modification methionine oxidation, precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Protein quantification was based on LFQ intensities based on at least two peptides. False discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to a maximum of 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
Plant diseases are a major cause for yield losses and new strategies to control them without harming the environment are urgently needed. Plant-associated bacteria contribute to their host's health in diverse ways, among which the emission of disease-inhibiting volatile organic compounds (VOCs). We have previously reported that VOCs emitted by potato-associated bacteria caused strong in vitro growth inhibition of the late blight causing agent Phytophthora infestans. This work focuses on sulfur-containing VOCs (sVOCs) and demonstrates the high in planta protective potential of S-methyl methane thiosulfonate (MMTS), which fully prevented late blight disease in potato leaves and plantlets without phytotoxic effects, in contrast to other sVOCs. Short exposure times were sufficient to protect plants against infection. We further showed that MMTS's protective activity was not mediated by the plant immune system but lied in its anti-oomycete activity. Using quantitative proteomics, we determined that different sVOCs caused specific proteome changes in P. infestans, indicating perturbations in sulfur metabolism, protein translation and redox balance. This work brings new perspectives for plant protection against the devastating Irish Famine pathogen, while opening new research avenues on the role of sVOCs in the interaction between plants and their microbiome.

### Keywords
Sulfuor-containg vocs, Proteomics, Phytophthora infestans

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


