### Accession
PXD024694

### Title
The rhinobiome of exacerbated preschool wheezers & asthmatics: insights from a German pediatric exacerbation network

### Description
Although the nose, as a gateway for organism-environment interactions, may have a key role in asthmatic exacerbation, the rhinobiome of exacerbated children with asthma was widely neglected to date. Deep nasopharyngeal swab specimens, nasal epithelial spheroid cultures (NAEsp), and blood samples of acute exacerbated wheezers (WH), asthmatics (AB), and healthy controls (HC) were used for culture (n=146), 16 S-rRNA gene amplicon sequencing (n=64), proteomic and cytokine analyses. Interestingly, Proteobacteria were over-represented in WH (WH to AB: p=0.005; WH to HC: p=0.021), whereas Firmicutes and Bacterioidetes were associated with AB. In contrast, Actinobacteria commonly colonized HCs (PermANOVA p=0.005). Moreover, Staphylococcaceae (p<0.05), Enterobacteriaceae (p<0.05), Burkholderiaceae (p<0.05), Xanthobacteraceae (p<0.05), and Sphingomonadaceae (p<0.05) were significantly more abundant in AB compared to WH and HC. The α‐diversity analyses demonstrated an increase of bacterial abundance levels in atopic AB and a decrease in WH samples. Microbiome profiles of atopic WH differed significantly from atopic AB. The NAEsp bacterial exposure with M. catarrhalis, S. aureus and H. influenzae experiments provided a disrupted epithelial cell integrity, a cytokine release and cohort specific proteomic differences especially for M. catarrhalis cultures. Our comprehensive dataset contributes to a deeper insight into the poorly understood plasticity of the nasal microbiota, and, in particular, may enforce our understanding in the pathogenesis of asthma exacerbation in childhood.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze the effects of isolated M. catarrhalis on nasal epithelial cells (NAEPCs), subject-derived NAEPCs at passage 2 (P2) were seeded for spheroid cell culture (1 x 103 cells per well) on a non-cell attachment, lipidure® coated, 96 Well, U-bottom plate from amsbio® using Pneumacult ALI culture media from STEMCELLTM Technologies, Vancouver, Canada. The culture media was changed every 2 days, and the cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for up to max. 10 days until a size of approximately 200-300 nm was observed. Subject-derived deep-frozen M. catarrhalis cultures of AB and WH were thawed and re-cultivated on a Choco culture agar plate for 24 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. A biofilm production was confirmed using the 96-well-microtiter plate assay. Next, we were interested whether the proteome level of infected NAEsp with subject-derived M. catarrhalis was biologically different between groups. The exposure experiments with M. catarrhalis were lysed, and the extracted proteins were separated by 1D SDS PAGE before tryptic in gel digestion.

### Data Protocol
Eluted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro.Results obtained during analysis of a pure culture of n=5 subject-derived M. catarrhalis strains were used to create a spectral library, which was subsequently used to identify spectra obtained from infection experiments. First, the data obtained from infection experiments were searched against the generated spectral library using the tool ‘SpectraST Search’ within the TPP framework. Obtained pep.xml files where combined to interact.pep.xmls and processed with Peptide Prophet. Resulting ipro.pep.xmls were merged into protein lists using the TPP Tool ‘Analyze proteins’ with activated ‘Normalize NSP using protein length’ option. Finally, the software Philosopher (Nesvizhskii Lab) was used to filter the prot.xml files for an FDR less than 0.01 on peptide and protein level. More details on sample preparation, MS analysis and data processing can be found in the Supplementary information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exacerbation, Metagenomics, Nasal microbiome, Proteomics, Moraxella catarrhalis, Bacteria, Bioinformatics, Asthma

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


