### Accession
PXD005818

### Title
Identification of Chlamydomonas centriolar central core proteins reveals a role for human WDR90 in ciliogenesis

### Description
Centrioles are evolutionary conserved macromolecular structures that are fundamental for templating the formation of cilia and flagella, as well as for assembling centrosomes. Centrioles are nine-fold symmetrical microtubule-based cylindrical structures, which have three regions that can be clearly distinguished in the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii organelle: a ~100nm-long proximal region harboring a cartwheel, a ~250nm-long central core region containing the Y-shaped linker and a ~150nm-long distal region ending at the transitional plate. Despite the discovery of a growing number of centriolar components in many systems, no protein has been attributed to the central core region of the centriole thus far. Here, combining relative quantitative mass spectrometry and super-resolution microscopy on purified Chlamydomonas centrioles, we identified POB15 and POC16 as two proteins of the central core region. We also uncovered that POB15 and POC16 distribution correlates with that of centriolar microtubule glutamylation. Moreover, we developed an assay to uncover temporal relationships between centriolar proteins during organelle assembly, and thus established that POB15 is recruited after the cartwheel protein CrSAS-6, but before microtubule glutamylation takes place. Furthermore, we uncovered that WDR90, the human homolog of POC16, localizes to the distal lumen of human centrioles and is required for proper ciliogenesis. Overall, our work provides the first insights into the molecular identity and the function of components of the central core region of centrioles.

### Sample Protocol
The cell wall-less Chlamydomonas strain CW15- was grown in Tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP medium containing Trace). Chlamydomonas centrioles were isolated as follows. Briefly, cells were pelleted at 600 g for 10 minutes in an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge, washed once with PBS, and resuspended in 5% sucrose, 10mM Hepes pH 7.0. Cells were deflagellated by pH shock by adding acetic acid 0.5M to a final pH comprised between 4.5 and 4.7, and incubated for one minute stirring. KOH 1N was subsequently added to restore pH to 7.0. Cells were centrifuged at 600g for 10 minutes in an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge to remove detached flagella. The pellet was washed twice with PBS prior to being carefully loaded on 25% sucrose and spun at 600g at 4°C for 15 minutes to remove the left-over flagella in the supernatant. Next, the pellet was resuspended with 1-2ml of PBS and the lysis buffer (1mM Hepes; 0.5mM MgCl2; 1% NP-40 supplemented with 5000 units of DNase (Roche)) was added at once on the resuspended cells and incubated for 1 hour at 4°C. Lysed cells were spun at 600g for 10 minutes in a 50ml Falcon in an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge at 4°C to remove cell debris. Next, the supernatant was collected and loaded onto a 2ml 60% sucrose cushion, and spun at 11 000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The 3 ml cushion interface (2 ml cushion + 1 ml above the cushion) was mixed and pooled, before loading onto a 40%-70% sucrose gradient (40%-50%-70%), and spun at 25 000g for 1 hour 15 minutes at 4°C. Twelve fractions of 500ml each were collected and further analysed by immunofluorescence. Isolated centrioles and neighboring control fraction were digested in-solution. Proteins were resuspended in 8 M Urea, 20% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.2% RapiGest. Samples were reduced, alkylated and digested using Lys-C and Trypsin. The reaction was stopped by acidification and RapiGest-cleaved by addition of pure Formic Acid (FA) during a final one hour incubation at 37°C. Samples were dimethyl-labeled on Stage Tip. Isolated centrioles were labeled with medium dimethyl reactants (CD2O + NaBH3CN), and the neighboring control fraction with heavy dimethyl reactants (13CD2O + NaBD3CN). Once labeled, samples were eluted, mixed in a 1:1 (medium/heavy) ratio and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Q-exactive. Samples were injected in technical triplicates and separated through long gradients (235 min) in order to maximize both protein identifications and relative quantification accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 using an in-house database generated by combining Chlamydomonas reinhardttii proteins sequences from Phytozome (http://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov - PhytozomeV9: Creihardtii_236), UniProtKB/TrEMBL (Release 2014_05) and common contaminants. A threshold of 1% false discovery rate was fixed at the peptide and protein level. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and Oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr) as well as acetylation (protein N terminus) were considered as variable modifications. Protein quantifications were performed with Razor and unique peptides using only unmodified, oxidized (Met), and acetylated (protein N terminus) peptides. A minimum of one ratio count was required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Centrioles are evolutionarily conserved macromolecular structures that are fundamental to form cilia, flagella, and centrosomes. Centrioles are 9-fold symmetrical microtubule-based cylindrical barrels comprising three regions that can be clearly distinguished in the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii organelle: an &#x223c;100-nm-long proximal region harboring a cartwheel; an &#x223c;250-nm-long central core region containing a Y-shaped linker; and an &#x223c;150-nm-long distal region ending at the transitional plate. Despite the discovery of many centriolar components, no protein has been localized specifically to the central core region in Chlamydomonas thus far. Here, combining relative quantitative mass spectrometry and super-resolution microscopy on purified Chlamydomonas centrioles, we identified POB15 and POC16 as two proteins of the central core region, the distribution of which correlates with that of tubulin glutamylation. We demonstrated that POB15 is an inner barrel protein within this region. Moreover, we developed an assay to uncover temporal relationships between centriolar proteins during organelle assembly and thus established that POB15 is recruited after the cartwheel protein CrSAS-6 and before tubulin glutamylation takes place. Furthermore, we discovered that two poc16 mutants exhibit flagellar defects, indicating that POC16 is important for flagellum biogenesis. In addition, we discovered that WDR90, the human homolog of POC16, localizes to a region of human centrioles that we propose is analogous to the central core of Chlamydomonas centrioles. Moreover, we demonstrate that WDR90 is required for ciliogenesis, echoing the findings in Chlamydomonas. Overall, our work provides novel insights into the identity and function of centriolar central core components.

### Keywords
Super-resolution microscopy, Central core, Ciliogenesis, Centrioles, Basal bodies, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
PCF
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Gönczy
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland


