### Accession
PXD031014

### Title
Human nasopharyngeal cancer cell HONE1 FOXP1 immunoprecipitates LC-MS

### Description
Identification of peptides matching to LCK in FOXP1 immunoprecipitates from HONE1 cells by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein complex eluates were concentrated using IP beads (Bimake), resolved by SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Beyotime). Stained bands that differed from the control were excised, subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Gibco) at 37ºC overnight. The digested peptides were dried and resuspended in an MS-compatible buffer, and the mixture was analyzed using the LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo Fisher) in combination with the UltiMate RSLC Nano LC system (Dionex).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher) was used to identify the protein, and the files were imported and used to explore the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database. The mass tolerances of precursors and fragments were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Data on the peptides with a false discovery rate of < 1% (q < 0.01) were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is reportedly the first identified human tumor virus, and is closely related to the occurrence and development of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), gastric carcinoma (GC), and several lymphomas. PD-L1 expression is elevated in EBV-positive NPC and GC tissues; however, the specific mechanisms underlying the EBV-dependent promotion of PD-L1 expression to induce immune escape warrant clarification. EBV encodes 44 mature miRNAs. In this study, we find that EBV-miR-BART11 and EBV-miR-BART17-3p upregulate the expression of PD-L1 in EBV-associated NPC and GC. Furthermore, EBV-miR-BART11 targets FOXP1, EBV-miR-BART17-3p targets PBRM1, and FOXP1 and PBRM1 bind to the enhancer region of PD-L1 to inhibit its expression. Therefore, EBV-miR-BART11 and EBV-miR-BART17-3p inhibit FOXP1 and PBRM1, respectively, and enhance the transcription of PD-L1 (CD274, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/29126 ), resulting in the promotion of tumor immune escape, which provides insights into potential targets for EBV-related tumor immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Foxp1, Nasopharyngeal cancer cell

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Institute and School of Basic Medicine Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China;
Cancer Research Institute and School of Basic Medicine Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China

### Submitter
zhaoyang zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaoyang Zeng, Wei Xiong
Cancer Research Institute and School of Basic Medicine Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China


