### Accession
PXD043158

### Title
Heart LC-MS/MS of a primary carnitine deficiency mouse model

### Description
A previous animal model for primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) showed symptoms and died quickly, which did not match the characteristics of patients who remained seemingly asymptomatic for a long time. A new mouse model aimed to simulate the characteristics of seemingly asymptomatic was recently constructed. Possible mechanisms underlying the cardiac phenotype was investigated by proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The mice’s ventricles were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were minced to powder in liquid nitrogen and incubated in lysis buffer for 5 min, then 10 mM DTT was added to the sample, followed by 5 min of sonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 4 °C, 13,000 rpm for 20 min, and the supernatant was collected. The supernatant was mixed with 4 times the volume of precooled acetone and still at -20 °C for 2 h. After centrifugation, the protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). Protein samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for another 30 min in the dark. Total protein concentration was measured by BCA protein quantitation assay. An equal amount of proteins from each sample (~100 ug) were used for tryptic digestion. Trypsin was added at an enzyme-protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w), and the digest reaction was performed at 37 °C for 12-16 hours. After digestion, peptides were desalted using C18 Cartridge, followed by drying with a Vacuum concentration meter. Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed on a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). About 200 ng peptides were separated within 60 min at a 0.3 uL/min flow rate on a commercially available reverse-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (IonOpticks, Australia). An integrated Toaster column oven kept the separation temperature at 50 °C. Mobile phases A and B were produced with 0.1 vol. Mobile phase B was increased from 2 to 22% over the first 45 min, increased to 35% over the next 5 min, further increased to 80% over the next 5 min, and then held at 80% for 5 min. The LC was coupled online to a hybrid timsTOF Pro2 (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source (CSI). The timsTOF Pro2 was operated in Data-Dependent Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode with 10 PASEF MS/MS frames in 1 complete frame. The capillary voltage was set to 1,400 V, and the MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired from 100 to 1,700 m/z. As for the ion mobility range (1/K0), 0.7 to 1.4 Vs/cm2 was used. The TIMS accumulation and ramp time was set to 100 ms, enabling an operation at duty cycles close to 100%. The “target value” of 10,000 was applied to a repeated schedule, and the intensity threshold was set at 2,500. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a mobility function from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs/cm2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs/cm2. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2Th for m/z < 700 and 3Th for m/z > 800. In diaPASEF mode, the instrument control software was extended to define quadrupole isolation windows as a function of the TIMS scan time. Modifying the instrument control electronics achieves seamless and synchronous ramping of all applied voltage. We defined 25 Th isolation windows from m/z about 400 to 1,200, and 64 windows were defined. Other parameters were the same as in DDA-PASEF mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using DIA-NN(v1.8.1) with library-free method. The uniprot-proteome_UP000000589_Mus_musculus.fasta database (55319 entries)was uesed to creat a spectra library with deep learning algrithms of neural networks. the option of MBR was employed to create a spectral library from DIA data and then reanlyse using this library. FDR of search results was adjusted to < 1% at both protein and precursor ion levels, the remaining identifications were used for further quantification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Primary carnitine deficiency

### Affiliations
Faculty of Forensic Medicine, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Sun Yat-sen university

### Submitter
Kai Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Erwen Huang
Faculty of Forensic Medicine, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China


