### Accession
PXD031863

### Title
BioID proximity labelling of MAP4K4 interactors in HEK-293T cells

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase kinase 4 (MAP4K4) is Ser/Thr protein kinase highly expressed in medulloblastoma (MB) patient samples which promotes cell migration and invasiveness downstream of growth factor receptors. Although MAP4K4 implication in the control of the membrane protrusions at the leading edge of cells during migration and invasion in MB is established, its downstream effectors governing and mediating this process in MB have not been identified. In this study we explored the proteomic neighborhood of MAP4K4 in MB cells and to identify candidate potentially affecting its activity and pro-migratory functions. Towards this aim, we expressed BioID fused versions of MAP4K4(N- and C-terminal) in HEK-293T cells under presence of biotin. In the control setup, we expressed the BioID enzyme alone. After Streptavidin purification of biotinylated proteins, we performed mass spectrometry and quantified relative abundances compared to control conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Lentiviral constructs were ordered from VectorBuilder (Santa Clara, CA, USA). 3xFLAG-tagged BioID2 biotin ligase was fused to either the N-terminus (3xFLAG-BioID2-MAP4K4) or the C-terminus (MAP4K4-BioID2-3xFLAG) of human MAP4K4 cDNA (NM_145686.4). An extended flexible linker consisting of 13 repeats of GGGGS was inserted between MAP4K4 and the BioID2 ligase. As negative controls, only BioID2-FLAG was used. Expression of proteins were confirmed by western blot. For Streptavidin immunoprecipitations, 7 x 106 HEK-293T cells were transiently transfected with N-BioID2-M4K4, C-BioID2-M4K4, or BioID2-CTRL plasmids using jetPRIME reagent (Polyplus Transfection). Un-transfected WT HEK-293T cells were used as further control. Twenty-four hours after the transfection, the cells were incubated with 50 μM biotin for 16 h. Biotin stock solution (20 mM) was obtained by dissolving 100 mg of powder (IBA, 2-1016-002) in 2.04 ml of NH4OH 28-30% (Sigma Aldrich, ref# 221228), 18 ml of 1 M HCl was added to neutralize the solution (pH~7.5) and stored at 4°C. After 16 h of biotin incubation and two PBS washes, the cells were lysed at 4°C with 1 ml of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 nM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitor tablet (Roche). Two mg of protein samples were incubated with 75 μl of pre-equilibrated Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 magnetic beads (65602, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 h at 4 °C under rotation. The beads were collected using a magnetic rack and washed twice with lysis buffer and twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.3). Beads were resuspended in 150 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, snap-frozen, stored at -80°C, and used for MS analysis. For each condition, three biological replicates were performed and analyzed by MS. For on-bead digestion, 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2) was added to a final concentration of 2 M urea. Reduction and alkylation were carried out using 2 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 1 h at 30°C under agitation in the dark. The solutions were diluted with 10 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM CaCl2 (pH 8.2) in a 1/1 ratio and digestion was performed with 1 µg/sample trypsin overnight at 30°C under agitation in the dark. The next day, the supernatant was taken from the beads and pooled with two washing steps with 100 μl 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2)/10% acetonitrile and acidified with 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration 0.5%). The Samples were desalted on Sep-Pack C18 columns (Thermo Scientific), completely dried using speed vac centrifugation, and dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA). The samples were diluted 10-fold and transferred to autosampler vials for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 2 μl of samples were injected by an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) and separated on an EasySpray-column (75 µm x 500 mm) packed with C18 material (PepMap, C18, 100 Å, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Peptides were eluted using the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile): 5-25% B in, 60 min; 25-35% B in 10 min; 35-99% B in 5 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. All precursor signals were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole transmission in the mass range of 300-1500 m/z. Spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, a target value of 5E5 and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Data dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 30% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 8E3 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Precursor signals were selected for fragmentation with a charge state from +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5E3. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 25 seconds. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data of three biological replicates were combined and searched against a SwissProt database with Homo sapiens taxonomy using Mascot (version 2.6.2, London, UK), with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.030 Da. The database was also expanded with frequently observed contaminants, such as bovine serum albumin, trypsin, and keratins. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (C) was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (M) was set as a variable modification. Scaffold (version 4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. 1% and 0.1% false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff on peptide and protein, respectively, was used to control for false identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides per protein. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins detected in the parental control samples (WT cells lacking BioID2 expression) were subtracted from the results. The significance of enrichment was tested using a two-tailed student’s t-test with equal variances. Hits were considered significantly enriched in MAP4K4-BioID2 cells compared the unspecific background (BioID2-CTRL) if they had > 2-fold enrichment and p-values < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Map4k4

### Affiliations
University Children's Hospital Zürich
Pediatric Molecular Neuro-Oncology Research, Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Martin Baumgartner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Baumgartner
Pediatric Molecular Neuro-Oncology Research, Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Switzerland


