### Accession
PXD002157

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the role of Snail1 in the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cell

### Description
Snail effects on adipogenesis was proposed to be mediated, among others, by a lack of response to TGFβ (Batlle et al., 2012) or by an apparent inhibition of PPARγ and C/EBPα expression (Lee et al., 2013).  Similar results were obtained in preventing the differentiation of bone marrow-derived murine mesenchymal stem cells (mMSC) to osteoblasts or adipocytes (Batlle et al, 2012). Still, the molecular mechanisms underlying the effect of Snail on MSCs differentiation and the blocking of adipogenesis were far from being established. We carried out an in-depth quantitative proteomic analysis of Snail-transfected cells to identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms controlled by Snail.  We used isobaric labeling with tandem mass tags (TMT) (Dayon and Sanchez, 2012) for mMSCs analysis.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labelling of the nuclear fraction of mMSC/Snail1 and control cells was performed as manufactured described (TMT6 plex Thermo Fisher) The TMT experiment was designed to include two biological replicates and two internal controls for normalization. For nuclear protein extraction, cells were washed twice with chilled PBS, resuspended with PBS containing 4mM EDTA, and harvested by centrifugation at 500g for 5 min. Then, we used the subcellular protein fractionation kit (Thermo) . Protein quantification was performed using the tryptophan method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). The nuclear fraction and protein quantification of mMSC cells was obtained as indicated for 3T3-L1 cells (Figure 1B). Then, 25 μg proteins from each sample were separately dissolved in 33 μl 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 6M urea, reduced with 2 μl 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 1 μL of 0.4 M iodoacetamide. In parallel, we performed the same protocol with two other equal tubes containing 25 μg of protein nuclear extract from each sample (pool sample 1-3 and pool sample 2-4). The samples were then diluted with 64 μl TEAB and digested overnight with 2 μg of porcine trypsin. The next day, all peptides from the four samples and both pools were separately labeled with six different Tandem Mass Tags (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the content of the six tubes was pooled, desalted on a Vidac C18 spin column (Harvard apparatus, Holliston, MA) and dried prior to off-gel electrophoresis. Off-gel electrophoresis was performed according to manufacturer's instructions (Agilent). Briefly, desalted and dehydrated samples were reconstituted in OFFGEL solution. Focusing was performed on an IPG dry strip (13 cm, pH 3–10, linear; GE Healthcare) set up with a 12-well frame at 20 kVh with a maximum of 50 μA and power of 200 mW. The 12 collected fractions were desalted on a Vidac C18 microspin column, dried under speed-vacuum and stored at -20ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. ESI LTQ-OT MS was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap velos from Thermo Electron (San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity system from Waters.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from raw data using the embedded software from the instrument vendor (extract_MSN.exe). After peak list generation, the CID and HCD spectra were merged for simultaneous identification and quantification (http://www.expasy.org/tools/HCD_CID_merger.html). The monoisotopic masses of the selected precursor ions were corrected using an in-house written Perl script . The corrected mgf files, combined from the 12 analyzed off-gel fractions, were searched against XYZ database  using Phenyx (GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland). Mus musculus taxonomy was specified for database searching. The parent ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Variable amino acid modifications were set for oxidized methionine. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with two potential missed cleavages, and the normal cleavage mode was used. Only one search round was used with selection of “turbo” scoring. The peptide p value was 1 × 10E-2 for LTQ-Orbitrap data. False-positive ratios were estimated using a reverse decoy database . All datasets where searched once in the forward and once in the reverse database. Separate searches were used to keep the database size constant. Protein and peptide score were then set up to maintain the false positive peptide ratio below 1%. This resulted in a slight overestimation of the false-positive ratio (REFERENCIA). Only those proteins matching two different peptide sequences were kept for all analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Adipogenesis requires a differentiation program driven by multiple transcription factors, where PPAR&#x3b3; and C/EBP&#x3b1; play a central role. Recent findings indicate that Snail inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 and murine mesenchymal stem cells (mMSC). An in-depth quantitative SILAC analysis of the nuclear fraction of Snail-induced alterations of 3T3-L1 cells was carried out. In total, 2251 overlapping proteins were simultaneously quantified in forward and reverse experiments. We observed 574 proteins deregulated by Snail1 using a fold-change &#x2265;1.5, with 111 up- and 463 down-regulated proteins, respectively. Among other proteins, multiple transcription factors such as Trip4, OsmR, Nr2f6, Cbx6, and Prrx1 were down-regulated. Results were validated in 3T3-L1 cells and mMSC cells by Western blot and quantitative PCR. Knock-down experiments in 3T3-L1 cells demonstrated that only Nr2f6 (and Trip4 at minor extent) was required for adipocyte differentiation. Ectopic expression of Nr2f6 reversed the effects of Snail1 and promoted adipogenesis. Because Nr2f6 inhibits the expression of IL-17, we tested the effect of Snail on IL-17 expression. IL-17 and TNF&#x3b1; were among the most up-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines in Snail-transfected 3T3-L1 and mMSC cells. Furthermore, the blocking of IL-17 activity in Snail-transfected cells promoted adipocyte differentiation, reverting Snail inhibition. In summary, Snail inhibits adipogenesis through a down-regulation of Nr2f6, which in turn facilitates the expression of IL-17, an anti-adipogenic cytokine. These results would support a novel and important role for Snail and Nr2f6 in obesity control.

### Keywords
Orbitrap-velos, Snail1, Msc, Tmt-6plex

### Affiliations
CIB-CSIC (Spanish Research Council)
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH (IDIPAZ)

### Submitter
Alberto Pelaez García

### Lab Head
Dr Functional Proteomics
CIB-CSIC (Spanish Research Council)


