### Accession
PXD035634

### Title
Synergy between a cytoplasmic vWFA/VIT protein and a WD40-repeat F-box protein controls development in the social amoeba Dictyostelium (Vwa1 IP)

### Description
Like most eukaryotes, the pre-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium depends on the SCF (Skp1/cullin-1/F-box protein) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases to regulate its proteome. In Dictyostelium, starvation induces a transition from unicellular feeding to a multicellular slug that responds to external signals to culminate into a fruiting body containing terminally differentiated stalk and spore cells. These transitions are subject to regulation by F-box proteins and O2-dependent posttranslational modifications of Skp1. Here we examine in greater depth the essential role of FbxW2 and Vwa1, which was found in the FbxWD interactome by co-immunoprecipitation and is classified as a vault protein inter-alpha- trypsin (VIT) and von Willebrand factor-A (vWFA) domain containing protein. Reciprocal co-IPs using gene-tagged strains confirmed the interaction and their similar transcript expression profiles during multicellular development suggest they function together. FbxWD overexpression and proteasome inhibitors did not affect Vwa1 levels suggesting a non-substrate relationship. Forced FbxwD overexpression in slug tip cells where it is normally expressed blocked culmination by a mechanism that depended on its F-box and RING domains, and on Vwa1 expression itself. However, vwa1-disruption alone did not affect development. In contrast, overexpression of either of its three conserved domains arrested development but the effect depended on Vwa1 expression. Based on structure predictions, we propose that the Vwa1 domains exert their negative effect by artificially activating Vwa1 which in turn imbalances its synergistic function with FbxWD. Autoinhibition or homodimerization might be relevant to the poorly understood tumor suppressor role of the evolutionarily related VWA5A/BCSC-1 in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation For interactome studies, cells were lysed for 15 min on ice in Lysis buffer (250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.2% (v/v) NP-40, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 10 µg/ml aprotinin) at a final concentration of 1.2-1.5 × 105 cells/µl for vegetative cells and 2.4×105 cells/µl for slugs. Lysates were spun at 21,000 × g for 15 min to remove the insoluble material. 107 cell equivalents of the supernatant (S21) were added to 5 µl packed volume of M2 anti-FLAG magnetic Sepharose beads (Sigma-Aldrich M8823). Lysate and beads were rotated for 1 hour at 4°C at a rate that kept the beads evenly suspended in the lysate. The beads were collected magnetically, rinsed three times in 20 bead vol of Lysis buffer, three times in detergent-free Lysis buffer, and once more in 20 vol of unbuffered salt solution (250 mM NaCl, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 10 µg/ml aprotinin). For Western blot analysis, beads were boiled in 10 vol 2% SDS for 5 min. For mass spectrometric analysis, beads were eluted with 10 bead vol of 133 mM triethanolamine for 15 min and neutralized with acetic acid. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolubilized in 8M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The efficiency of IP capture was routinely evaluated by Western blot analysis of the S21, IP supernatant, and eluted fractions.  Mass spectrometric analysis Dried eluates from were solubilized in 8 M urea, reduced at room temperature with 10 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide (63). After addition of 1 µg of endo-LysC/trypsin (Pierce, A40009), the sample was incubated at 22°C for 2 h, and then diluted with the same buffer to a final concentration of 2 M urea for continued overnight digestion.  The peptide samples were amended with heptafluorobutyric acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and aspirated 5 times through a pre-equilibrated C18 Zip-Tip (Agilent Bond Elut Omix), which was then rinsed twice with 0.1% heptafluorobutyric acid. Peptides were eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, followed by 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid.  The peptide solution was loaded onto a C18 trap column (Thermo Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 series) in a Thermo Fisher UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC, and eluted from the trap column onto a C18 nano-column (Thermo Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 series) in a 5%-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 3 h. The eluent was directly introduced via a nano-electrospray source into a Thermo-Fischer Q-Exactive Plus and analyzed by MS and MS/MS. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350 to 2000 at 70,000 resolution. Peptides were selected for fragmentation in the C-trap via higher energy collision-induced dissociation for MS/MS analysis using a Top 10 method and a 30 sec fragmentation exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5, using its two step Protein Search method with label free quantification and Consensus workflow with parameters specific to the MS1 and MS2 fragmentation and mass tolerances of the Thermo-Fischer Q Exactive Plus. A modified D. discoideum protein database containing 12,428 unique proteins (64), modified to include a 179-protein exclusion list of common ectopic contaminants (65), was used for peptide identification. Sequest HT search parameters were 10 ppm parent ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance, and up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of Met, formylation or acetylation of the protein N terminus; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of Cys. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was determined via Target/Decoy in the Proteome Discoverer processing workflow. Protein identifications were ranked by protein FDR confidence intervals of High (X<1%), Medium (1%<X<5%) and Low (5%<X<10%). Candidates assigned as mitochondrial, ribosomal or secretory proteins (see listing in database referenced below) were filtered as before (20). Protein quantifications were derived from reconstructed ion chromatograms of all peptides assigned to a protein at the MS1 level. Comparisons of protein abundance were done after setting total abundance of each sample within a single analysis equal to the highest value within the experiment in Proteome Discoverer. Normalized abundance values of proteins were analyzed for statistically significant differences between groups using the SimpliFi algorithm (https://simplifi.protifi.com/)(59). Since Simplifi can use nonparametric statistics that assume only that data model themselves, we used this to perform tests on normalized abundances, with 1 added to all spectral counts to avoid zero values, rather than on logarithmic transformations. Proteins whose abundances were >4-fold higher in experimental vs. control samples with a Wilcoxon test p-value <0.01 and a t-test p-value <0.01 were classified as Skp1 interactors. Proteins whose values were ≥1.5-fold higher in phyA+ vs. phyA– samples, with t-test and Wilcoxon test p-values <0.05, were classified as enriched in the phyA+ Skp1 interactome.

### Publication Abstract
Like most eukaryotes, the pre-metazoan social amoeba <i>Dictyostelium</i> depends on the SCF (Skp1/cullin-1/F-box protein) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases to regulate its proteome. In <i>Dictyostelium</i>, starvation induces a transition from unicellular feeding to a multicellular slug that responds to external signals to culminate into a fruiting body containing terminally differentiated stalk and spore cells. These transitions are subject to regulation by F-box proteins and O<sub>2</sub>-dependent posttranslational modifications of Skp1. Here we examine in greater depth the essential role of FbxwD and Vwa1, an intracellular vault protein inter-alpha-trypsin (VIT) and von Willebrand factor-A (vWFA) domain containing protein that was found in the FbxwD interactome by co-immunoprecipitation. Reciprocal co-IPs using gene-tagged strains confirmed the interaction and similar changes in protein levels during multicellular development suggested co-functioning. FbxwD overexpression and proteasome inhibitors did not affect Vwa1 levels suggesting a non-substrate relationship. Forced FbxwD overexpression in slug tip cells where it is normally enriched interfered with terminal cell differentiation by a mechanism that depended on its F-box and RING domains, and on Vwa1 expression itself. Whereas <i>vwa1</i>-disruption alone did not affect development, overexpression of either of its three conserved domains arrested development but the effect depended on Vwa1 expression. Based on structure predictions, we propose that the Vwa1 domains exert their negative effect by artificially activating Vwa1 from an autoinhibited state, which in turn imbalances its synergistic function with FbxwD. Autoinhibition or homodimerization might be relevant to the poorly understood tumor suppressor role of the evolutionarily related VWA5A/BCSC-1 in humans.

### Keywords
Cellular slime mold, Vit, Vfwa, Ring, F-box protein, Glycosylation, Von willebrand domain a, E3(scf)ubiquitin-ligase, Skp1

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104 USA
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Christopher West

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark West
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104 USA


