### Accession
PXD023592

### Title
CRPC biomarker via proteomic analysis

### Description
Identifying biological change from hormone-naive prostate cancer to CRPC is a major clinical challenge for developing therapeutic agents. Although the pathways that lead to CRPC are not fully understood, recent evidence demonstrates that androgen signaling is often maintained through varied mechanisms. Here, we investigated PCa tissues at each stage of progression from benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) to CRPC based on quantitative proteomic technology, including tissues after ADT therapy. MS-based quantitative proteomics approach based on 6-plex TMT (126-131) was performed in patient tissues from T2G2 to CRPC, and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) patient tissues were used as a control. We analyzed the peptide samples using two types of high resolution and accuracy mass spectrometers as LTQ orbitrap velos and Q-exactive mass spectrometer. In total, 4,768 proteins were identified in this study, among which 4,069 proteins were quantified in the combined prostate cancer tissues. Among the quantified proteins, DEPs were 865 (21.2%), those with a quantitative ratio greater than 2 were considered as upregulated, whereas those with a quantitative ratio of less than 0.5 as downregulated. Based on quantitative protein results, we performed systematic bioinformatics analysis including GO, Interpro, KEGG pathway, functional enrichment-based cluster analysis on DEPs. Finally, we found that 15 proteins including FOXA1 and HMGN1-3 between T3G3, T3GX, and CRPC were increased despite ADT treatment. Among all target, we verified increased level of FOXA1 and HMGN1-3 in CRPC by immunoblotting and indirect ELISA. In summary, we provides intracellular mechanical changes on PCa tissues according to treatment before and after ADT by mean of regulating ADT treatment. In addition, this results were identified through bioinformatics analysis, and those were suggested as potential CRPC-related factors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for comparative proteome analysis Three prostate cancer tissues in each group were homogenized and proteins were extracted with RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) containing the Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. Five hundred microgram protein of pooled each group sample was prepared after protein quantification with a BCA colorimetric Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for reduction was added into the lysated protein, incubated 56°C for 30min, then 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for alkylation, at RT for 45 min in the dark. The Protein lysates purification started with 10% of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at -20°C for 4h and then washed two times by ice-cold acetone. Centrifuged 16,000 x g for 10 min and pellet was suspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Then, trypsin/P (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was added to digest protein with enzyme ratio to protein 1:50 (w/w), and incubate 37°C for overnight. Quenching step by 1% TFA (v/v) was performed in digested peptide, at 16,000 ⅹ g, at 4°C for 10 min. The purified peptide concentration was measured by quantitative, colorimetric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and prepared equivalent 80 ug peptide in each group for 6-plex TMT labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). TMT label reagent prior dissolved in 41 ul of acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. BPH, T2G2, T3G2, T3G3, T3GX and CRPC group were 6-plex TMT labeled 126 to 131, respectively. TMT labeling reaction was quenched by 8 ul of 5% hydroxylamine into each sample and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Equal amounts of samples were combined in low bind e-tube and dried by speed vacuum.   Peptide fractionation by High-pH reverse-phase (RP) fractionation and desalting  Peptide fractionation was performed on a high-pH RP fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Eight different pH values in 0.1% triethylamine with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and 50% ACN were used in order to elute fractionate peptides. For desalting peptide samples, total of eight fractionated samples were desalted by ZipTip C18 resin (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and dried again for analysis of liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).   Nano LC-MS/MS analysis  For accurate mass measurement, LTQ Velos-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Eksigent nano liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher) connected with nano liquid chromatography (LC) system (Dionex) were used. For the condition of LTQ Velos-Orbitrap LC-MS/MS, and a total of 75 min gradient method was run with linear gradient of 5–30% solvent B (Acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The injection volume was 2 ul of 500 ng peptide of dissolved in solvent A (water/0.1% formic acid). Peptide separation was carried out using a home-made C12 column (0.75 mm i.d., 10 cm; Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA, USA) filled with Jupiter C12 resin which was used as the analytical column. The eluted peptides were sprayed into the Orbitrap mass spectrometer at 1.8 kV. A full scan from m/z 300 to 1,800 at a resolution 30,000 was examined. Top 10 mode followed by a data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS scan method was applied using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 40 eV. Singly charged peptides were excluded form fragmentation. Analysis was carried out by using (LTQ-velos Orbitrap) supported by Basic Science Research Capacity Enhancement Project through Korea Basic Science Institute (National research Facilities and Equipment Center). The same batch of eluted peptides were loaded onto a Q-Exactive orbitrap spectrometer and separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System with a PepMap 100 C18 LC column (#164535) as a loading column followed by PepMap RSLC C18 (#ES803) analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 135 min. The nano and trap column temperatures were both set at 45°C. Data were collected over a broad mass to charge (m/z) precursor full mass selection scan range of m/a 350-2000. Full scan mass spectrometry (MS) with a data dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed in a range from 350 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis Bioinformatics study was performed to analyzed differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) using from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). For gene ontology (GO) annotation, log2 of over two-fold changed proteins were classified based on three categories: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function (MF). Pathway analysis online service, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) mapper (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/mapper.html), was used DEPs for mapping the annotation results. The DEPs also were transformed for z-scores then, clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering in Perseus software platform (v. 1.6) into seven types of classification. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. Web-free Software of STRING network (https://string-db.org/) was used based on the highest confidence (0.900) of required interaction score.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying the biological change from hormone-na&#xef;ve prostate cancer to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is a major clinical challenge for developing therapeutic agents. Although the pathways that lead to CRPC are not fully completely understood, recent evidence demonstrates that androgen signaling is often maintained through varied mechanisms. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is used as a primary treatment for preventing the progression of prostate cancer (PCa). Here we investigated PCa tissues at each stage of progression, from benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) to CRPC, based on quantitative proteomic technology, including tissues after ADT. In total, 4768 proteins were identified in this study, of which 4069 were quantified in the combined PCa tissues. Among the quantified proteins, 865 were differentially expressed proteins (21.2%). Based on the quantitative protein results, we performed systematic bioinformatics analysis and found that the levels of 15 proteins, including FOXA1 and HMGN1-3, increased among T3G3, T3GX, and CRPC, despite the ADT. Among all targets, we verified the increased levels of FOXA1 and HMGN1-3 in CRPC by immunoblotting and indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. In summary, we discuss the changes in intracellular factors involved in the progression of CRPC PCa despite ADT. Moreover, we suggest that FOXA1 and HMGN1-3 proteins could be used as potential CRPC-related factors in clinical therapeutic agents.

### Keywords
: comparative proteomics; prostate cancer; foxa1; androgen deprivation therapy; crpc

### Affiliations
kyungpook national university

### Submitter
Ann-Yae Na

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
kyungpook national university


