### Accession
PXD018673

### Title
N-glycomic profiling of colorectal cancer according to tumor stage and location

### Description
Alterations in glycosylation are seen in many types of cancer, including colorectal cancer (CRC). CRC is known to display glycosylation alterations. Glycans, the sugar moieties of glycoconjugates, are involved in many important functions relevant to cancer, such as cell signaling and adhesion, and may can be of value as biomarkers. In this study, we have used mass spectrometry to analyze the N-glycan profiles of 35 CRC tissue samples from patients with tumors in the right or left colon and 10 healthy tissue samples from non-CRC patients who underwent operations for other reasons. The tumor samples were divided into groups depending on tumor location (right or left colon) and stage (II or III), while the healthy samples were divided into right or left side of the colon. The levels of neutral and acidic N-glycan compositions and glycan classes were analyzed in a total of ten different groups. Surprisingly, there were no significant differences in glycan levels when all right- and left-sided CRC samples were compared, and few differences (such as in the abundance of the neutral N-glycan H3N5) were seen when the samples were divided according to both location and stage. Multiple significant differences were found in the levels of glycans and glycan classes when stage II and III samples were compared, and these glycans could be of value as candidates for new markers of cancer progression. In order to validate our findings, we analyzed healthy tissue samples from the right and left colon and found no significant differences in the levels of any of the glycans analyzed, confirming that our findings when comparing CRC samples from the right and left colon are not due to normal variations in the levels of glycans between the healthy right and left colon. Additionally, the levels of the acidic glycans H4N3F1P1, H5N4F1P1, and S1H5N4F1 were found to change in a cancer-specific but colon location-nonspecific manner, indicating that CRC affects glycan levels in similar ways, regardless of tumor location.

### Sample Protocol
Glycans were isolated from FFPE tissue blocks as previously described [Kaprio et al. 2014 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics]. To summarize, for the tumor tissue samples from CRC patients, representative areas of carcinoma tissue were marked on H&E slides and samples were punched from FFPE tissue blocks with a 3.0-mm puncher. For the healthy colon tissue samples, 10 µm flakes were cut using a microtome. The reason for using a microtome instead of a puncher for these samples was due to the better yield of epithelial cells made possible by sectioning. Whereas the FFPE blocks for the tumor tissue samples contained only tumor tissue, the samples from healthy colon tissue included not only epithelial cells but also other layers of the colon. All samples were then deparaffinized with xylene and an ethanol-water series according to standard procedures. N-linked glycans were detached from cellular glycoproteins by N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) digestion (Glyko; ProZyme Inc., Hayward, CA) and purified as previously described [Satomaa et al. 2009 BMC Cell Biology 10:42]. Briefly, the detached glycans were passed in water through C18 silica, after which they were absorbed to graphitized carbon material. Both of these steps were done in 96-well format. Next, the carbon wells were washed with water and neutral N-linked glycans were eluted using 25% acetonitrile, while acidic N-linked glycans were eluted using 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 25% acetonitrile in water. The acidic glycans were further purified through hydrophilic interaction solid-phase extraction done in 96-well format. Both glycan fractions were then passed in water through strong cation-exchange resin before MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry was performed using a Bruker Ultraflex III TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics Inc, Bremen, Germany) as previously described [Satomaa et al. 2009]. Neutral N-glycans were detected in positive ion reflector mode as [M+Na]+ ions and acidic N-glycans in negative ion reflector mode as [M-H]- ions. The relative molar abundances of neutral and acidic glycan components were assigned based on their relative signal intensities in the mass spectra when analyzed separately as neutral and acidic N-glycan fractions. The mass spectrometric raw data was transformed into the present glycan profiles. The resulting glycan signals in the glycan profiles were normalized to 100% to allow comparison between the samples and were assigned to biosynthetic groups based on their proposed monosaccharide composition.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in glycosylation are seen in many types of cancer, including colorectal cancer (CRC). Glycans, the sugar moieties of glycoconjugates, are involved in many important functions relevant to cancer and can be of value as biomarkers. In this study, we have used mass spectrometry to analyze the N-glycan profiles of 35 CRC tissue samples and 10 healthy tissue samples from non-CRC patients who underwent operations for other reasons. The tumor samples were divided into groups depending on tumor location (right or left colon) and stage (II or III), while the healthy samples were divided into right or left colon. The levels of neutral and acidic N-glycan compositions and glycan classes were analyzed in a total of ten different groups. Surprisingly, there were no significant differences in glycan levels when all right- and left-sided CRC samples were compared, and few differences (such as in the abundance of the neutral N-glycan H3N5) were seen when the samples were divided according to both location and stage. Multiple significant differences were found in the levels of glycans and glycan classes when stage II and III samples were compared, and these glycans could be of value as candidates for new markers of cancer progression. In order to validate our findings, we analyzed healthy tissue samples from the right and left colon and found no significant differences in the levels of any of the glycans analyzed, confirming that our findings when comparing CRC samples from the right and left colon are not due to normal variations in the levels of glycans between the healthy right and left colon. Additionally, the levels of the acidic glycans H4N3F1P1, H5N4F1P1, and S1H5N4F1 were found to change in a cancer-specific but colon location-nonspecific manner, indicating that CRC affects glycan levels in similar ways regardless of tumor location.

### Keywords
N-glycan cancer maldi-tof mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Glykos Finland Ltd., Helsinki, Finland
Glykos Finland Ltd.

### Submitter
Tero Satomaa

### Lab Head
Dr Tero Satomaa
Glykos Finland Ltd., Helsinki, Finland


