### Accession
PXD008544

### Title
Proteomic analyses of Pseudomonas jessenii GO3 cells

### Description
Several soil organisms are known to be capable of growth on caprolactam as soil carbon and nitrogen source, but the enzymes of the catabolic pathway have not been described. We isolated a caprolactam-degrading strain of Pseudomonas jessenni, and identified genes putatively involved in the caprolactam metabolism using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics. This led to the discovery of a caprolactamase and an aminotransferase that are involved in the initial steps of caprolactam conversion. Additionally, various proteins were identified likely to be involved in later steps of the pathway. The identified caprolactamase consisted of 2 subunits and demonstrated high sequence identity to the 5-oxoprolinases. E. coli expressing this caprolactamase did not convert 5-oxoproline but was able to hydrolyze caprolactam to form 6-aminohexanoic acid in an ATP dependent manner. Characterization of the aminotransferase revealed that the enzyme deaminated 6-aminohexanoic acid to produce 6-oxohexanoate with pyruvate as amino acceptor. The amino acid sequence of the aminotransferase demonstrated high similarity to subgroup II ω-aminotransferases of the PLP fold type I proteins. Finally, analyses of the genome sequence demonstrated the presence of a caprolactam catabolism gene cluster consisting of all genes involved in the conversion of caprolactam to adipate.

### Sample Protocol
P. jessenii GO3 cells were cultured in 50 ml MM supplemented with 0.2% glucose and 5 mM (NH4)2SO4 or with 4 mM caprolactam. When the culture reached the late exponential growth phase, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 15 min. Cell pellets were washed once with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.8, and stored at -20°C prior to use.    For mass spectrometry, cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.8 and lysed using a Sonic Vibra cell sonicator at 0°C. To remove unbroken cells and cell debris the samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 60 min at 4°C. Soluble protein was precipitated by the addition of 20% TCA. After incubating the samples for 1 h on ice, samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Protein pellets were washed with ice cold acetone to remove the residual TCA. Dry protein extracts were then resuspended in 50 μL 50 mM NaOH. Reduction of the samples was performed with 5 μl of 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 350 μL 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25°C, followed by 30 min incubation at room temperature with 10 μl of 550 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C by the addition of 4 μg trypsin Gold (mass spectrometry grade, Promega), followed by a second trypsin digestion for 3 h at 37°C using 1 μg trypsin Gold. Samples were prepared for injection by the addition of 2.5% FA to the samples.  Peptides were trapped on a pre-column (EASY-Column C18, 100 µm x 20mm, 5µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a capillary column (C18 PepMap 300, 75 µm x 100 mm, 3-µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) mounted on a Proxeon Easy-nLCII system (Thermo Scientific). Solutions of 0.1% formic acid in water and a 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile were used as the mobile phases. A gradient from 5 to 40% acetonitrile was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed using a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific). MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap, in the range from 300 to 2000 m/z. The 5 most intense ions per scan were selected for MS/MS fragmentation (35% Normalized Collision Energy) and detected in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were obtained from raw data files using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Mascot (version 2.1, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the annotated P. jessenii GO3 genomic DNA. Peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance to 2.0 Da, using semi-trypsin as protease specificity and allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine residues, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and carboamidomethylation of cysteines were specified as variable modifications. The MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications were further validated with the program Scaffold (version 4.6.1, Proteome Software Inc.). Peptide identifications were accepted when the probability was greater than 95%. Protein identifications were based on at least 2 unique peptides identified by MS/MS, each with a confidence of identification probability higher than 99%.   For each growth condition, at least two replicates of two independent cultures were analyzed. Normalized intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values from Scaffold were used as a measure for the abundance of the identified proteins. Average iBAQ values were calculated for the different samples, and subsequently log2-transformed.  In case the protein was not detected, the log2 transformed iBAQ value was manually set to 8.5, 2.5 times below the approximate limit of detection. The effect of the growth conditions on specific protein amounts was calculated by dividing the average log2 iBAQ value for each protein in protein extracts from caprolactam-grown cells by the corresponding iBAQ value in protein extracts from control cells. A protein was considered upregulated when the log2-fold ratio was more than two, and downregulated when the log2-fold ratio was less than 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Some bacterial cultures are capable of growth on caprolactam as sole carbon and nitrogen source, but the enzymes of the catabolic pathway have not been described. We isolated a caprolactam-degrading strain of Pseudomonas jessenii from soil and identified proteins and genes putatively involved in caprolactam metabolism using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics. This led to the discovery of a caprolactamase and an aminotransferase that are involved in the initial steps of caprolactam conversion. Additionally, various proteins were identified that likely are involved in later steps of the pathway. The caprolactamase consists of two subunits and demonstrated high sequence identity to the 5-oxoprolinases. Escherichia coli cells expressing this caprolactamase did not convert 5-oxoproline but were able to hydrolyze caprolactam to form 6-aminocaproic acid in an ATP-dependent manner. Characterization of the aminotransferase revealed that the enzyme deaminates 6-aminocaproic acid to produce 6-oxohexanoate with pyruvate as amino acceptor. The amino acid sequence of the aminotransferase showed high similarity to subgroup II &#x3c9;-aminotransferases of the PLP-fold type I proteins. Finally, analyses of the genome sequence revealed the presence of a caprolactam catabolism gene cluster comprising a set of genes involved in the conversion of caprolactam to adipate.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas jessenii go3, Nano lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
Biotransformation and Biocatalysis, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Marleen Otzen

### Lab Head
Dr Dick B. Janssen
Biotransformation and Biocatalysis, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands


