### Accession
PXD011137

### Title
Schistosoma haematobium proteomes

### Description
Despite the clear role of adult secreted and tegumental proteins as well as egg proteins in host-parasite interactions, there has not been any in-depth proteomic analysis of these or other Schistosoma haematobium proteomes. In the current project we have carried out the first comprehensive proteomic analysis of S. haematobium. The characterisation of the molecules playing a key role at the interphase between the host and the parasite is crucial for (i) a better understanding of the parasite’s biology and, (ii) for the development of new control and diagnostic approaches to tackle parasitic infections.

### Sample Protocol
The adult ES and egg ES extracts were obtained by culturing ~100 adult worms or ~400,000 eggs in serum-free Basch media for 72h. Media was centrifuged at 500 g, 2,000 g and 4,000 g to remove debris and concentrated to 1mg/ml. To obtain the adult tegument extract, two batches of 100 S. haematobium adult worms were washed x3 in PBS and frozen at -80°C. Worms were then thawed on ice, washed in TBS (10 mM Tris/HCl, 0.84% NaCl, pH 7.4) and incubated for 5 min on ice in 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.4. Each sample was vortexed for five 1 s bursts, the tegumental extract pelleted at 1,000g for 30 min and solubilised three times in 200 μl of solubilising solution (0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1.0% (v/v) Triton X-100 in 40 mM Tris, pH 7.4) with pelleting at 15,000g between each wash. The washes were combined and buffer exchanged and concentrated as described above. SEA extracts were obtained by adding lysis buffer (3 M Urea, 0.2% SDS, 1% Triton X, 50 mM Tris-HCl) to ~200,000 S. haematobium eggs before repeated vortexing and sonication.  A total of 100 µg of S. haematobium adult ES, adult tegument and egg ES products was electrophoresed on an OFFGEL fractionator, trypsin digested and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Shimadzu Prominance Nano HPLC (Japan) coupled to a Triple Tof 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Canada) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. For SEA, two samples were in-solution digested and run as described above.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using a combination of five search engines in SearchGUI version v3.3.3. The search engines used were: X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), MS-GF+ version Release (v2018.04.09), Comet version 2018.01 rev. 0, MyriMatch version 2.2.140  and Tide.  Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the S. haematobium proteome downloaded from Parasite Wormbase (version of 2017-05-WormBase) and concatenated to the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) (11,257 (target) sequences) and the sequence of an antigen similar to the Schistosoma mansoni TSP-2 that was cloned as described previously. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.2 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da),  variable modifications: Deamidation of N (+0.984016 Da), Deamidation of Q (+0.984016 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da).  Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.27. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tegument, Schistosoma haematobium, Egg, Proteomics, Es

### Affiliations
Professor. Lab head
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
Professor. Lab head


