### Accession
PXD000278

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of breast cancer tissues

### Description
We compared label-free and SILAC based quantative methods in combination with shotgun, directed and targeted MS methods in laser capture microdissected breast cancer tissues (biological replicates) as well as whole tissue lysates (technical replicates). We aim to recommend a quantitative method for biomarker discovery and validation in laser capture microdissected tissues. Recorded MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant soft ware (version 1.1.1.36). An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 7 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal 2 missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylati on of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N;terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. To construct the MS/MS peak list file, up to top 8 peaks per 100 Da window were extracted and submitted to search against a concatenated forward and reverse version of the UniProtKB/Swiss;Prot human database (generated from version 2011_03). The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01, and only peptides with greater than or equal to 7 amino acid residues were allowed for identification. Minimally one unique peptide was required for protein identification

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics plays an important role in validation of breast-cancer-related biomarkers. In this study, we systematically compared the performance of label-free quantification (LFQ) and SILAC with shotgun and directed methods for quantifying breast-cancer-related markers in microdissected tissues. We show that LFQ leads to slightly higher coefficient of variation (CV) for protein quantification (median CV = 16.3%) than SILAC quantification (median CV = 13.7%) (P &lt; 0.0001), but LFQ method enables &#x223c;60% more protein quantification and is also more reproducible (&#x223c;20% more proteins were quantified in all replicate samples). Furthermore, we describe a method to accurately quantify multiple proteins within one pathway, that is, "focal adhesion pathway", in trace amounts of breast cancer tissues using a SILAC-based SRM assay. Using this SILAC-based SRM assay, we precisely quantified five "focal adhesion" proteins with good quantitative precision (CV range: 2.4-5.9%) in replicate whole tissue lysate samples and replicate microdissected samples (CV range: 5.8-16.1%). Our results show that in microdissected breast cancer tissues LFQ in combination with shotgun proteomics performed the best overall and is therefore suitable for both biomarker discovery and validation in these types of specimens. The SILAC-based SRM method can be used for the development of clinically relevant protein assays in tumor biopsies.

### Keywords
Nanolc-orbitrap-ms, Quantitative proteomics, Laser capture microdissection, Human breast cancer

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences

### Submitter
Ning Qing Liu

### Lab Head


