### Accession
PXD017126

### Title
Mild proteasomal stress improves photosynthetic performance in Arabidopsis chloroplasts

### Description
The ppi2 mutant introgressed into the Columbia-0 ecotype as previously reported. Doublemutant ppi2xrpn8a was crossed with the above referenced genotypes using heterozygous ppi2 plants. After 2 days of stratification at 4 °C the plants were grown on half-strength Murashige and Skoog (M&S) medium supplemented with 0.8% (w/v) plant agar (Duchefa) and 0.8% (w/v) sucrose under short day conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of N-terminal peptides by ChaFRADIC was performed as previously described (Shema et al., 2018, doi: 10.1074/mcp.TIR117.000302). In brief, one iTRAQ label (20 µl of label from iTRAQ-8plex labeling kit (AB Sciex) + 80 µl of isopropanol) was added to each sample comprising 100 µg protein. The 121, 119 and 118 labels were used for the rpn8axppi2 double mutant while 117, 116 and 113 were used for ppi2. After labelling, protein pellets were digested with Trypsin (ArgC-specific) and peptides were dried under vacuum before being resolubilized in 52 µl of SCX buffer A. First SCX step: 50 µl (200 µg) of each sample on a POLYSULFOETHYL A column. Four fractions corresponding to charge states +1 to +4 were collected, dried under vacuum and resuspended in 50 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.8. Free N-termini of internal peptides were blocked by trideutero (d3)-acetylation. Samples were desalted and dried under vacuum. After resolubilization, each fraction was separately re-chromatographied under the same conditions as above. Fractions were desalted, dried under vacuum and resuspended in 45 µl of 0.1% (w/v) TFA and 1/3rd of each fraction applied was analyzed by nano LC MS/MS using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer online coupled to a nano RSLC HPLC system in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Samples were measured in data-dependent acquisition mode using the top speed option (3 s). Survey scans were acquired from 350-1550 m/z at resolution of 120,000 using AGC target value of 2e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Per precursor, two MS/MS were acquired, precursors were selected using the quadrupole with an isolation width of 0.8 m/z. The first MS/MS (peptide identification) was acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode, with an AGC target value of 2e3, a maximum injection time of 300 ms and a normalized HCD collision energy of 35%. The second MS/MS (reporter ion quantification) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000, with an AGC target value of 1e5, and maximum injection time of 100 ms, and a normalized HCD collision energy of 60%. For data analysis, Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used with Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) as search engine, reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes. To enable the quantification of both classes of N-terminal peptides, those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation, we performed a two step search strategy: First, data were searched with iTRAQ 8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at Lys and peptide N-termini; second iTRAQ 8plex of Lys and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0105 Da) of N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence corresponding to an FDR < 1% at the PSM level, and a search engine rank of 1. The reporter ion quantifier node was adjusted according to the search settings. Reporter areas were normalized based on a single-shot nano-LC-MS/MS analysis of 1 Âµg of the digested sample, without enrichment. Normalized reporter areas were used to calculate ratios and p-values.

### Publication Abstract
The proteasome is an essential protein-degradation machinery in eukaryotic cells that controls protein turnover and thereby the biogenesis and function of cell organelles. Chloroplasts import thousands of nuclear-encoded precursor proteins from the cytosol, suggesting that the bulk of plastid proteins is transiently exposed to the cytosolic proteasome complex. Therefore, there is a cytosolic equilibrium between chloroplast precursor protein import and proteasomal degradation. We show here that a shift in this equilibrium, induced by mild genetic proteasome impairment, results in elevated precursor protein abundance in the cytosol and significantly increased accumulation of functional photosynthetic complexes in protein import-deficient chloroplasts. Importantly, a proteasome lid mutant shows improved photosynthetic performance, even in the absence of an import defect, signifying that functional precursors are continuously degraded. Hence, turnover of plastid precursors in the cytosol represents a mechanism to constrain thylakoid membrane assembly and photosynthetic electron transport.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Chafradic, N-termiomics

### Affiliations
Biochemistry of Plants, Faculty for Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr-University Bochum, UniversitÃƒÂ¤tsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Biochemistry of Plants, Faculty for Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr-University Bochum, UniversitÃƒÂ¤tsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany


