### Accession
PXD004361

### Title
HILIC and ERLIC Enrichment of Glycopeptides Derived from Breast and Brain Cancer Cells

### Description
Aberrant glycosylation has been linked to many different cancer types. The blood brain barrier (BBB) is a region of the brain that regulates the entrance of ions, diseases, toxins, etc. However in breast cancer metastasis, the BBB fails to prevent the crossing of the cancer cells into the brain. Here we present a study of identifying and quantifying the glycosylation of six breast and brain cancer cell lines using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and electrostatic repulsion liquid chromatography (ERLIC) enrichments and LC-MS/MS analysis. Qualitative and quantitative analyses of N-linked glycosylation were performed by both enrichment techniques for individual and complementary comparison. Potential cancer glycopeptide biomarkers were identified and confirmed by chemometric and statistical evaluations. The results provide the first comprehensive glycopeptide listing for these six cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cancer cell line samples (~5x106 cells) were mixed with 100 µL of 5% SDC lysis solution. The cell line samples were lysed in a 2 mL microtube at 40k rpm for 3 minutes with 30 second rests in between for six times. Lysis was performed with 30 µL of triple-high impact zirconium beads (Ø: 0.5 mm). The lysate was centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and denatured at 80 °C for 10 minutes. SDC concentration was diluted to 0.5% with 50 mM ABC buffer. 2.The concentration of the extracted protein was determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo-Pierce, San Jose, CA). Tryptic digestion was carried out on 400 µg aliquots of extracted protein for each cell line. Protein reduction was then conducted by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM. Incubation occurred at 60 °C for 45 minutes. Alkylation was then performed with 20 mM IAA. Incubation occurred at 37.5 °C in the dark for 30 minutes. A second addition of 5 mM DTT aliquot was added to quench the alkylation process and incubated at 37.5 °C for 30 minutes. After pH confirmation of basic solution conditions, a trypsin solution in a ratio of 1:25 w/w of enzyme:substrate was added and incubated at 37.5 °C for 18 hours. Microwave digestion was then used to complete the tryptic digestion at 45 °C for 30 minutes at 50 W. The digestion was quenched, and the SDC was precipitated by adding 1% (v/v) neat formic acid. The mixture was centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected, vacuum dried, and re-suspended in 300 µL of 90% acetonitrile immediately before HILIC enrichment. 3. Following tryptic digestion, HILIC enrichment was performed on 400 µg aliquots of each cell line based on a modified cotton wool HILIC enrichment method established by Selman. The amount of cotton, the size of the tip and incubation time was increased in our modified protocol. The cotton HILIC apparatus consisted of 5 mg of commercially available cotton balls packed into a 1 mL pipette tip. The tip was washed with 10 mL of the elution buffer (0.5% formic acid) in 1000 µL increments for 10 times, followed by conditioning of the cotton material with 10 mL of the loading buffer (90% acetonitrile) in 1000 µL increments for 10 times. The bottom of the tip was sealed with Parafilm, and a 300 µL aliquot of the cell line sample was applied. The top of the tip was then sealed with Parafilm and incubated at 4 °C for 1-2 hours with low agitation. The Parafilm was then removed, and the tip was washed with 10 mL of washing buffer (90% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) in 1000 µL increments for 10 times. The cotton media was then tightly packed into the bottom of the tip, and 400 µL of the elution buffer was aspirated through the stationary phase 25 times and collected. The tip was washed with the elution buffer until a total of 2 mL was collected. The collected eluents were dried and then re-suspended in 8 µL aliquots of 0.1% formic acid so that 112.5 µg of the sample was analyzed by mass spectrometry. 4. For sequential HILIC-ERLIC enrichment, a 200 µg aliquot of the already HILIC enriched cell line samples were the subjected to ERLIC enrichment (purchased from PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD). The tip was washed with 100 µL of the elution buffer (5.0% acetonitrile/2.0% formic acid) three times. The tip was then conditioned 100 µL of the loading buffer (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) three times. The bottom of the tip was capped, and 200 µL of sample was applied to the ERLIC tip. The sample was then mixed, and the top was capped with the provided lid. The samples were allowed to incubate at room temperature for one hour (no agitation). Afterwards, the ERLIC tip was washed with 200 µL of the washing buffer (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) five times. Glycopeptide elution was then performed and collected with 200 µL of the elution buffer for five times.  5. A 50 µg aliquot of HILIC enriched and HILIC-ERLIC enriched samples were dried and re-suspended in formic acid prior to PNGase F digestion. Deglycosylation was achieved by adding 200 µL of 10 mM phosphate buffer saline and 0.5 µL of PNGase F to the samples. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Samples were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The .raw files were converted to .mgf files using Discoverer Daemon 1.2 (Thermo Scientific) The .mgf file was then used for a database search using MASCOT 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) for peptide sequencing. MASCOT parameters were set to search for fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable modification of oxidation of methionine. Non-PNGase F digested samples were searched with MASCOT parameters for fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable modification oxidation of methionine. While PNGase F digested samples were searched with fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable modifications of deamidation and oxidation of methionine. The peptide tolerance for matching was set to 10 ppm. A maximum of two missed cleavages were accounted for, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. GlyPID 2.030 was used to search for possible glycan structures with an ion score of four or higher. Confirmation was based on diagnostic ion detection in the HCD MS/MS. Such diagnostic ions included m/z values of 138, 204, 274, 292, 366, 657, etc. Glycan structures were then printed and manually assigned from CID MS/MS using the Y1 for glycan-peptide matching. A theoretical peptide backbone mass was calculated from the CID MS/MS using the precursor value after glycan assignment. This theoretical peptide backbone was then matched within 20 ppm (set for maximum matching) to the identified peptides from the MASCOT peptide search results of the PNGase F digested samples. Peak area quantitation for HILIC glycopeptides and HILIC-ERLIC glycopeptides were obtained with Pinpoint 1.1 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). A Pinpoint work book of glycopeptide m/z values was created. The peak width was set to 10 scans and a mass accuracy of 20 ppm. Peptide sequences were searched against a carbamidomethylation modification only, selecting the appropriate monoisotopic value. All MS .raw files were then imported into Pinpoint, the accuracy was set to 20 ppm, and the points smoothed. Peak areas exported to Excel from Pinpoint were analyzed for repeating identification and same retention time, but different charge states. In such cases, the peak area intensity values were summed. Additionally, glycopeptides with adducts from cysteine and methionine modifications were summed together with the respective glycopeptide and charge state, while glycopeptides identified as phosphorylated/sulfated were not summed. The peak areas were then normalized, and the average relative intensities (RI) were calculated. The standard error of the mean (SEM) was calculated to consider the variability between the biological cell line samples. A statistical t-test was performed to identify significant differences with a p-value < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant glycosylation has been linked to many different cancer types. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a region of the brain that regulates the entrance of ions, diseases, toxins, and so on. However, in breast cancer metastasis, the BBB fails to prevent the crossing of the cancer cells into the brain. Here we present a study of identifying and quantifying the glycosylation of six breast and brain cancer cell lines using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and electrostatic repulsion liquid chromatography (ERLIC) enrichments and LC-MS/MS analysis. Qualitative and quantitative analyses of N-linked glycosylation were performed by both enrichment techniques for individual and complementary comparison. Potential cancer glycopeptide biomarkers were identified and confirmed by chemometric and statistical evaluations. A total of 497 glycopeptides were characterized, of which 401 were common glycopeptides (80.6% overlap) identified from both enrichment techniques. HILIC enrichment yielded 320 statistically significant glycopeptides in 231BR relative to the other cell lines out of 494 unique glycopeptides, and sequential HILIC-ERLIC enrichment yielded 214 statistically significant glycopeptides in 231BR compared with the other cell lines out of 404 unique glycopeptides. The results provide the first comprehensive glycopeptide listing for these six cell lines.

### Keywords
Hilic enrichment, Glycoproteomics, Erlic enrichment, N-linked glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Blood brain barrier, Cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Jingfu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University


