### Accession
PXD017375

### Title
Proteomic and metabolomic analysis of Nothapodytes nimmoniana (J. Graham) extracts treatment on HeLa cells

### Description
Nothapodytes nimmoniana is a natural source of camptothecin, a known anticancer drug. Stem and leaf extracts of Nothapodytes nimmoniana were studied to assess its in-vitro action on cancer progression events in a cervical cancer cell line, the HeLa. As a well-studied ideal model system, the HeLa has been chosen and the effects of extracts on cancer progression events have been traced out. HeLa cells and media samples were analyzed for differentially expressed proteins and metabolites respectively on RRLC-ESI-QTOFMS. The CBFA2T1, cysteine-rich protein 2-binding protein, Zinc finger protein 788, transcription factor RFX3 and angiomotin-like protein 1 were significantly expressed proteins while 3-Hydroxysuberic acid, Indole-3-carboxylic acid, N8-Acetylspermidine, L-Octanoylcarnitine were significantly expressed metabolites. Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, purine metabolism, and valine, leucine, arginine, proline metabolism were the most prominent pathways. The multi-omics approach has the greatest metabolites and proteins profiling potential hence was applied here to find signatures of N. nimmoniana extracts treatment of cervical cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Every 100µL cell pellet (cell pellet obtained from a single flask) was gently re-suspended in 500 µL TPE Buffer‐I in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Tubes were then vortexed for 1‐2 minutes and were placed on ice. The 60 µL TPE Buffer‐II was added for each 100μL TPE Buffer‐I used. The mixture was gently mixed by tapping the tube with a finger and vortexed for 30 seconds to achieve complete mixing. The tubes were incubated for 30 seconds in a boiling hot water bath and then vortexed for the next 30 seconds. Repeated heating and vortexing process was performed until a clear solution was obtained. On an additional incubation for 10 minutes in the boiling water bath, the tubes were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 15,000g at 4°C to remove any cell debris. The supernatant was stored at ‐80°C until further analysis (Jain, K.K. 2010).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification was performed with the Spectrum mill database search tool (A.03.03, Agilent Technologies). The obtained MS/MS spectrums were searched against the Homo sapiens NCBI database downloaded on 1st March 2015. The searches were run using the fixed modification of carbamidomethylation labeled cysteine and methionine oxidation as variable modification parameter enabled. Other parameters were set as MS spectral features, M+H+ 600 to 60,000 m/z, extraction time range 0 to 30 min, aloud charge states 2-4, maximum ambiguous precursor charge 3, precursor mass tolerance ± 1.0 Da, product mass tolerance ± 0.5 Da, maximum # missed cleavages 2, minimum detected peaks 4, sequence tag length > 3, protein pI 3.0-10.0, maximum reported hits 5. In the autovalidation step in Spectrum Mill, by default the FDR is set as < 1.2%, and the same was utilized in this experiment (http://128.255.119.18/millhtml/sm_instruct/SMallman.htm). After validation a summary of peptides obtained for a single sample was gained that comprised of the amino acid sequence, RT, mean peptide spectrum intensity, charge, distinct summed MS/MS search score, % scored peak intensity (SPI), % amino acid coverage, pI and molecular mass of each of the peptide and whole protein. This data was manually analyzed further based on the functional significance of the obtained proteins with the help of online tools such as Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). Using the Deconvolution tool (Bioconfirm) an actual molecular mass of the protein was also recalculated from the concerned raw data (.d) file. The obtained lists of proteins were analyzed for the protein-protein interactions using Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING version 9.05, https://string-db.org), Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID version 6.8, http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) and Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER, version 11.1, http://www.pantherdb.org/) tools.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Metabolomics, Camptothecin, Rrlc-esi-qtofms, Proteomics, Nothapodytes nimmoniana (j. graham), Anticancer

### Affiliations
Research Officer, Department of Pharmacology, National Research Institute of Basic Ayurvedic Sciences (NRIBAS), Kothrud, Pune - 411038, Maharashtra, India
Laboratory Technician, RAIFR, Pune

### Submitter
Amey Shirolkar

### Lab Head
Dr Sharad Daulatrao Pawar
Research Officer, Department of Pharmacology, National Research Institute of Basic Ayurvedic Sciences (NRIBAS), Kothrud, Pune - 411038, Maharashtra, India


