### Accession
PXD020194

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based quantification of proteins in tumor samples from tissue preserved by different methods – a source of markers of urothelial bladder cancer

### Description
Tissue samples in biobanks preserved by formalin-fixation and paraffin-embedding (FFPE) and/or optimal cutting temperature (OCT)-embedded and subsequently freezing are highly valuable in experimental studies where the results can be related to clinical parameters. Today, mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics is the method of choice for unbiased and relative comparison of the abundances of thousands of proteins present in biological samples. MS analysis of FFPE- and OCT-preserved tissue has been limited, but it is now  approachable using newly developed protocols. However, it has not been clarified how the results from different preservation methods agrees and differ. In this study, we use a unique sample set of urinary bladder cancer tissues of two different tumor stages (Ta/T1 – non-muscle invasive and T2/T3 muscle invasive); upon sampling the tumors were divided and preserved by the two methods. Thereafter a protocol for parallel processing of the samples were applied after which the samples were analyzed with label free quantitative MS analysis. Over 700 and 1200 proteins were quantified in FFPE and OCT samples, respectively. Principal component analysis showed that the largest differences between samples are based on the preservation method, but this analysis could also classify the tumors into different stages in each preservation. The overlap of quantifiable proteins between the preservation methods were 84% when all proteins and full data set were taken into consideration, but only 41% on average when proteins from a specific tumor were analyzed. Proteins involved in mitochondrial function were overrepresented among proteins present in OCT data but missing in the FFPE data, indicating that these proteins are not well preserved by FFPE. Moreover, univariate analysis showed that HMGCS2 protein is uniquely quantified in Ta/T1 tumors in both FFPE and OCT data, and that LGALS1, ANXA5 and plastin proteins are upregulated in T2/T3 tumors compared to Ta/T1 tumors in both FFPE and OCT data, confirming the consistency between the data sets and suggesting these proteins as biomarkers. Finally, LGALS1 data were verified by immunohistochemistry staining of an independent data set.

### Sample Protocol
The sample cohort consisted on tissue samples from urinary bladder cancer patients diagnosed with tumors of non-muscle invasive stage (Ta/T1) or muscle invasive stage (T2/T3). Specimens were bisected and preserved (see below) within 1-2 h after surgery by either FFPE or OCT/freezing approaches. For the OCT/frozen approach, samples were incubated with Tissue-Teak O.C.T. compound (Sakura, The Netherlands) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Upon use, the tissue blocks were sectioned into 10 µm slices using a cryostat at ≤ -10°C. Five such sections were used as one sample for MS investigation and stored at -80°C until use. In the case of FFPE approach, it included an initial step of standardized fixation of the tissue in 4% formalin for approximately 24 h after which the tissue was embedded in paraffin. 10 µm sections were also sliced from the resulting tissue-paraffin-block. Five such sections were used as one sample and stored at room temperature (RT) until use.  The paraffin embedded tissue removal was removed by five washes of xylene and one incubation with heptane that was complemented with an addition of methanol at the end. After removing the upper heptane layer, the remaining methanol was evaporated before sequential rehydration; a series of ethanol washes (100 % (v/v; two times)), 90%, 80%, 70% and a final wash with Milli-Q-water was applied.  The OCT removal was performed by washing with with ethanol (70%) five times, four times with water, and three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. All washing solutions were freshly prepared and ice-cold. Prior to further processing the final washing solution was removed and the tissue was left for air-drying at RT for 5 min.  OCT and FFPE preserved tissue samples were treated in parallel and proteins were extracted using a lysis buffer consisting of 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1M ammoniumbicarbonate, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails was added to the cleared-out tissue specimens. In the case of FFPE, the samples were heated to 95 °C for 30 min and incubated at 60 °C for 2 h in order to reverse the cross linking was applied. Finally, FFPE and OCT samples were processed using common procedures of sonication and centrifugation.  Multi-enzyme digestion using filter aided sample preparation (MED-FASPwas used. Concisely, total protein concentrations were determined using Bio-rad protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, U.S.A) and normalized amount of 10 µg total protein was selected and digested, after reduction and alkylation, on molecular weight cut off filters (Amicon Ultra 10K, Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, U.S.A.) with a combination of Lys C and trypsin. The resulting peptides were collected by centrifuging the device and collecting the generated flow through. Peptides were acidified with addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and cleaned up using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4) with the integrated Andromeda search engine. The spectra were matched against the UniProt human database (Homo sapiens, downloaded on July 2019, containing 26,483 proteins sequences). A target-decoy search, using a reversed database, was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was accepted for protein and peptide identification. The following settings were used in the search: minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, 20 ppm mass tolerance in first search was, 4.5 ppm mass tolerance in the second search, 20 ppm mass tolerance for the fragment ions, trypsin as digestive enzyme and two maximum missed cleavages were allowed. For all searches, carbamidomehtylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and N-carbamylation were included as variable modification. For protein quantification, label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used and only proteins with at least two identified peptides were included.

### Publication Abstract
Samples in biobanks are generally preserved by formalin-fixation and paraffin-embedding (FFPE) and/or optimal cutting temperature compound (OCT)-embedding and subsequently frozen. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis of these samples is now available via developed protocols, however, the differences in results with respect to preservation methods needs further investigation. Here we use bladder urothelial carcinoma tissue of two different tumor stages (Ta/T1-non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC), and T2/T3-muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC)) which, upon sampling, were divided and preserved by FFPE and OCT. Samples were parallel processed from the two methods and proteins were analyzed with label-free quantitative MS. Over 700 and 1200 proteins were quantified in FFPE and OCT samples, respectively. Multivariate analysis indicates that the preservation method is the main source of variation, but also tumors of different stages could be differentiated. Proteins involved in mitochondrial function were overrepresented in OCT data but missing in the FFPE data, indicating that these proteins are not well preserved by FFPE. Concordant results for proteins such as HMGCS2 (uniquely quantified in Ta/T1 tumors), and LGALS1, ANXA5 and plastin (upregulated in T2/T3 tumors) were observed in both FFPE and OCT data, which supports the use of MS technology for biobank samples and encourages the further evaluation of these proteins as biomarkers.

### Keywords
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded, Oct, Optimal cutting temperature embedded, Urinary bladder cancer., Biobank tissue samples, Ffpe, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Uppsala Universtiy Dept. Chemistry-BMC Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Sara Lind

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Lind
Uppsala Universtiy Dept. Chemistry-BMC Analytical Chemistry


