### Accession
PXD037286

### Title
Surveying the chloroplast protein kinase preferences for cation cofactors in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Survival of plants depends on their ability to adapt to ever-changing environmental conditions. Chloroplasts sense different stimuli and respond to ion fluxes in the cytosol triggering systemic responses under stress conditions. Indeed, changes in calcium and magnesium ion concentration in the chloroplast stroma impact the immune response against pathogens and adapt the photosynthetic machinery under fluctuating light conditions. Here we investigated the link between di-valent cations, calcium, magnesium and manganese and the protein kinase activity in Arabidopsis chloroplasts. Our results show that overall, manganese ions are the strongest activator of kinase activity in chloroplasts followed by magnesium ions, whereas calcium ions have seemingly no effect. Additionally, when comparing the phosphorylation pattern from Arabidopsis wild type and a cmt1 mutant, which is defective in manganese import into chloroplasts, the phosphorylation of specific protein bands is strongly reduced in the mutant chloroplasts supporting the notion that chloroplasts contain manganese-dependent protein kinases. These findings provide insights for the future characterization of chloroplast protein kinases activity regarding in-vitro assays and potential target proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Excised coomassie stained gel pieces were washed three times with LC-MS grade water and cut into smaller pieces (< 1 mm). Samples were washed twice for 10 min with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 100 μl acetonitrile (ACN), respectively. To reduce disulfide bridges, 100 μl 10 mM dithiothreitol (in 20 mM ABC) was added to the sample and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. Then the samples were washed with 100 μl ACN for 10 min and 100 μl 55 mM idoacetamide (in 20 mM ABC) for 30 min in the dark. Afterwards, the samples were washed for 2×10 min with ABC and ACN separately, and digested overnight with 0.1 μg/μl trypsin (Serva) at 37°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003), vacuum dried and stored at −80°C.  Liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on a nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Impact II high-resolution Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using a CaptiveSpray nano electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Bruker Daltonics). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm), both from ThermoFisher Scientific. The peptide mixture was separated over a 40-min linear gradient of 5–37% (v/v) ACN at a constant flow rate of 250 nl min−1. The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. MS1 spectra with a mass range from m/z 200–2000 were acquired at 3 Hz, and the 18 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity-dependent spectrum acquisition rate of between 4 and 16 Hz. Dynamic exclusion duration was 0.5 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software 2.1.3.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis reference proteome (Uniprot, www.uniprot.org, version March 2022) using the built‐in Andromeda search engine with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplasts sense a variety of stimuli triggering several acclimation responses. One prominent response is the mechanism of state transitions, which enables rapid adaption to changes in illumination. Here, we investigated the link between divalent cations (calcium, magnesium, and manganese) and protein kinase activity in Arabidopsis chloroplasts. Our results show that manganese ions are the strongest activator of kinase activity in chloroplasts followed by magnesium ions, whereas calcium ions are not able to induce kinase activity. Additionally, the phosphorylation of specific protein bands is strongly reduced in chloroplasts of a cmt1 mutant, which is impaired in manganese import into chloroplasts, as compared to the wild-type. These findings provide insights for the future characterization of chloroplast protein kinase activity and potential target proteins.

### Keywords
Maganese, Arabidopsis, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Biozentrum der LMU München Pflanzenwissenschaften Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried phone    +49 +89 2180 74760
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Serena Schwenkert

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Schwenkert
Biozentrum der LMU München Pflanzenwissenschaften Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried phone    +49 +89 2180 74760


