### Accession
PXD001495

### Title
Mistargeted mitochondrial proteins activate a proteostatic response in the cytosol

### Description
The vast majority of the mitochondrial proteome originates from nuclear genes and is transported into the organelle after synthesis in the cytosol. Complex machineries, which maintain the specificity of protein import and sorting, include the TIM23 translocase responsible for the transfer of precursor proteins into the matrix and the MIA machinery required for the biogenesis of intermembrane space proteins. Dysfunctions of mitochondrial protein sorting pathways result in diminishing specific substrate proteins, followed by systemic pathology of the organelle and organismal death1-4. Cellular responses that are caused by accumulation of mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol are largely unknown. Here we show a comprehensive picture of the changes in the cellular transcriptome and proteome in response to the stress associated with protein import dysfunction. We identify pathways that protect the cell against mitochondrial biogenesis defects by inhibiting protein synthesis and by activation of the proteasome, a major machine for cellular protein clearance. The proteasomal activity is modulated in proportion to the quantity of mislocalized mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol. We propose that this type of unfolded protein response activated by mistargeting of proteins (UPRam) is beneficial for the cells. UPRam provides a means for buffering the consequences of physiological slowdown in mitochondrial protein import and for counteracting pathologies that are caused or contributed by mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Yeast strains of WTS and mia40-4intS were grown on respiratory minimal liquid medium (0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base, 0.068% [w/v] CSM amino acid mix lacking arginine and lysine, 3% [v/v] glycerol, 0.02% [w/v] L-proline) supplemented with 18.6 mg/l [13C6/15N4] L-arginine and 19.35 mg/l [13C6/15N2] L-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich) or non-labeled L-arginine and L-lysine. Three separate cultures were grown and differentially labeled using SILAC amino acids including a label-switch. Complete incorporation (≥ 98%) of SILAC amino acids into proteins and minimal arginine-to-proline conversion (˂ 5%) was confirmed by LC/MS.  Differentially SILAC-labeled WTS and mia40-4intS cells were mixed in equal ratios according to their optical density and proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C using a six-fold excess of ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were prepared by centrifugation at 21,100 x g for 20 min at 4°C and analysed by LC/MS (liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry) employing both a gel-free and a gel-based approach. Following the gel-free approach, proteins were redissolved in 60% [v/v] MeOH/20 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) followed by reduction of cysteine residues using 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 60°C and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Tryptic in-solution digestion of proteins was performed overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following the gel-based approach, acetone-precipitated proteins were resuspended in 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea dissolved in 30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). 15 µg of protein per replicate were separated on a 4 - 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gradient gel (Life Technologies) and stained using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Gel lanes were cut into 15 equal slices, destained and washed as described before (Wiese et al. 2007, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 6, 2045-2057) followed by reduction of cysteine residues and alkylation as described above. Proteins were in-gel digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C and peptides extracted from the gel matrix were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% [v/v] TFA. LC/MS analysis: Mass spectrometric analyses of peptide mixtures obtained by in-solution digestion were performed following ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography separations on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). After concentration and washing on a C18 μ-pre-column (Acclaim PepMap μ-precolumn cartridge; 0.3 mm x 5 mm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Scientific), peptides were separated on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18-column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC column, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 150-min linear gradient ranging from 4 - 35% [v/v] acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analysed on-line by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Concomitant with the recording of a survey scan ranging from m/z 370 - 1,700 in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, the five most intense multiply charged ions were sequentially subjected to low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) experiments in the linear ion trap. Further instrument setting were as follows: automatic gain control (AGC) and maximum fill time, 5 x 105 ions and 500 ms in the orbitrap, 1 x 104 ions and 100 ms in the LTQ; normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. To determine changes in protein abundance, data from three biological and three technical replicates were collected. Peptide mixtures derived from the gel-based approach were analysed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system as described above. Peptides were eluted with a 45 min gradient ranging from 4 - 35% [v/v] ACN/0.1% [v/v] FA and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Orbitrap Elite was operated with the following settings: survey scan range, m/z 370-1,700; resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400; top15 method for the generation of MS/MS data of multiply charged precursor ions by CID; AGC and maximum fill time, 1 x 106 and 200 ms for the orbitrap, 5 x 103 and 150 ms for the linear ion trap; normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 10 ms; dynamic exclusion, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric data acquired in triplicate experiments each following the gel-free and gel-based approach were jointly processed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox & Mann 2008, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367-1372; Cox et al. 2011, J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794-1805). For protein identification, spectra were correlated with the Saccharomyces Genome Database (www.yeastgenome.org) using Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011, J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794-1805). LC/MS data from mitochondrial samples were included in the search to support peptide identifications. The database search was performed with tryptic specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini, deamidation of asparagine and Pro6 were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Applying the first search option within Andromeda, raw spectra were recalibrated. Mass spectra were searched using the default settings of MaxQuant and Andromeda with mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions of 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied on both the peptide and the protein level.  For relative quantification, SILAC ratios were calculated separately for each biological replicate using MaxQuant with default settings and the “match between runs”-option enabled. Only razor and unique peptides were considered for quantification. SILAC ratios for proteins were log-transformed and mean log10 ratios across all experiments as well as p-values using a two-sided Student's t-test were determined. Protein groups exhibiting a posterior error probability (PEP) < 0.01, a p-value < 0.05 and a minimum fold change of ± 1.5 were classified as up- or downregulated in mia40-4intS cells.

### Publication Abstract
Most of the mitochondrial proteome originates from nuclear genes and is transported into the mitochondria after synthesis in the cytosol. Complex machineries which maintain the specificity of protein import and sorting include the TIM23 translocase responsible for the transfer of precursor proteins into the matrix, and the mitochondrial intermembrane space import and assembly (MIA) machinery required for the biogenesis of intermembrane space proteins. Dysfunction of mitochondrial protein sorting pathways results in diminishing specific substrate proteins, followed by systemic pathology of the organelle and organismal death. The cellular responses caused by accumulation of mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol are mainly unknown. Here we present a comprehensive picture of the changes in the cellular transcriptome and proteome in response to a mitochondrial import defect and precursor over-accumulation stress. Pathways were identified that protect the cell against mitochondrial biogenesis defects by inhibiting protein synthesis and by activation of the proteasome, a major machine for cellular protein clearance. Proteasomal activity is modulated in proportion to the quantity of mislocalized mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol. We propose that this type of unfolded protein response activated by mistargeting of proteins (UPRam) is beneficial for the cells. UPRam provides a means for buffering the consequences of physiological slowdown in mitochondrial protein import and for counteracting pathologies that are caused or contributed by mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Proteomics, Silac, Protein transport, Mia pathway, Proteasome, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


