### Accession
PXD028303

### Title
proteome analysis of the antitumor activity of maslinic acid against pancreatic cancer cells

### Description
Maslinic acid (MA) is a triterpenoid compound of natural abundance in olive plants possessing numerous biological activities. The effect and molecular mechanism of MA on pancreatic cancer cells remain elusive. Here, we explored the anti-tumor activity of MA on human pancreatic cancer cells and the potential underlying molecular mechanism.The search for potential therapeutic targets was achieved via  proteomics analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation PANC-1 cells were treated with or without 40 μM MA for 24 h. The cells were collected by centrifugation. Each sample was added to the SDT buffer. The pyrolysate was treated with ultrasound and boiled for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 40 min, protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (p0012, Beyotime, Shanghai, China). Protein (20 μg) from each sample was mixed with 6x loading buffer and boiled for 5 min, and separated in 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 staining. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion)  Protein (200 μg) of each cell sample was mixed with 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0). Protein ultrafiltration (sartorius, 30 KD) was repeated with UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5). Subsequently, 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added, followed by a 30 min incubation in the dark. The protein suspension was digested with trypsin (Promega) (4 μg) in 0.1M DS buffer (40 μl) at 37℃ overnight. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. Based on the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate protein, the peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density (at 280 nm) using the extinction coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution.  TMT labelling  For each sample, 100 μg of the peptide mixture was labelled using a TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide Fractionation with reversed-phase chromatography  The labeled peptides were fractionated and classified using Agilent 1260 Infinity II HPLC system. The resultant peptide mixture, diluted with buffer A (10mM HCOONH4 and 5% acetonitrile, pH 10.0), was loaded onto a 4.6 mm X 100 mm XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using the following gradient: 0%–7% buffer B (10mM HCOONH4, 85% ACN, pH 10.0) for 5 min, 7–40% buffer B for 30 min, 40%–100% buffer B for 60 min, 100% buffer B for 65 min. The elution was assessed by UV at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1 min and dried. Easy nLC  Each fraction was injected for nano LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto the C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Acclaim Pep Map RSLC 50um X 15cm, nano viper, P/N164943) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated at a flow rate of 300 NL/min, with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid). The linear gradient was set as follows: 6% for 3 min, 6-28% for 40 min, 28-38% for 5min,38-100% for 5 min, and 100% for 5 min.  LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method that dynamically chose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maxIT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17500 for HCD spectra at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 2e5 and a maxIT of 45 ms. The isolation width was 2 m/z. Only ions with a charge state between 2 and 6 and a minimum intensity of 2e3 were selected for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30 s. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV.

### Data Protocol
TMT Data analysis  MS/MS raw data were processed by Mascot engine (version 2.6) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a Human protein database (Uniprot_HomoSapiens_20386_20180905). Search parameters included trypsin as the enzyme with 2 missed cleavages. A precursor mass tolerance and MS2 fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. We set Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, while Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein was set at <1% using a reverse database search strategy [35]. We filtered proteins with expression fold change >1.2 and Student’s t-test, p<0.05.  Bioinformatic analysis   First, the sequence comparison tool NCBI BLAST+ (ncbi-blast-2.3.0+) was employed on the Linux server to compare the target protein collection to the appropriate protein sequence database and retain the front 10 aligned sequences that satisfies E-value<=1e-3 were subjected to subsequent analysis. Secondly, Blast2GO Command-Line was applied to extract the GO entries associated with the target protein set and the highest Bit-Score alignment in the Blast retention results (download link: www.geneontology.org). In the KEGG database, KOALA (KEGG Orthology And Links Annotation) software was employed to annotate the target protein set for the KEGG pathway. Fisher’s Exact Test was used to perform GO annotation or KEGG pathway annotation enrichment analysis on the target protein set. For cluster analysis, the matplotlib software was used to classify samples and protein expression in two dimensions (distance algorithm: Euclidean, connection method: Average linkage).

### Publication Abstract
Maslinic acid (MA) is a triterpenoid compound of natural abundance in olive plants possessing numerous biological activities. The effect and molecular mechanism of MA on pancreatic cancer cells remain elusive. Here, we explored the anti-tumor activity of MA on human pancreatic cancer cells and the potential underlying molecular mechanism. The anti-cancer effects of MA on whole-cell processes, including proliferation, migration, and invasion in pancreatic cancer cells, were systematically assessed by colony formation, transwell, and migration assays. The search for potential therapeutic targets was achieved via transcriptomics and proteomics analyses. MA was demonstrated to inhibit the proliferation, migration, and invasion of PANC-1 and Patu-8988 cells, but induced apoptosis of these cells. Several key candidate genes and proteins of functional relevance for the anti-tumor activity of MA were identified through the association analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics. To our knowledge, this is the first transcription and proteomics-based comprehensive analysis of the mechanism of MA against pancreatic cancer. The findings demonstrate that MA holds promise as a therapeutic drug for managing pancreatic cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Maslinic acid, Pancreatic cancer cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University
Department of Surgery, Key laboratory of diagnosis and Treatment of Severe Hepato-Pancreatic diseases of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Provincial Top Key discipline in Surgery, The First affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical university, Nanbaixiang Street, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China

### Submitter
Hewei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Linxiao Sun
Department of Surgery, Key laboratory of diagnosis and Treatment of Severe Hepato-Pancreatic diseases of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Provincial Top Key discipline in Surgery, The First affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical university, Nanbaixiang Street, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China


