### Accession
PXD005439

### Title
Shotgun proteomic profiling of Yersinia ruckeri strains

### Description
Project goal is to identify proteomic profiles of Yersinia ruckeri, the causative agent of enteric redmouth disease in fish. Four strains (SP-05, CSF007-82, 7959-11 and YRNC-10) of Y. ruckeri were isolated from disease rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss. Strains, SP-05 and CSF007-82, belong to serotype 1 and biotype 1 (motile and lipase positive), while strains 7959-11 and YRNC-10 belong to serotype 1 and biotype 2 (non-motile and lipase negative) and belong to serotype 1. A single colony of each strain was inoculated into tryptic soy broth (Casein peptone, dipotassium hydrogen phosphate, glucose, sodium chloride, soya peptone, Sigma) and grown at 22 °C with shaking (150 rpm). These starter cultures were then diluted with fresh sterile tryptic soy broth to an optical density (OD 600) of 0.10 ± 0.05. Five hundred microlitres of the diluted starter cultures were inoculated in duplicates, into 25 ml of tryptic soy broth. Cultures were grown overnight at 22 °C with shaking (150 rpm) until the late log phase. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, then washed three times with PBS.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were resuspended in denaturing lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS and 1% DTT) containing bacterial protease inhibitor cocktail. Bacterial cell suspensions were disrupted by sonication. The lysates were centrifuged and supernatants were collected. Protein digestion was performed using the standard two-step in-solution digestion protocol for Trypsin/LysC-Mix according to the user manual (Promega, USA). Ten micrograms of proteins was diluted with 8M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) to a total volume of 10 µl. Proteins were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (final concentration) for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C. Trypsin/LysC mix was added in a ratio of 25:1 protein to protease (w/w). The first digestion step was performed for 4 h at 37 °C under high urea concentration. To enable protease activity of trypsin, urea was diluted afterwards with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) to a concentration below 1 mol/l. The second digestion step was performed for 8 h at 37 °C. Finally, digested samples were acidified with concentrated trifluoroacetic acid.  Tryptic peptides were separated by a nano liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and analyzed with a high-resolution hybrid triple quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, Sciex, USA) coupled via a nano-ESI interface.  Samples were pre-concentrated and desalted with a 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (300 µm inner diameter, 5 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size) (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were loaded and desalted using 2% acetonitrile (ACN, ChemLab, Belgium) in LC-MS grade water (Optima, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). 0.05% TFA was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 5 µl/min. Three microliter injection volumes (corresponding to 370 ng digested protein absolute on column) were used per injection. Peptide separation was performed on a 25 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient started with 4% B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and increased to 35% B in 120 min. It was followed by a washing step with 90% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of LC-MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid. For information dependent data acquisition, MS1 survey scans were collected in the range of 400-1500 m/z. The 25 most intense precursors with charge state 2–4 that exceeded 100 counts per second, were selected for fragmentation for 250 ms. MS2 product ion scans were collected in the range of 100–1800 m/z for 110 ms. Precursor ions were dynamically excluded from reselection for 12 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files of data dependent acquisition were carried out with Protein Pilot Software version 5.0 (Sciex). The UniProt database (Release 10_2016) was restricted to Yersinia ruckeri, but contained possible contaminants from the growth medium, e.g. Glycine max (Soybean) and bovine caseins. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 Da and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. The following sample parameters were applied: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot. Global false discovery rate was set to <1% on protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Yersinia ruckeri is the causative agent of enteric redmouth disease (ERM) of salmonids. There is little information regarding the proteomics of Y. ruckeri. Herein, we perform whole protein identification and quantification of biotype 1 and biotype 2 strains of Y. ruckeri grown under standard culture conditions using a shotgun proteomic approach. Proteins were extracted, digested and peptides were separated by a nano liquid chromatography system and analyzed with a high-resolution hybrid triple quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer coupled via a nano ESI interface. SWATH-MS technology and sophisticated statistical analyses were used to identify proteome differences among virulent and avirulent strains. GO annotation, subcellular localization, virulence proteins and antibiotic resistance ontology were predicted using bioinformatic tools. A total of 1395 proteins were identified in the whole cell of Y. ruckeri. These included proteases, chaperones, cell division proteins, outer membrane proteins, lipoproteins, receptors, ion binding proteins, transporters and catalytic proteins. In virulent strains, a total of 16 proteins were upregulated including anti-sigma regulatory factor, arginine deiminase, phosphate-binding protein PstS and superoxide dismutase Cu-Zu. Additionally, several virulence proteins were predicted such as Clp and Lon pro-teases, TolB, PPIases, PstS, PhoP and LuxR family transcriptional regulators. These putative virulence proteins might be used for development of novel targets for treatment of ERM in fish. Our study represents one of the first global proteomic reference profiles of Y. ruckeri and this data can be accessed via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005439. These proteomic profiles elucidate proteomic mechanisms, pathogenicity, host-interactions, antibiotic resistance ontology and localization of Y. ruckeri proteins.

### Keywords
Yersinia ruckeri, Whole cell proteomics, Enteric redmouth disease

### Affiliations
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna

### Submitter
Gokhlesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gokhlesh Kumar
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


