### Accession
PXD014755

### Title
A Systems Mechanism for  KRAS Mutant Allele Specific Responses to Targeted Therapy

### Description
Cancer treatment decisions are increasingly guided by which specific genes are mutated within each patient’s tumor.  For example, agents inhibiting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) benefit many colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, with the general exception of those whose tumor includes a KRAS mutation.  However, among the various KRAS mutations, the G13D mutation behaves differently; for unknown reasons, CRC patients with the KRAS G13D mutation (also written KRASG13D) appear to benefit from the EGFR-blocking antibody cetuximab.  Controversy surrounds this observation, because it appears to contradict the well-established mechanisms of EGFR signaling and of RAS mutations.  Here, we identified a systems-level, mechanistic basis that explains why KRASG13D cancers respond to EGFR inhibition.  We first investigated the problem with a computational model of RAS signaling, which unexpectedly revealed that the known biophysical differences between the three most common KRAS mutant proteins are sufficient to generate different sensitivities to inhibition.  Computation and experimentation together revealed a non-intuitive, mutant-specific dependency of wild-type RAS activation by EGFR that is determined by the interaction strength between KRAS and the tumor suppressor neurofibromin (NF1).  KRAS mutants that strongly interact with NF1 drive wild-type RAS activation in an EGFR independent manner through competitive inhibition of NF1, whereas KRAS G13D cells remain dependent upon EGFR for wild-type Ras activation because they cannot competitively inhibit NF1 due to a weak interaction between these two proteins. Overall, our work demonstrates how systems approaches enable mechanism-based inference in genomic medicine and can help identify patients for selective therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of active GTP bound Ras was performed using the Active Ras Pull-Down and Detection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA) following manufacturers protocol. Ras abundance was measured by Western blot and/or by mass spectrometry.   RBD lysates from cetuximab treated and non-treated cells (CTX; 20g/ml for 48h) were precipitated using Methanol-Chloroform. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were then trypsin digested overnight at 37° C. Samples were digested at 50 μl final volume. Heavy labeled peptides were spiked-in to the digested samples at appropriate concentrations so that a single LCMS injection contained 10 μl of digested sample with 500 fmol of heavy labeled peptides.  Peptides used were: SFEDIHQYR for HRAS, SFADINLYR for NRAS, SFEDIHHYR for KRAS, LVVVGAGGVGK for wild-type HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS, LVVVGAGDVGK for G13D mutant KRAS, NRAS, and HRAS, and LVVVGAVGVGK for G12V mutant KRAS, NRAS, and HRAS.    The samples were analyzed on a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 μm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 μm C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 90% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1–25% B over 110 min, an increase to 40% B over 10 min, an increase to 100% B over another 10 min and held at 90% B for a final 10 min of washing was used for 140 min total run time. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Fusion was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution. The cycle time was set to 3 s, and within this 3s the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 5 s

### Data Protocol
Peak area quantitation of the heavy peptides and corresponding light peptides from the samples were extracted by Skyline (37). Within each sample, we used mutant Ras as a standard to normalize against. We then compared the ratio of normalized wild-type peptide levels in cetuximab treated conditions to normalized wild-type peptide levels in non-cetuximab treated conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer treatment decisions are increasingly guided by which specific genes are mutated within each patient's tumor. For example, agents inhibiting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) benefit many colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, with the general exception of those whose tumor includes a <i>KRAS</i> mutation. However, among the various <i>KRAS</i> mutations, that which encodes the G13D mutant protein (KRAS<sup>G13D</sup>) behaves differently; for unknown reasons, KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> CRC patients benefit from the EGFR-blocking antibody cetuximab. Controversy surrounds this observation, because it contradicts the well-established mechanisms of EGFR signaling with regard to RAS mutations. Here, we identified a systems-level, mechanistic explanation for why KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> cancers respond to EGFR inhibition. A computational model of RAS signaling revealed that the biophysical differences between the three most common KRAS mutants were sufficient to generate different sensitivities to EGFR inhibition. Integrated computation with experimentation then revealed a nonintuitive, mutant-specific dependency of wild-type RAS activation by EGFR that is determined by the interaction strength between KRAS and the tumor suppressor neurofibromin (NF1). KRAS mutants that strongly interacted with and competitively inhibited NF1 drove wild-type RAS activation in an EGFR-independent manner, whereas KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> weakly interacted with and could not competitively inhibit NF1 and, thus, KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> cells remained dependent on EGFR for wild-type RAS activity. Overall, our work demonstrates how systems approaches enable mechanism-based inference in genomic medicine and can help identify patients for selective therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Systems approaches reveal why cancer patients with one specific kras mutation respond to egfr inhibitors, Thus resolving a problem in cancer personalized medicine.

### Affiliations
Salk
IBL-F, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Jolene Diedrich

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Stites
IBL-F, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA


