### Accession
PXD019572

### Title
Quantitative data-independent acquisition glycoproteomics of sparkling wine

### Description
We developed an automated workflow that created ion libraries to analyse Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical mass spectra (SWATH) Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry data based on glycopeptides identified by Byonic. We applied our workflow to three pairs of experimental sparkling wines to assess the effects of aging on lees and of different yeasts strains used in Liqueur de Triage for secondary fermentation.

### Sample Protocol
Wine sample replicates of 250 µL were precipitated by methanol/acetone (1:1 v/v) and the precipitated proteins were reduced and digested with trypsin. The samples were desalted and concentrated with a C18 ZipTip then analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using DDA and DIA/SWATH methods.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed with ProteinPilot 5.0.1 (SCIEX) using DDA files from one replicate of each sample. For glycopeptide analyses we used Byonic (Protein Metrics, v. 2.13.17) to search all DDA files. We wrote a Python script that created a PeakView SWATH library from the exported Byonic details. Identified peptides from the ProteinPilot search were combined with glycopeptides identified from the Byonic search to form one ion library. The library was used to measure peptide abundances in PeakView v2.2.0.11391 (SCIEX) using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Swath, Sparkling wine, Dia, Byonic

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD, Australia, 4072

### Submitter
Cassandra  Pegg 

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin L. Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD, Australia, 4072


