### Accession
PXD022550

### Title
Cov-MS: a community-based template assay for clinical MS-based protein detection in Sars-Cov-2 patients

### Description
Rising population density and global mobility are among the reasons why pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, spread so rapidly across the globe. The policy response to such pandemics will always have to include accurate monitoring of the spread, as this provides one of the few alternatives to total lockdown. However, COVID-19 diagnosis is currently performed almost exclusively by Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR). Although this is efficient, automatable and acceptably cheap, reliance on one type of technology comes with serious caveats, as illustrated by recurring reagent and test shortages. We, therefore, developed an alternative diagnostic test that detects proteolytically digested SARS-CoV-2 proteins using Mass Spectrometry (MS). We established the Cov-MS consortium, consisting of fifteen academic labs and several industrial partners to increase applicability, accessibility, sensitivity and robustness of this kind of Sars-Cov-2 detection. This in turn gave rise to the Cov-MS Digital Incubator that allows labs to join the effort, navigate and share their optimizations, and translate the assay into their clinic. As this test relies on viral proteins instead of RNA, it provides an orthogonal and complementary approach to RT-PCR, using other reagents that are relatively inexpensive and widely available, as well as orthogonally skilled personnel and different instruments.

### Sample Protocol
DDA: 50 µL patient sample was precipitated by adding 450 µL (9 volumes) of ice-cold acetone (-20°C). After spinning at 16.000g and 0°C, the supernatant was discarded and 1µg of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) in 50µL 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) buffer was added. This was followed by an incubation step of four hours at 37°C, to facilitate trypsin digestion. Next, 20 µL of this sample was prepared for analysis in a final concentration of 0.1% formic acid (FA)of which 2µL was injected into the LC-MS system.   Narrow-window DIA: A similar protocol as described for the DDA data was applied for the Narrow-window DIA, but using a UTM background coming from a negative Covid-19 patient and this spiked with two recombinant proteins NCAP_SARS2 and SPIKE_SARS2 (Sino Biological, Beijing, China).

### Data Protocol
The DDA data was peak picked with MSConvert (Version 3.0.20070) at the MS1 level using the built-in vendor specific algorithms. The peak lists (.mgf files) obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified with Mascot v2.7.0 using a concatenated database of Homo sapiens reference proteome, SARS-Cov-2 database, and the cRAP database of contaminants (https://thegpm.org/cRAP) (downloaded from Uniprot on the 4th of April 2020). Following search parameters were applied: trypsin as digestion enzyme, a maximum of two missed cleavages, peptide charges 2+ to 4+, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 50 ppm and Oxidation of Methionine and Deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications.  The eight gas phase fractions (GP) of 100 m/z each covering a 400-1200 m/z range, were peak picked and demultiplexed into 2m/z (narrow window DIA) windows and finally converted into .mzML’s by MSConvert. These mzML's were searched in EncyclopeDIA (v.0.9.0) using a spectral library containing predicted spectra (MS²PIP) and predicted retention times (DeepLC) for the proteins identified with the DDA data. Finally, the peptide and protein identification results were exported as .BLIB file to facilitate peptide-centric analysis of the SWATH data (PanoramaWeb)

### Publication Abstract
Rising population density and global mobility are among the reasons why pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, spread so rapidly across the globe. The policy response to such pandemics will always have to include accurate monitoring of the spread, as this provides one of the few alternatives to total lockdown. However, COVID-19 diagnosis is currently performed almost exclusively by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Although this is efficient, automatable, and acceptably cheap, reliance on one type of technology comes with serious caveats, as illustrated by recurring reagent and test shortages. We therefore developed an alternative diagnostic test that detects proteolytically digested SARS-CoV-2 proteins using mass spectrometry (MS). We established the Cov-MS consortium, consisting of 15 academic laboratories and several industrial partners to increase applicability, accessibility, sensitivity, and robustness of this kind of SARS-CoV-2 detection. This, in turn, gave rise to the Cov-MS Digital Incubator that allows other laboratories to join the effort, navigate, and share their optimizations and translate the assay into their clinic. As this test relies on viral proteins instead of RNA, it provides an orthogonal and complementary approach to RT-PCR using other reagents that are relatively inexpensive and widely available, as well as orthogonally skilled personnel and different instruments. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022550.

### Keywords
Dda, Covid-19, Sars-cov2, Narrow-window dia

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


