### Accession
PXD002975

### Title
Proteomic analysis revealed the important role of vimentin in human cervical carcinoma HeLa cells treated with gambogic acid

### Description
Gambogic acid (GA) is an anti-cancer agent in phase Ⅱb clinical trial in China. In HeLa cells, GA inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and apoptosis, as showed by results of MTT assay and flow cytometric analysis. Possible target-related proteins of GA were searched using comparative proteomic analysis (2-DE) and 9 proteins at early (3 h) stage together with 9 proteins at late (24 h) stage were found. Vimentin was the only target-related protein found at both early and late stage. Results of both 2-DE analysis and Western blotting assay suggested cleavage of vimentin induced by GA. MS/MS analysis of cleaved vimentin peptides indicated possible cleavage sites of vimentin at or near aa51 and aa425. Results of targeted proteomic analysis showed that GA induced change in phosphorylation state of the vimentin head domain (aa51-64). Caspase inhibitors could not abrogate GA-induced cleavage of vimentin. Over-expression of vimentin ameliorated cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells. The GA-activated signal transduction, from p38 MAPK, heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), vimentin, dysfunction of cytoskeleton, to cell death, was predicted and then confirmed. Results of animal study showed that GA treatment inhibited tumor growth in HeLa tumor-bearing mice and cleavage of vimentin could be observed in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Results of immunohistochemical staining also showed down-regulated vimentin level in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Furthermore, compared with cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells, cytotoxicity of GA in MCF-7 cells with low level of vimentin was weaker while cytotoxicity of GA in MG-63 cells with high level of vimentin was stronger. These results indicated the important role of vimentin in the cytotoxicity of GA. The effects of GA on vimentin and other epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers provided suggestion for better usage of GA in clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Stained gels were then scanned with a Densitometer GS-800 (Bio-Rad) and protein spots were quantified using the PDQuest 7.4.1 software (Bio-Rad). Spot detection and matching between pairs of gels (control and GA-treated) were performed automatically, followed by manual matching. The individual protein spot quantity was normalized as follows: the raw quantity of each spot in a member gel was divided by the total quantity of the valid spots in the gel, and normalized spot intensities were expressed in ppm.  MALDI-TOF MS/MS analysis was conducted with an Applied Biosystems 4700 Proteomics Analyzer (Framingham, MA) using the same parameters as detailly described in our previous report published in Molecular Cellular Proteomics (16). Briefly, the protein spots of interest were destained in a 1:1 solution of 100 mM sodium thiosulfate and 30 mM potassium ferricyanide and equilibrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to pH 8.0. After dehydrating with acetonitrile and drying in a SpeedVac, the spots were rehydrated in a minimal volume of trypsin solution (10 μg/mL in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated overnight at 37℃. The supernatant containing extracted peptides was directly applied onto the sample plate with equal amounts of MALDI matrix (5 mg/ml CHCA diluted in 0.1% TFA/50% ACN). MS analysis was conducted using a Mass spectra were obtained in a mass range of 700–3200 Da by using a laser (355 nm, 200 Hz) as desorption ionization source. Using the individual PMF spectra, peptides exceeding a signal-to-noise ratio of 20 that passed through a mass exclusion filter were submitted to fragmentation analysis. The parameters for peak matching were Min S/N: 20 and Mass Tolerance: 0.2 Da; Min Peaks to Match reference masses was 4 and Max outlier Error was set to 100 ppm. Total shots for each MS spectrum were 2000 while for MS/MS using 3000 shots. MS/MS accuracy was calibrated against the MS/MS fragments of m/z 1606.85, which is one of the peaks generated in myoglobin PMF.

### Data Protocol
A two-tailed Student's t test was performed to perform quantitative analysis between protein gels from control and GA-treated group. The significantly differentially expressed protein spots (p<0.05) with 1.5 fold or more increased or decreased intensity between control and GA-treated group were punched out of the gels and used for further identification by MALDI-TOF MS/MS.   Peptide differential modifications allowed during the search were oxidation of methionines and carbamidomethylation of cysteines. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 1 with trypsin as the protease. The database search was carried out by using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) to screen the NCBI protein sequence database restricted to human taxonomy. Protein homology identification of the top hit (first rank) with a relative score exceeding 95% probability and additional hits (second rank or more) with a relative score exceeding 98% probability threshold were retained. The probability-based protein score had to be more than 64 when submitting PMF data to the database and be more than 30 for individual peptide ions when submitting peptide sequence spectra, assuming that the observed match is significant (P<0.05). Proteins that belonged to a protein family with multiple members were singled out based on the identification of unique and diagnostic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Gambogic acid (GA) is an anticancer agent in phase IIb clinical trial in China. In HeLa cells, GA inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and apoptosis, as showed by results of MTT assay and flow cytometric analysis. Possible target-related proteins of GA were searched using comparative proteomic analysis (2-DE) and nine proteins at early (3 h) stage together with nine proteins at late (24 h) stage were found. Vimentin was the only target-related protein found at both early and late stage. Results of both 2-DE analysis and Western blotting assay suggested cleavage of vimentin induced by GA. MS/MS analysis of cleaved vimentin peptides indicated possible cleavage sites of vimentin at or near ser51 and glu425. Results of targeted proteomic analysis showed that GA induced change in phosphorylation state of the vimentin head domain (aa51-64). Caspase inhibitors could not abrogate GA-induced cleavage of vimentin. Over-expression of vimentin ameliorated cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells. The GA-activated signal transduction, from p38 MAPK, heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), vimentin, dysfunction of cytoskeleton, to cell death, was predicted and then confirmed. Results of animal study showed that GA treatment inhibited tumor growth in HeLa tumor-bearing mice and cleavage of vimentin could be observed in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Results of immunohistochemical staining also showed down-regulated vimentin level in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Furthermore, compared with cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells, cytotoxicity of GA in MCF-7 cells with low level of vimentin was weaker whereas cytotoxicity of GA in MG-63 cells with high level of vimentin was stronger. These results indicated the important role of vimentin in the cytotoxicity of GA. The effects of GA on vimentin and other epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers provided suggestion for better usage of GA in clinic.

### Keywords
Vimentin, Proteomics, Anti-cancer, Gambogic acid

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
fudan

### Submitter
zhang yang

### Lab Head
Dr De-An Guo
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


