### Accession
PXD035269

### Title
CD11b restricts alveolar macrophage activation during pneumococcal pneumonia and prevents excessive lung inflammation

### Description
Bacterial lung infections are associated with strong infiltration of CD11b+ myeloid cells, which limit life-threatening disease, but also severely damage lung tissue. In a murine lung infection model with Streptococcus pneumoniae, we found intrinsic upregulation of CD11b on resident alveolar macrophages. Such CD11b expression was associated with transcriptomic and proteomic adaptations by alveolar macrophages, leading to the identification of specific molecules and pathways that depended on CD11b. In the absence of CD11b, the antimicrobial defense of alveolar macrophages was strongly reduced, and the production of neutrophil-recruiting chemokines was more pronounced. Moreover, CD11b expression limited the infection and prevented excessive alveolar damage. In conclusion, our study provides detailed molecular insights into the alveolar macrophage-specific immune response to Streptococcus pneumoniae lung infection and reveals profound CD11b-dependent alterations that are critical for effective antimicrobial immunity, neutrophil recruitment, and prevention of alveolar damage.

### Sample Protocol
Animals. Mice were bred and housed under specific pathogen-free conditions and were allowed to eat and drink ad libitum. C57BL/6 mice (WT) (8-12 weeks of age, Charles River, as well as CCR2-/- and CD11b-/- mice were used. Experimental mice were euthanized with cervical dislocation under isoflurane anesthesia for the isolation of organs.  Culture of S. pneumoniae for intratracheal infection experiments. For bacterial lung infection, a pneumococcal serotype 1 strain (S. pneumoniae SV1, ATCC 33400) was used. For infection, bacteria were cultured to mid-logarithmic phase, @ at 1500g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and resuspended in 550 µl PBS; 50 µl per animal corresponding to 1x108 CFUs S. pneumoniae were used for infection.  Dissociation of murine lung into single cells. Lungs were disaggregated with 3 ml of PBS supplemented with 0.5 mg/ml collagenase D and 0.2 mg/ml DNAse I, placed in a 6-well plate. Each lobe was injected with the digestion medium using 26 G needle to facilitate the diffusion of the medium through the tissue. After 5 min of incubation at RT, lung was disrupted with fine-toothed forceps and transferred into 5 ml polystyrene tubes which were incubated in a water bath for 30 min. The tissue was resuspended every 10 min to mechanically boost the digestion process. The resulting single-cell suspension was filtered (100 µm), pelleted for 5 min at 4 °C and 400g, and processed for flow cytometry.  Flow cytometry and cell sorting. Single-cell suspension (1/10 of total lung) was liberated from erythrocytes using RCB buffer (ammonium chloride 146 mmol, EDTA disodium 0,2 mmol, sodium bicarbonate 24 mmol). Antibodies were mixed in a solution of human immunoglobulins (c= 1,5 mg/ml, PZN-01700625, Privigen), and 20 μl was added onto cell pellets, followed by the 20-minute incubation at 4 °C in the dark. Either 0,05 µg or 0,1 µg of each antibody were used per sample. Unbound antibodies were washed away, and the cell pellets were resuspended in PBS with 2mM EDTA and 2% FCS (FACS buffer) for subsequent measurement on the BD LSR Fortessa II. Ten thousand Calibrite™ APC beads (BD Biosciences, 340487) were added to each sample to extrapolate to the total cell number in the lung. BD Aria III was used for sorting AM for transcriptome and proteome analyses. Briefly, AM were identified as CD45+, CD11c+, and Siglec-F+ cells, whereas neutrophils were delineated based on CD45, CD11b, and Ly6G expression.   Preparation of AM for LC-MS/MS proteome analysis. In brief, AM (1x105) were lysed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 0.1% RapiGest Surfactant. The samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60°C and subsequently alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature protected from light. Proteins were digested using 22.5 ng trypsin per sample overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and precipitated RapiGest was removed by centrifugation. Peptides were dried in vacuo and 350 ng peptides in 15 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was subjected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. The peptides were preconcentrated for 7 minutes on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 µm × 5 mm, C18, 100 Å, flow rate 30 µL/min) and subsequently separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 minutes (flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60°C). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, and the 20 most abundant peptides were selected for MS/MS analysis (data-dependent acquisition). Tandem spectra were measured in the linear ion trap following peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and data analysis. Peptides were identified using Proteome Discoverer Software (v.1.4.1.14). The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (release 2016_05, 551 193 entries) restricted to Mus musculus using the Mascot search engine (v.2.5). The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. One tryptic miscleavage was considered as well as chemical modifications of methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (propionamide). The percolator function, implemented in proteome discoverer, was used to estimate peptide confidence, and only peptides that passed a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% (FDR-adjusted P < .01) were considered for analysis. Ion intensity–based label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics. To account for retention time shifts, LC-MS runs were aligned to one run automatically chosen by the software. A master list of features considering retention time and m/z was generated considering peptide ions with minimum 3 isotopic peaks and charges states +2, +3, and +4. The peptide identifications (peptides spectrum matches) from Proteome Discoverer were imported into the software and matched to the respective features. The protein abundances were calculated considering the normalized ion intensities of all nonconflicting peptides of a protein. Normalized protein intensities were further analyzed using bioinformatics and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alveolar macrophages, Integrin α-m, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum and Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum and Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum


