### Accession
PXD000219

### Title
Protein abundance comparison of human cells infected with Shigella flexneri over different time periods

### Description
The enteroinvasive bacterium Shigella flexneri invades the intestinal epithelium of humans. During infection, several injected effector proteins promote bacterial internalization, and interfere with multiple host cell responses. To obtain a systems-level overview of host signaling during infection, we analyzed the global dynamics of protein phosphorylation by LC-MS/MS and identified several hundred of proteins undergoing a phosphorylation change during the first hours of infection. Functional bioinformatic analysis revealed that they were mostly related to the cytoskeleton, transcription, signal transduction, and cell cycle. Fuzzy c-means clustering identified six temporal profiles of phosphorylation and a functional module composed of ATM-phosphorylated proteins related to genotoxic stress. Pathway enrichment analysis defined mTOR as the most overrepresented pathway. We showed that mTOR complex 1 and 2 were required for S6 kinase and AKT activation, respectively. Comparison with a published phosphoproteome of Salmonella typhimurium-infected cells (PMID:21934108, PRIDE experiment accessions 18477 and 18485) revealed a large subset of co-regulated phosphoproteins. Finally, we showed that S. flexneri effector OspF affected the phosphorylation of several hundred proteins, thereby demonstrating the wide-reaching impact of a single bacterial effector on the host signaling network.

### Sample Protocol
For each condition, two 6-well plates of HeLa CCL-2TM cells were grown to confluency. Cells were infected as described above. At the indicated time-points, the plates were put on ice and washed twice with ice-cold phosphate- buffered saline (PBS). Samples were then collected in urea solution [8 M Urea (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany), 0.1 M Ammoniumbicar- bonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA), 1 PhosSTOP (Roche, Basel, Switzerland)]. The samples were briefly vortexed, sonicated at 4 °C (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany), shaked for 5 min on a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and centri- fuged for 20 min at 4 °C and 16 000g. Supernatants were collected and stored at 80 °C for further processing. BCA Protein Assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was used to measure protein concentration.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis software tool (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 4.0) for label-free quantification using the default parameters. MS2 spectra were exported directly from Progenesis in mgf format and searched using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Sci- ence, Version 2.4) against a decoy database (39) containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 16/05/2012) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,250 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13) . To identify proteins originating from S. flexneri, non phos- phopeptide enriched samples were searched against the same data- base above including predicted SwissProt entries of S. flexneri (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 16/05/2012, in total 49,610 sequences) The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were al- lowed, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) or oxidation (M) as a variable modification for TiO2 enriched or not enriched samples, respectively. Finally, the database search results were exported as a xml-file and imported back to the Progenesis software for MS1 feature assignment.

### Publication Abstract
The enteroinvasive bacterium Shigella flexneri invades the intestinal epithelium of humans. During infection, several injected effector proteins promote bacterial internalization, and interfere with multiple host cell responses. To obtain a systems-level overview of host signaling during infection, we analyzed the global dynamics of protein phosphorylation by liquid chromatography-tandem MS and identified several hundred of proteins undergoing a phosphorylation change during the first hours of infection. Functional bioinformatic analysis revealed that they were mostly related to the cytoskeleton, transcription, signal transduction, and cell cycle. Fuzzy c-means clustering identified six temporal profiles of phosphorylation and a functional module composed of ATM-phosphorylated proteins related to genotoxic stress. Pathway enrichment analysis defined mTOR as the most overrepresented pathway. We showed that mTOR complex 1 and 2 were required for S6 kinase and AKT activation, respectively. Comparison with a published phosphoproteome of Salmonella typhimurium-infected cells revealed a large subset of coregulated phosphoproteins. Finally, we showed that S. flexneri effector OspF affected the phosphorylation of several hundred proteins, thereby demonstrating the wide-reaching impact of a single bacterial effector on the host signaling network.

### Keywords
Infection, Phosphoproteomics, S. flexneri

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel


