### Accession
PXD000310

### Title
Quantitative proteome profiling of Caenorhabditis elegans pept-1(lg601) and N2(Bristol) during ontogenesis.

### Description
PEPT-1 is responsible for the uptake of di-and tripeptides form the intestinal lumen into the epithelial cells. Knock-out of pept-1 in C.elegans results in a severe phenotype. Despite a reduction of brood size and a retarded development, pept-1(lg601) depicts increased stress resistance. Therefore, populations of pept1(lg601) as well as N2(Bristol) were synchronized and sampled at various time points during development. Applying 15N metabolic labeling in combination with shotgun LC/MS-MS, we determined the proteome of both strains during development.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins that are differentially expressed during the development of WT and pept-1 C. elegans, synchronized cultures of N2 wild-type and pept-1 C. elegans were allowed to grow for 20, 40, or 60 h, respectively, before whole protein extract was subjected to quantitative proteome analysis. Protein extraction, 15N labeling, LC-MS/MS, and statistical and bioinformatical analysis are described in Geillinger et al.15 Briefly, a standard for indirect quantification was generated by including fully 15N-labeled WT and pept-1 at every developmental stage to ensure the integrity of the standard. After each sample was combined with this standard, they were processed by a short acrylamide gel run, trypsin digestion, and peptide extraction, and peptides were analyzed by nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS (UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was accomplished using Mascot Distiller version 2.4.0.0. Mascot (version 2.3) search engine with the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (UniProt/Swiss-Prot release 2011_06) and restriction for taxonomy (C. elegans, 3332 sequences) was used for identification. Search parameters were as follows: tryptic specificity, one missed cleavage site, methionine oxidation as variable modification, 4 ppm as precursor mass tolerance, and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance. A decoy version of the database was used that was complemented with a duplicate of itself in which the amino acid sequence of each protein entry was randomly shuffled in order to enable the calculation of a false discovery rate. Resulting lists were truncated at a false discovery rate of 1%. Quantification was achieved using Mascot Distiller. Impurity of labeling was set to 92%. Protein ratios were calculated on the basis of a minimum of two peptides meeting the selection criteria of a correlation threshold above 0.9 and standard deviation below 0.2, whereby at least one peptide had to be unique to the protein. The list of identified proteins was merged for the two biological replicates and three time points to yield a combined list of identified proteins. Proteins that were not detected in all samples were excluded from the list. Statistical analysis was accomplished using R software package applying a two-way ANOVA test.

### Publication Abstract
The intestinal peptide transporter PEPT-1 plays an important role in development, growth, reproduction, and stress tolerance in Caenorhabditis elegans, as revealed by the severe phenotype of the pept-1-deficient strain. The reduced number of offspring and increased stress resistance were shown to result from changes in the insulin/IGF-signaling cascade. To further elucidate the regulatory network behind the phenotypic alterations in PEPT1-deficient animals, a quantitative proteome analysis combined with transcriptome profiling was applied. Various target genes of XBP-1, the major mediator of the unfolded protein response, were found to be downregulated at the mRNA and protein levels, accompanied by a reduction of spliced xbp-1 mRNA. Proteome analysis also revealed a markedly reduced content of numerous ribosomal proteins. This was associated with a reduction in the protein synthesis rate in pept-1 C. elegans, a process that is strictly regulated by the TOR (target of rapamycine) complex, the cellular sensor for free amino acids. These data argue for a central role of PEPT-1 in cellular amino acid homeostasis. In PEPT-1 deficiency, amino acid levels dropped systematically, leading to alterations in protein synthesis and in the IRE-1/XBP-1 pathway.

### Keywords
Pept-1(lg601), Ontogenesis, Caenorhabditis elegans, Amino acid homeostasis, Shot-gun proteomics, Peptide transporter, Target of rapamycin, N2(bristol)

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics / Biostatistics
Molecular Nutrition, Technische Universit채t M체nchen, Gregor-Mendel-Str. 2, 85354 Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Gerhard Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hannelore Daniel
Molecular Nutrition, Technische Universit채t M체nchen, Gregor-Mendel-Str. 2, 85354 Freising, Germany


