### Accession
PXD014310

### Title
Egg White as a quality control in MALDI Mass Spectrometry Imaging

### Description
Tryptic peptides and N-glycans were spatially mapped and visualised on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) endometrial cancer tissue microarrays (TMAs) using an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF/ToF MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics). FFPE egg white was placed either side of each TMA and used as an external control to monitor detector performance and sample preparation.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE TMAs and egg white were sectioned (6 µm) onto indium tin oxide (ITO) slides, antigen retrieved and treated in separate experiments with Trypsin Gold (Promega) and glycerol-free PNGase F (New England Biolabs). Trypsin was deposited using the imagePrep (Bruker Daltonics) while PNGase F was deposited using the iMatrixSpray. Following 2 h incubation at 37°C, the sections were overlaid with alpha-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA) in 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) using the imagePrep and iMatrixSpray, respectively. MS data was acquired using an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF/ToF MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics). Instrument-specific settings were as follows: 800–4500 m/z range, 700 Da matrix suppression and 2 kHz laser repetition rate. Method-specific settings were as follows: 50 % laser power and 2698 V detector gain. For trypsin digested FFPE egg white, a total of 1000 shots were acquired at each position without random walk within a 70 μm diameter. For the PNGase F digested FFPE egg white, a total of 2000 shots were acquired at each position with random walk within a 100 μm diameter.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data for the regions of interest (ROI), such as trypticpeptide_before (trypsin digested FFPE egg white region at the start of the run) and trypticpeptide_after (trypsin digested FFPE egg white region at the end of the run), were converted to imzML (www.imzml.org) using SCiLS Lab (version 2016b, SCiLS GmbH, Bruker Daltonics). The raw MS data for homogenous egg white compared to heterogenous egg white (n-glycan_homo_vs_hetero and n-glycan_homo_vs_hetero_2) was also converted to imzML.

### Publication Abstract
The strength of MALDI-MSI is to analyze and visualize spatial intensities of molecular features from an intact tissue. The distribution of the intensities can then be visualized within a single tissue section or compared in between sections, acquired consecutively. This method can be reliably used to reveal physiological structures and has the potential to identify molecular details, which correlate with biological outcomes. MALDI-MSI implementation in clinical laboratories requires the ability to ensure method quality and validation to meet diagnostic expectations. To be able to get consistent qualitative and quantitative results, standardized sample preparation and data acquisition are of highest priority. We have previously shown that the deposition of internal standards onto the tissue section during sample preparation can be used to improve the mass accuracy of monitored <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> features across the sample. Here, we present the use of external and internal controls for the quality check of sample preparation and data acquisition, which is particularly relevant when either many spectra are acquired during a single MALDI-MSI experiment or data from independent experiments are processed together. To monitor detector performance and sample preparation, we use egg white as an external control for peptide and <i>N-</i>glycan MALDI-MSI throughout the experiment. We have also identified endogenous peptides from cytoskeletal proteins, which can be reliably monitored in gynecological tissue samples. Lastly, we summarize our standard quality control workflow designed to produce reliable and comparable MALDI-MSI data from single sections and tissue microarrays (TMAs).

### Keywords
Ffpe, Imaging, Maldi, Egg white

### Affiliations
Future Industries Institute, The Univrsity of South Australia
The University of South Australia

### Submitter
Matthew Briggs

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hoffmann
Future Industries Institute, The Univrsity of South Australia


