### Accession
PXD031336

### Title
o Exploring dynamics of pre-germinative metabolism in Medicago truncatula seeds during priming, dry-back, and post-priming imbibition using proteomics

### Description
o The dramatic impact of climate change poses a demanding challenge: the need to enhance seed quality by designing tailored seed priming protocols. Proteomics can provide a comprehensive picture of the molecular players behind the seed response to priming. Using label-free protein quantification with mass spectrometry, changes in the seed proteome of the model legume Medicago truncatula were investigated along the rehydration-dehydration cycle of a standard vigorization treatment (hydropriming plus dry-back) and during post-priming imbibition.

### Sample Protocol
o 30-50mg of tissue were taken and re-suspended in 300 µl of lysis buffer (4 % Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 4% SDS/50 mM TEAB/100mM DTT.  Protein extraction was carried out using a tissue homogenizer and treated with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) before boiling at 95°C for 10 minutes while shaking at 800 rpm. For each sample 20 µg of protein were taken and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Samples were further processed using the single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). The SP3 protein purification, digest and peptide clean-up were performed using a KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (GE Life Sciences; GE65152105050250, GE45152105050250). Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat (TEAB). Peptides were acidified to perform a stage-tip cleanup using two Empore reversed-phase extraction disks (3M). The eluted samples were dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample 1 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) connected to a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) with a maximum cycle time of 3 s,  using Xcalibur (tune version 3.1.2412.25), with spray voltage set to 2.5 kV, funnel RF level at 40 %, heated capillary temperature at 275 °C, and Advanced Peak Determination (APD) on. Full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 500’000 or for a maximum injection time of 40 ms. Precursors with an intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS. Ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 35 %. Fragments were detected in the linear ion trap with the scan rate set to rapid, the automatic gain control set to 10’000 ions, and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms. Charge state screening was enabled, and singly, unassigned charge states and charge states higher than seven were excluded. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, applying a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
o The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Medicago truncatula database from the Uniprot reference proteome (taxonomy 2051, canonical version from 2020-10-02), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant IonTrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Medicago truncatula, Seeds, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ETH
Department of Biology and Biotechnology ‘L. Spallanzani’, University of Pavia, via Ferrata 9, 27100, Pavia, Italy

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Alma Balestrazzi
Department of Biology and Biotechnology ‘L. Spallanzani’, University of Pavia, via Ferrata 9, 27100, Pavia, Italy


