### Accession
PXD023910

### Title
Nonsense-mediated decay in Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
We have HA-tagged two nonsense-mediated decay proteins, UPF1 and UPF2, in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. We then performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments to determine the protein-protein interactions of these nonsense-mediated decay components.

### Sample Protocol
Infected RBCs were synchronised with 5% (w/v) D-sorbitol and parasites were harvested as trophozoites 72 h later. Parasites were isolated from RBCs by lysis with 0.03% (w/v) saponin in PBS on ice. Samples were crosslinked with 1 mM dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (Thermo Scientific) for 30 min, followed by termination with Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) at a final concentration of 20 mM for 15 min. Parasite pellets were then solubilised  in immunoprecipitation buffer (IP buffer) containing 1% Triton-X-100, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA and cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) for 30 min on ice. Insoluble material was separated by centrifugating twice at 13,000 g for 10 min. The Triton-X-100-soluble fraction (input) was incubated with anti-HA agarose beads (Sigma) overnight at 4C and was washed 5 times with IP buffer. For immunoblotting, proteins were eluted at 95C for 10 min with Laemmli buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol. Input and eluate samples were separated on 4-15% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels at 200V for 35 min. For mass spectrometry, beads were washed a further two times in 1 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) before elution with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and trifluoroethanol at 50C for 5 min. The eluate was neutralised with triethylammonium bicarbonate and reduced with TCEP (5 mM), then digested with trypsin for 16 h at 37C. Samples were then analysed by LC-MS/MS with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched using MASCOT against a custom protein database comprised of the 3D7 P. falciparum annotated proteome (version 43) and Homo sapiens reference proteome (Uniprot proteome ID: UP000005640). MASCOT searches were performed with the following parameters: MS tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.2 Da, cleavage enzyme = trypsin, missed cleavages allowed = 3, peptide isotope error = 0, variable modifications = oxidation (M), with a MASCOT decoy search performed concurrently. Proteins were considered to be enriched in PfUPF1-HA or PfUPF2-HA IP eluate compared to a wildtype control if there were at least 2 significant peptides detected in two biological replicates and a) 5-fold the number of significant peptides detected or b) no peptides were detected in the control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nonsense-mediated decay, Plasmodium falciparum, Co-immunoprecipitation, Malaria, Mrna

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia

### Submitter
Emma McHugh

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart Ralph
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia


