### Accession
PXD024202

### Title
The eye proteome of hadal snailfish from Mariana Trench

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed to the eye of P. swirei living in constant darkness, aiming to gain new insights into the vision of hadal snailfish at protein level.

### Sample Protocol
The snailfishes were taken out and washed with cold filtered sea water, after then the eyes were isolated and frozen by liquid nitrogen for further use. One eye from each snailfish was homogenized thoroughly in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8), and 0.2% SDS), and sonicated on ice. Supernatant was transferred to a new tube after centrifuging at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and purified using the acetone precipitation method. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay. For in-solution peptide preparation, a total of 100 μg protein from each biological replicate was used, protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for 16 h at 37°C, after which the peptide solution was desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. For in-gel peptide preparation, a total of 100 μg protein was used for SDS-PAGE gel running and stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The dark band (high-abundant proteins) was excised (Eyes-gel-high) and the remainder were collected (Eyes-gel-low). Collected gel bands were sliced into pieces and destained, proteins inside the gel particle were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a concentration of 10 ng/μL overnight, after then the peptides were collected, desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a 60 min gradient. Mass spectrometry data were searched against the protein database deduced from the protein database deduced from the P. swirei genome obtained in the previous study using software Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The searched parameters were set as follows: maximum of 2 mis-cleavage sites were allowed, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the precursor and the fragment ion scans were used respectively, carbamidomethyl was specified as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified as dynamic modifications. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR＜1% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Label-free quantification was performed based on precursor intensity.

### Publication Abstract
No sunlight can reach the hadal trench, but some fishes dwelling there still have apparent eye morphology. However, whether they are capable of sensing light remains unknown. In this study, the eyes of the dominant hadal endemic snailfish Pseudoliparis swirei from the Mariana Trench were analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 2088 proteins were identified in the eye proteome, most of which had at least one hit against public databases and could be mapped to 316 metabolic pathways. Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways directly contributing to visual phototransduction were significantly enriched from the top 10% dominant proteins, implying abundant metabolic activities in the eye and it is still a functional visual organ. One rhodopsin was identified in the eye proteome, sequence analysis indicated that it might have an absorption maximum at &#x223c;480&#xa0;nm and be sensitive to dim blue light. In addition, proteins that might contribute to extreme environment adaptation, such as heat shock proteins and chaperonin-containing T-complex protein 1, were also highly expressed in the eye. Overall, these results provide insights into the molecular mechanism underlying the vision of hadal snailfish and provide a useful database for further research.

### Keywords
Hadal trench，darkness，eye，vision，opsins

### Affiliations
Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Guoyong Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Lisheng He
Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences


