### Accession
PXD023541

### Title
Plasma proteomics analysis for the identification of integrated biomarker signatures of type 1 diabetes

### Description
This project has the aim to identify biomarker candidates of type 1 diabetes development based on integration of multiple omics measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Abundant plasma proteins depleted on a Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) column (Hu-14 4.6 x 100 mm, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled with a 1200 series HPLC (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Depleted fraction had its buffer exchanged to 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 using 3-kDa molecular mass cutoff Amicon centrifugal filters (Millipore, Burlington, MA). Urea and dithiothreitol concentrations were adjusted to final concentrations of 8M and 5 mM, respectively. Samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) for 45 min at 25°C in dark. Samples were digested for 2 h at 25 °C using 1:50 (enzyme/protein ratio) of sequencing-grade endoproteinase Lys-C, followed by overnight incubation with 1:50 sequencing-grade trypsin at 25°C. Peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction using tC18 Sep Pak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Samples were labeled with a 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and fractionated into 24 fractions by high-pH reversed phase as described in https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0006-9. LC-MS/MS analysis was done on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC system with a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Gradient: 1–8% B in 2 min, 8–12% B in 18 min, 12–30% B in 55 min, 30–45% B in 22 min, 45–95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99–1% B in 10 min. Data collection parameters: Full mass scans were collected from 300 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 at 400 m/z. Tandem mass spectra were collected in data-dependent acquisition of the top 12 most intense parent ions using high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z), before being dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were extracted with Decon2LS_V2 and DTA Refinery for mass recalibration and peak list extraction. Identification of peptides were done with MSGF+ using the human SwissProt database (downloaded from Uniprot Knowledgebase on February 22, 2019). The analysis parameters were: parent ion mass tolerance of ±6 ppm, tryptic digestion in at least one of the peptide termini, 2 missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) and N-terminal/lysine TMT labeling (+229.1629 Da) derivatization as static modifications, and the variable modifications: oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine, cysteine, tyrosine and tryptophan; dioxidation (+31.9898 Da) on cysteine; and deamidation/deamination (+ 0.98402 Da) on asparagine, glutamine and arginine residues. Spectral-peptide matches, peptides and protein were filtered with MSGF probabilities to maintain false-discovery rate below 1% in each of the levels. The intensities of TMT reporter ions were extracted with MASIC for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, Type 1 diabetes, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


