### Accession
PXD008002

### Title
A Methodological Assessment and Characterization of Genetically-Driven Variation in Three Human Phosphoproteomes

### Description
Phosphorylation of proteins on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues is a ubiquitous post-translational modification that plays a key part of essentially every cell signaling process. It is reasonable to assume that inter-individual variation in protein phosphorylation may underlie phenotypic differences, as has been observed for practically any other molecular regulatory phenotype. However, we do not know much about the extent of inter-individual variation in phosphorylation because it is quite challenging to perform a quantitative high throughput study to assess inter-individual variation in any post-translational modification. To test our ability to address this challenge with current technology, we quantified phosphorylation levels for three fully sequenced human cell lines within a nested experimental framework, and found that genetic background is the primary determinant of phosphoproteome variation. We uncovered multiple functional, biophysical, and genetic associations with germline driven phosphopeptide variation (though the small sample size in this ‘pilot’ study limits the applicability of our genetic observations). Among these associations were variants affecting protein levels or structure, with the latter presenting, on average, a stronger effect. Interestingly, we found evidence that is consistent with a phosphopeptide variability buffering effect endowed from properties enriched within longer proteins. We also undertook a thorough technical assessment of our experimental workflow to aid further efforts. Taken together, this work provides the foundation for future work to characterize inter-individual variation in post-translational modification as well as reveals novel insights into the nature of inter-individual variation in phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cell culturing and SILAC labeling: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from Yoruba individuals in Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI from Coriell, NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository) were cultured under identical conditions of 37°C and 5% CO2. Each of the three lines (GM18486, GM19160, and GM18862) were grown in Lys/Arg depleted RPMI and 15% dialyzed FBS supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamate, 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin and L-13C615N4-Arg (Arg-10) and L-13C615N2-Lys (Lys-8) (Cambridge Isotopes, Andover, USA). Each line was cultured to ~200 x 106 cells over at least six doublings. Culture replicates were awoken from the same frozen pellet and cultured in parallel. Label incorporation was verified by analyzing the protein lysate from the labeled LCLs alone by high-resolution LC-MS/MS. The internal (unlabeled) standard line (GM19238) was expanded to 20 x 109 cells in roller bottles using RPMI media with 15% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamate by the Coriell Institute for Medical Research.  2. Quantitative, high-resolution mass spectrometry: Cell pellets were washed twice with 500µL 25mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged at 5000 x g for 2 minutes.  Washes were discarded.  Cell lysis was performed with 3mL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris.HCl pH8, 100mM NaCl) using 3 applications of a Qsonica Q125 sonic probe with a 30 second pulse and 80% amplitude.  The cell lysate was centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 minutes at 25°C.  The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was determined with a Qubit protein assay (Invitrogen).  For each experiment 4.5mg of light and 4.5mg heavy protein were combined and digested with the following protocol: Reduction with 10mM dithiothreitol at 25°C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 20mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 45 minutes.  Proteins were digested with 200µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight.  The final digest volume was 25mL adjusted with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate.  The digestion was cooled to room temperature and terminated with 5µL of formic acid.  The digest was centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 minutes.  Peptides were desalted with 500mg Sep-Pak (Waters) and dried using vacuum centrifugation in a SpeedVac.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% ACN and protein quantitation performed with a 280nm protein assay.  Peptides were fractionated on an Agilent 1100 equipped with a 500 uL sample loop operating at 2 mL/min, detector set at 220-280 nm wavelengths.  5mg of peptide was loaded on polySULFOETHYL A, 4.6 mm ID x 200 mm length, 5 um particle size, 200 Å pore size (polyLC, from the Nest group).  A total of 48 fractions were collected at 1 min intervals.  In batches of 3, adjacent SCX fractions were pooled and processed by solid phase extraction (SPE) using a Waters SEP-PAK 50mg C18 cartridge per the vendor protocol and dried overnight in a lyophilizer.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere TiO2 tips from GL sciences using the vendor protocol.  Phosphopeptides were eluted from the tips using two eluents: 50µL 5% NH4OH in water and 50µL 5% Pyrrolidine in water.  The eluents were combined and neutralized with 50% acetic acid and dried.  Dry samples were reconstituted in 100µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic (TFA) acid.  Each enriched sample was desalted using a Stage Tip (ThermoFisher P/N SP301) per the vendor protocol.  Peptides were dried and reconstituted in 70µL of 0.1% TFA prior to analysis. Half of each enriched sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer.  Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min using a 2hr reverse phase gradient; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The injection volume was 30µL. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant [46] 1.5.0.30 and the Adromeda [47] search engine. Proteins were identified using a protein sequence database containing 35,585 consensus coding sequences (CCDS) [87] translated from GRCh37/hg19 gene models using Ensembl release 75 annotations. Only translations of genes/transcripts of status ‘known’ or ‘novel’ and biotype ‘protein coding’ were used. Each sequence has a unique protein identifier (ENSP ID) that allows for mapping between gene and transcript IDs. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications were included for all searches, while phosphorylation of S/T/Y was included for the phosphorylation data. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed for phosphoproteomic data and two missed cleavages were allowed for proteomic data. A ‘first search’ tolerance of 40 ppm with a score threshold of 75 was used for time-dependent recalibration followed by a main search MS1 tolerance of 6 ppm and an MS2 tolerance of 20 ppm. The ‘re-quantify’ option was used to aid the assignment of isotopic patterns to labeling pairs. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across samples using a matching time window of 42 seconds and an alignment time window of 30 min for phosphoproteomic data and 20 min for proteomic data. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. Quantitative analysis of phosphorylated peptides was limited to ‘class 1’ sites with median localization probability of .99 and minimum localization probability of .75. Protein group quantifications were taken as the median log2(sample/standard) ratio for all groups containing at least two independent unique or ‘razor’ peptide quantifications (including multiple measurements of the same peptide in different fractions) without a modified peptide counterpart. For the purposes of protein level normalization, a custom R script was used to assign phosphopeptides to protein groups based on the presence of the peptide within the sequences of the protein group proteins. In the rare cases where multiple protein groups contain proteins that match a phosphopeptide, the protein group with the most peptide identifications is assigned to the phoshpopeptide. For enrichment analyses, members of the protein group were parsed such that each member contained the given phosphopeptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation of proteins on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues is a ubiquitous post-translational modification that plays a key part of essentially every cell signaling process. It is reasonable to assume that inter-individual variation in protein phosphorylation may underlie phenotypic differences, as has been observed for practically any other molecular regulatory phenotype. However, we do not know much about the extent of inter-individual variation in phosphorylation because it is quite challenging to perform a quantitative high throughput study to assess inter-individual variation in any post-translational modification. To test our ability to address this challenge with SILAC-based mass spectrometry, we quantified phosphorylation levels for three genotyped human cell lines within a nested experimental framework, and found that genetic background is the primary determinant of phosphoproteome variation. We uncovered multiple functional, biophysical, and genetic associations with germline driven phosphopeptide variation. Variants affecting protein levels or structure were among these associations, with the latter presenting, on average, a stronger effect. Interestingly, we found evidence that is consistent with a phosphopeptide variability buffering effect endowed from properties enriched within longer proteins. Because the small sample size in this 'pilot' study may limit the applicability of our genetic observations, we also undertook a thorough technical assessment of our experimental workflow to aid further efforts. Taken together, these results provide the foundation for future work to characterize inter-individual variation in post-translational modification levels and reveal novel insights into the nature of inter-individual variation in phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Human, Yri, Maxquant, Lcl, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA

### Submitter
Chiaowen Hsiao

### Lab Head
Dr Yoav Gilad
Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA


