### Accession
PXD022396

### Title
Shulin packages axonemal outer dynein arms for ciliary targeting

### Description
The main force generators in eukaryotic cilia and flagella are axonemal outer dynein arms (ODAs). During cilio-genesis, these ∼1.8 MDa complexes are assembled in the cytoplasm and targeted to cilia via an unknown mechanism. Here we use the ciliate Tetrahymena to identify two novel factors (Q22YU3 and Q22MS1) which bind ODAs in the cytoplasm and are required for their delivery to cilia. We show that Q22YU3, which we name Shulin, locks the ODA motor domains into a closed conformation and inhibits motor activity. Cryo-EM reveals how Shulin stabilizes this compact form of ODAs by binding to the dynein tails. Our findings provide a molecular explanation for how newly assembled dyneins are packaged for delivery to the cilia.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification by mass-spectrometry was done either using in-gel or in-solution tryptic digestion. Three separate types of MS analyses were performed. 1) For identifying novel interactors of cell body ODAs, IC3-ZZ-FLAG pulldowns were performed on deciliated cells (as described above) in quadruplicates. Eluates were run on SDS-PAGE gels, Coomassie stained and excised gel slices were analysed by mass spectrometry. 2) For identifying proteins in the cell body ODA peak fraction following pulldowns and gel filtration, samples were resolved on SDS-PAGE and stained with SYPRO ruby protein gel stain (Bio-Rad). Polyacrylamide gel slices containing the bands for ODA holocomplex and bound factors were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis. 3) For precisely identifying subunit composition of ODAs in cilia, IP/MS experiments as above were performed on the isolated ciliary fraction of the IC3-ZZ-FLAG strains. Additionally, MonoQ fractions containing ODAs purified from cilia of wildtype strains (as described above) were tryptically digested in-solution for mass spectrometric analysis. Both these latter mass spectrometry experiments identified the same subunit composition for ODAs.  For polyacrylamide gel slices (1-2 mm) containing the purified proteins were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by manual in situ enzymatic digestion. Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a well of a 96-well microtitre plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng/µL Trypsin (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 řC. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. Protein samples in solution were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Following alkylation, the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, UK) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100, for 1 hour at room temperature and then further digested overnight at 37 řC following a subsequent addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1:20. The digests were analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using a Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 µm, 100 µm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 µm, 75 µm x 150 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile. The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a modified nano-flow electrospray ionization source, with a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA). Data dependent analysis was carried out, using a resolution of 30,000 for the full MS spectrum, followed by ten MS/MS spectra in the linear ion trap. MS spectra were collected over a m/z range of 3002000. MS/MS scans were collected using a threshold energy of 35 for collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were then searched against an in-house protein sequence database, containing Swiss-Prot and the protein constructs specific to the experiment, using the Mascot search engine program (Matrix Science, UK) (38).  Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed and variable modifications for oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine, tyrosine, tertbutyloxycarbonyl-lysine, norbornene-lysine and prop-2-yn-1-yloxycarbonyl-lysine were included. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold program (Proteome Software Inc., USA) (39). All data were additionally interrogated manually. For quantitative analysis of replicate runs, NSAF (Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor) values for each protein hit were used as a proxy of protein abundance (40). NSAF values were used to calculate significance and fold-changes (i.e. consistent enrichment of a given protein in test sample over control sample).

### Publication Abstract
The main force generators in eukaryotic cilia and flagella are axonemal outer dynein arms (ODAs). During ciliogenesis, these ~1.8-megadalton complexes are assembled in the cytoplasm and targeted to cilia by an unknown mechanism. Here, we used the ciliate <i>Tetrahymena</i> to identify two factors (Q22YU3 and Q22MS1) that bind ODAs in the cytoplasm and are required for ODA delivery to cilia. Q22YU3, which we named Shulin, locked the ODA motor domains into a closed conformation and inhibited motor activity. Cryo-electron microscopy revealed how Shulin stabilized this compact form of ODAs by binding to the dynein tails. Our findings provide a molecular explanation for how newly assembled dyneins are packaged for delivery to the cilia.

### Keywords
Tetrahymena thermophila, Cryo-em, Dynein, Lc-ms/ms, Flagella, Cilia

### Affiliations
MRC LMB
Structural Studies Division, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew P Carter
Structural Studies Division, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom


