### Accession
PXD009327

### Title
CDKL5 substrates -  Phosphoproteomic screening identifies physiological substrates of the CDKL5 kinase

### Description
Identification of CDKL5 substrates. Immuno-precipitated proteins were TMT labelled and analysed via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-precipitated proteins (MAP1S, CEP131, DLG5) were separated via SDS-PAGE, digested, peptides extracted and TMT labelled. Peptide identification and quantification via LC-MS/MS, analysis via MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant, statistical analysis was done using R.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the gene encoding the protein kinase CDKL5 cause a debilitating neurodevelopmental disease termed CDKL5 disorder. The impact of these mutations on CDKL5 function is poorly understood because the substrates and cellular processes controlled by CDKL5 are unclear. Here, we describe a quantitative phosphoproteomic screening which identified MAP1S, CEP131 and DLG5-regulators of microtubule and centrosome function-as cellular substrates of CDKL5. Antibodies against MAP1S phospho-Ser<sup>900</sup> and CEP131 phospho-Ser<sup>35</sup> confirmed CDKL5-dependent phosphorylation of these targets in human cells. The phospho-acceptor serine residues in MAP1S, CEP131 and DLG5 lie in the motif RPX<u>S</u>A, although CDKL5 can tolerate residues other than Ala immediately C-terminal to the phospho-acceptor serine. We provide insight into the control of CDKL5 activity and show that pathogenic mutations in CDKL5 cause a major reduction in CDKL5 activity <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and in cells. These data reveal the first cellular substrates of CDKL5, which may represent important biomarkers in the diagnosis and treatment of CDKL5 disorder, and illuminate the functions of this poorly characterized kinase.

### Keywords
Cep131, Dlg5 map1s, Tmt, Cdkl5

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee

### Submitter
John Rouse

### Lab Head
Dr John Rouse
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee


