### Accession
PXD014070

### Title
Differential protein expression profiles of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid following lipopolysaccharide-induced direct and indirect lung injury in mice

### Description
Acute lung injury (ALI)/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is an inflammatory process of the lungs characterized by increased permeability of the alveolar-capillary membrane with subsequent interstitial/alveolar edema and diffuse alveolar damage. ALI/ARDS can be the results of either direct or indirect lung injury, with pneumonia being the most common direct pulmonary insult and sepsis the most common extra-pulmonary cause. In this study, we employed the murine lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced direct and indirect lung injury model to explore the pathogenic mechanisms of pulmonary and extra-pulmonary ARDS, using an unbiased, discovery and quantitative proteomic approach. A total of 1,017 proteins were both identified and quantified in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from control, intratracheal LPS (I.T. LPS, 0.1 mg/kg) and intraperitoneal LPS (I.P. LPS, 5 mg/kg) treated mice. The two LPS groups shared 13 up-regulated and 22 down-regulated proteins compared to the control group. Among them, molecules related to bronchial and type II alveolar epithelial cell functions including cell adhesion molecule 1 and surfactant protein B were reduced, whereas lactotransferrin and resistin like alpha involved in lung innate immunity were upregulated in both LPS groups. Proteomic profiling also identified significant differences in BALF proteins between I.T. and I.P. LPS groups. Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed that acute-phase response signaling was activated by both I.T. and I.P. LPS, however, the magnitude of activation is much greater in I.T. LPS group compared to I.P. LPS group. Intriguingly, two canonical signaling pathways, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor activation and the production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in macrophages, were activated by I.T. LPS but suppressed by I.P. LPS. In addition, CXCL15 (also known as lungkine) was also up-regulated by I.T LPS but down-regulated by I.P. LPS. In conclusion, our quantitative discovery-based proteomic approach identified commonalities as well as significant differences in BALF protein expression profiles in LPS-induced direct and indirect lung injury, and importantly, LPS-induced indirect lung injury results in suppression of select components of lung innate immunity, which could contribute to the so-called “immunoparalysis” in sepsis patients.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of proteins (60 g per BALF sample) were prepared for trypsin digestion by reducing the cysteines with dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. After chloroform-methanol precipitation, each protein pellet was digested with trypsin overnight at 37C. The digested product was labeled using a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex Reagent set (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and stored at -80°C until further use. The 10 samples analyzed include control (I.T. saline, n = 3), I.T. LPS (n = 4) and I.P. LPS (n = 3). An equal amount of each TMT-labelled samples was pooled together in a single tube and SepPak purified (Waters Chromatography, Dublin, Ireland) using acidic reverse phase conditions. After drying to completion, an off-line fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity of the sample. The sample was brought up in 260 l of 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10. This mixture was subjected to basic pH reverse phase chromatography (Dionex U3000, Thermo Fisher). Briefly, UV monitored at 215 nm for an injection of 100 l at 0.1 ml/min with a gradient developed from 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10 to 100% acetonitrile (ACN, pH 10) over 90 minutes. A total of 48 fractions (200 l each) were collected in a 96-well microplate and recombined in a checkerboard fashion to create 12 “super fractions” (original fractions 1, 13, 25, and 37 became new super fraction #1, original Fractions 2, 14, 26, and 38 became new super fraction # 2, and so on.). The 12 “super fractions” were then run on a Dionex U3000 nano flow system coupled to a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Each fraction was subjected to a 90-min chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2-25% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) over the course of 65 min, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 min, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 min and a 10 min re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA. Chromatography was carried out in a “trap-and-load” format using a PicoChip source (New Objective, Woburn, MA), with the trap column C18 PepMap 100 (5 m, 100 Å) and the separation column PicoChip REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ (3 m, 120 Å, 105 mm). The flow rate for the entire run was at 0.3 l/min, and electrospray was achieved at 2.6 kV. TMT data acquisition utilized an MS3 approach for data collection. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 120,000, and data dependent MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap using a collision induced dissociation (CID) of 25%. Reporter Ions were fragmented using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 65% and detected in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
TMT data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The 3 runs of 12 “super fractions” were merged and searched using SEQUEST. The Protein FASTA database was Mus musculus (NCBIAV) version 2017-05-05. Static modifications included TMT reagents on lysine and N-terminus (+229.163), carbamidomethyl on cysteines (=57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (=15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenic mechanisms of acute lung injury due to direct and indirect pulmonary insults are incompletely understood. Using an unbiased, discovery and quantitative proteomic approach, we examined bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) proteome following lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced direct and indirect lung injury in mice. A total of 1017 proteins were both identified and quantitated in BALF from control, intratracheal (I.T., direct) and intraperitoneal (I.P., indirect) LPS-treated mice. The two LPS groups shared 13 up-regulated and 22 down-regulated proteins compared to the control group. Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed that acute-phase response signaling was activated by both I.T. and I.P. LPS; however, the magnitude of activation was much greater in the I.T. LPS group. Intriguingly, two canonical signaling pathways, liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor activation, and the production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in macrophages, were activated by I.T. but suppressed by I.P. LPS. Cxcl15 (also known as lungkine) was also up-regulated by I.T. but down-regulated by I.P. LPS. In conclusion, our quantitative discovery-based proteomic approach identified commonalities, as well as significant differences in BALF protein expression profiles between LPS-induced direct and indirect lung injury, and importantly, LPS-induced indirect lung injury resulted in suppression of select components of lung innate immunity.

### Keywords
Acute lung injury (ali)/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), Murine lipopolysaccharide (lps)-induced direct and indirect lung injury model, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf)

### Affiliations
The LSUHSC Proteomics Core3 Facility The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie J Guidry
The LSUHSC Proteomics Core3 Facility The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112


