### Accession
PXD003791

### Title
MuSt multiomics -  Integrated multi-omics of the human gut microbiome in a case study of familial type 1 diabetes

### Description
Multiomics of faecal samples collected from individuals in families with multiple cases of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) over 3 or 4 months. Metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing and metaproteomics were carried out, as well as whole human genome sequencing. Phenotypic data is available.

### Sample Protocol
DNA and proteins were extracted from flash-frozen, unthawed faecal samples after pre-treatment with 1.5 ml RNAlater ICE (LifeTechnologies), using differential centrifugation as described in Roume (Roume, H., Heintz-Buschart, A., Muller, E. E. L. & Wilmes, P. Sequential isolation of metabolites, RNA, DNA, and proteins from the same unique sample. Meth. Enzymol. 531, 219–236 (2013)) and the All-In-One kit (Norgen Biotek). An aliquot of 15 µg isolated protein fraction was reduced (DTT) and alkylated (Iodoacetamide) and the proteins precipitated using the Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein pellets were re-suspended at a concentration of 500 µg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to perform a complete trypsin digestion. 3.5 µg digested protein was purified on a Ziptip C18 (Millipore), dried and re-suspended in 100 mM ammonium formiate (pH 10) at 333 ng/µl. 3 µg digested protein were injected on a Nano 2D UPLC – Orbitrap MS system (2D-nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) and Q-Exactive (Thermo)). MPDSMIX (Waters) was spiked in at 150 fmoles of ADH digest per injection. A 2D LC method with three steps of 180 min was run. The three steps were run on a column at high pH with increasing percentage of acetonitrile and the eluted peptides were diluted and loaded on a low pH column, where each step consisted of a gradient of 5 min from 99 % of A (A = 0.1 % formic acid in water; B = acetonitrile) to 93 % of A followed by a gradient of 135 min from 93 % of A to 65 % of A. Mass spectrometry was done using a TopN-MSMS method (N = 12), with MS parameters as follows: mass range from 400 to 1750 m/z, resolution 70,000, AGC target 106 or maximum injection time 200 ms. MS2 parameters for spectrum acquisition were: isolation window 1.6 m/z, collision energy (NSE) 25, resolution 17,500, AGC target 105 or maximum injection time 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Sample specific SEARCH databases were constructed from individual-specific pseudo-phased human proteins including all homo- and heterozygous variants annotated using ANNOVAR76, as well as microbial protein predictions derived from the combined metagenomic and metatranscriptomic assemblies after inclusion of variants. The database SEARCHes were performed using Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4; Thermo Scientific) and Sequest HT on the protein predictions. Peptides were grouped by mass and sequences, PSM with at least a medium confidence interval and a delta Cn better than 0.15 were considered, strict maximum parsimony principle was applied and protein grouping was enabled. A minimal number of one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The gastrointestinal microbiome is a complex ecosystem with functions that shape human health. Studying the relationship between taxonomic alterations and functional repercussions linked to disease remains challenging. Here, we present an integrative approach to resolve the taxonomic and functional attributes of gastrointestinal microbiota at the metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic levels. We apply our methods to samples from four families with multiple cases of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). Analysis of intra- and inter-individual variation demonstrates that family membership has a pronounced effect on the structural and functional composition of the gastrointestinal microbiome. In the context of T1DM, consistent taxonomic differences were absent across families, but certain human exocrine pancreatic proteins were found at lower levels. The associated microbial functional signatures were linked to metabolic traits in distinct taxa. The methodologies and results provide a foundation for future large-scale integrated multi-omic analyses of the gastrointestinal microbiome in the context of host-microbe interactions in human health and disease.

### Keywords
Human microbiome, Type 1 diabetes, Families, Gastrointestinal, Faecal

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine

### Submitter
Anna Heintz-Buschart

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Wilmes
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine


