### Accession
PXD008384

### Title
Micro-metastases regression following primary tumor excision: a critical role for primary tumor secretome

### Description
Numerous case studies have reported spontaneous regression of metastases following tumor excision, but underlying mechanisms are elusive. Here we present a model of metastases regression and latency elicited by the removal of a primary tumor, and identify underlying mechanisms. Human breast cancer cells, expressing highly sensitive luciferase, were implanted into the mammary fat-pad of mice, and the progression of early stage micrometastases, was monitored. Upon establishment of micrometastases, the primary tumor was excised, inducing a robust regression of metastatic signal, resulting in latent foci. In vivo supplementation of tumor secretome immediately upon tumor excision diminished this regression, implicating primary tumor secreted factors in promotion of metastatic growth. In vitro, cancer cell conditioned medium reduced apoptosis and enhanced adhesion of non-confluent cancer cells, and induced angiogenesis in endothelial cells. Cytokine array and proteomic analysis of cancer cells secretome identified 359 extracellular secreted factors, with significant enrichment of angiogenic factors, growth factors activity, focal adhesion, apoptosis, and metalloprotease processes. In vivo blockade of four key potential mediators of these processes, IL-8, PDGFaa, Serpin E1 (PAI-1), and MIF, arrested development of micrometastases. Moreover, high protein levels of these four factors were correlated with poor patient outcome. These results demonstrate regression and latency of metastases following tumor excision and a crucial role for primary tumor secretome in promoting early metastatic stages, suggesting novel mechanisms to control minimal residual disease.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium samples were centrifuged to eliminate cell debris followed by filtration and concentration using 3 kDa Amicon filters. Concentrated medium was mixed at a 1:1 ratio with 8M UREA and filtered again to reach a final volume of ~100ul. Prior to protein digestion, proteins from the filtered samples were incubated with 1mM dithiothreitol followed by 5mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight with LysC/Trypsin mix (Promega) and sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (Promega) at room temperature, followed by desalting and concentration on C18 StageTips. Prior to MS analysis, peptides were eluted from StageTips using 80% acetonitrile, vacuum-concentrated and diluted in MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed using the nano- ultra high performance liquid chromatography system (UHPLC) (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by MS analysis on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography (50 cm long EASY- Spray PepMap columns; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 140 min linear gradient of water/acetonitrile. MS analysis was performed using a top10 method in which every high resolution MS scan was followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundant peaks by higher- energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant, and the Label-free quantification algorithm. MS/MS spectra were referenced to the Uniprot human proteome by the Andromeda search engine. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was used on both the peptide and protein levels based on a decoy database. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software, String database (www.string-db.org) and Cytoscape software. Enrichment analysis was performed relative to the identified secretome using Gene Ontology annotations from Uniprot (Fisher exact test with an FDR threshold of 0.02).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Breast cancer, Secretome, Metastasis, Cancer microenvironment

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Doctor Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel


