### Accession
PXD022720

### Title
Optimization of Proteomics Sample Preparation for Forensic Analysis of Skin Samples

### Description
We present an efficient protein extraction and in-solution enzymatic digestion protocol optimized for mass spectrometry-based proteomics studies of human skin samples.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-five (25) adult (over 18 years old) male and female donors of northern European ancestry used a commercial skin exfoliation product (PedEgg™) on their hands and fingers to collect epidermal skin material. Three (3) mg of each individual skin sample was transferred to one new protein LoBind microcetrifuge tube (Eppendorf) to prepare a pooled sample of all individuals. For each tube containing 3 mg of skin, 300 μL of either RapiGest or ProteaseMax at a concentration of 0.1% (w/v) or 0.25% (w/v) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added directly to the skin sample. To extract proteins, samples were lysed by probe sonication for 1 minute, heated at 95 °C for 5 minutes (except for samples dissolved in ProteaseMAX, which should not be heated above 85 °C), cooled on ice for 1 minute, and finally vortexed for 5 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 30 minutes to pellet undissolved skin material. Supernatants were then transferred to new LoBind tubes and protein concentrations were measured using a Qubit protein assay on a Thermo Fisher Qubit fluorometer per the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins were reduced by addition of 5.0 μL of 5.0 mg/mL dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 65 °C for 15 minutes. The reduced disulfide bonds were alkylated by addition of 5.0 μL of 15.0 mg/mL iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Trypsin (Promega) was reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, added at a 1:30 w/w ratio to the protein sample based on measured Qubit values. To compare the effect of incubation time and temperature on the enzymatic digestion efficiency, samples were then incubated for either 3 or 16 hours (overnight) at either 37 °C or 50 °C. Following trypsin enzymatic digestion, RapiGest was precipitated by addition of 5% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. The final tryptic peptide samples were vaccum-dried and after evaporation, were reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were obtained via the Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v1.4) using the Sequest search algorithm against a FASTA file based on the UniProt human database. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two (2) missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionines and deamidation of asparagines and glutamines were all set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) control was performed using Percolator at a threshold of 1% for peptide spectral match (PSM), peptide, and protein identifications. Protein groups were filtered only to include a minimum of two peptides per protein group at 1% FDR. For statistical analysis, outputs of Proteome Discoverer were further processed and summarized using Python scripts (v3.7) and RforProteomics and DEP packages in R (v3.5.3).

### Publication Abstract
We present an efficient protein extraction and in-solution enzymatic digestion protocol optimized for mass spectrometry-based proteomics studies of human skin samples. Human skin cells are a proteinaceous matrix that can enable forensic identification of individuals. We performed a systematic optimization of proteomic sample preparation for a protein-based human forensic identification application. Digestion parameters, including incubation duration, temperature, and the type and concentration of surfactant, were systematically varied to maximize digestion completeness. Through replicate digestions, parameter optimization was performed to maximize repeatability and increase the number of identified peptides and proteins. Final digestion conditions were selected based on the parameters that yielded the greatest percent of peptides with zero missed tryptic cleavages, which benefit the analysis of genetically variable peptides (GVPs). We evaluated the final digestion conditions for identification of GVPs by applying MS-based proteomics on a mixed-donor sample. The results were searched against a human proteome database appended with a database of GVPs constructed from known non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that occur at known population frequencies. The aim of this study was to demonstrate the potential of our proteomics sample preparation for future implementation of GVP analysis by forensic laboratories to facilitate human identification. SIGNIFICANCE: Genetically variable peptides (GVPs) can provide forensic evidence that is complementary to traditional DNA profiling and be potentially used for human identification. An efficient protein extraction and reproducible digestion method of skin proteins is a key contributor for downstream analysis of GVPs and further development of this technology in forensic application. In this study, we optimized the enzymatic digestion conditions, such as incubation time and temperature, for skin samples. Our study is among the first attempts towards optimization of proteomics sample preparation for protein-based skin identification in forensic applications such as touch samples. Our digestion method employs RapiGest (an acid-labile surfactant), trypsin enzymatic digestion, and an incubation time of 16&#xa0;h at 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C.

### Keywords
Proteomics; sample preparation; protein extraction; trypsin digestion; surfactants; human forensics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Campus Chemistry Instrument Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA  The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA

### Submitter
Maryam Baniasad

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Alan Freitas
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Campus Chemistry Instrument Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA  The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA


