### Accession
PXD005419

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid gut LC-MSMS

### Description
Huanglongbing, or citrus greening disease, has devastated the citrus industry. It is associated with the gram negative bacterium Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) that can be transmitted by Diaphorina citri, the Asian citrus psyllid. For transmission to occur, CLas must cross the gut of the ACP to circulate through the insect body. The insect gut is the first site of widespread interactions between the CLas and the ACP and forms a barrier to transmission. To investigate the effect of CLas exposure on this dynamic interface, we performed RNAseq and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyze the transcriptome and proteome respectively of dissected ACP guts. We found changes in iron metabolism, insecticide resistance, immune system, and apoptosis. We identified 83 long non-coding RNAs that are responsive to CLas, two of which have no homology to other organisms in NCBI. We also determined that Wolbachia, a symbiont of the ACP, undergoes protein regulation when CLas is present. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed that Wolbachia and CLas can inhabit the same ACP gut cell, but do not co-localize. These data provide a snapshot of the ACP gut under normal and CLas-exposed conditions, and provide tools to better understand the insect vector of the citrus greening pathosystem.

### Sample Protocol
Gut tissue from adult psyllids was divided into replicate samples of 250 each and collected using centrifugation and re-suspended in 10% TCA in acetone. Tissue was disrupted for two rounds of 10 sec each using a Branson 250 digital sonifier at 10% total amplitude. Total protein was precipitated at -20°C overnight. The precipitated proteins were reconstituted with proteaseMAX surfactant (Promega, Madison, WI). Protein concentration was quantified using a Bradford Assay and confirmed using densitometry on 10% polyacrylamide gels by comparing to a BSA loading control. Proteins were reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 55°C for 20 min, then alkylated with 33mM methyl methanethiosulfonate at room temperature for 20 min. Each sample containing 200mg of protein was digested using 4mg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. The digested protein was concentrated using a vacuum concentrator for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data was searched against a combined database described previously (28) containing predicted proteins from D. citri, its endosymbionts Carsonella, Proftella, Wolbachia as well as CLas using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The search parameters allowed for fixed methylthio modification and variable modifications (methionine oxidation; asparagine, glutamine deamidation). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Raw files were converted to Mascot Generic Format files using MSConvert in Proteowizard and used as input files for Mascot Daemon. Peptides were identified at a 95% threshold with a 0.03% decoy false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were identified with a 99% threshold and 0.6% decoy FDR with a minimum of 2 matching peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Huanglongbing, or citrus greening disease, is an economically devastating bacterial disease of citrus. It is associated with infection by the gram-negative bacterium Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas). CLas is transmitted by Diaphorina citri, the Asian citrus psyllid (ACP). For insect transmission to occur, CLas must be ingested during feeding on infected phloem sap and cross the gut barrier to gain entry into the insect vector. To investigate the effects of CLas exposure at the gut-pathogen interface, we performed RNAseq and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyze the transcriptome and proteome, respectively, of ACP gut tissue. CLas exposure resulted in changes in pathways involving the TCA cycle, iron metabolism, insecticide resistance and the insect's immune system. We identified 83 long non-coding RNAs that are responsive to CLas, two of which appear to be specific to the ACP. Proteomics analysis also enabled us to determine that Wolbachia, a symbiont of the ACP, undergoes proteome regulation when CLas is present. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed that Wolbachia and CLas inhabit the same ACP gut cells, but do not co-localize within those cells. Wolbachia cells are prevalent throughout the gut epithelial cell cytoplasm, and Wolbachia titer is more variable in the guts of CLas exposed insects. CLas is detected on the luminal membrane, in puncta within the gut epithelial cell cytoplasm, along actin filaments in the gut visceral muscles, and rarely, in association with gut cell nuclei. Our study provides a snapshot of how the psyllid gut copes with CLas exposure and provides information on pathways and proteins for targeted disruption of CLas-vector interactions at the gut interface.

### Keywords
Citrus, Lc-msms, Wolbachia, Gut, Psyllid, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Diaphorina citri, Acp

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Angela Kruse

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


