### Accession
PXD018337

### Title
Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles from Plasmodium vivax patients signal spleen fibroblasts via NF-kB facilitating parasite cytoadherence

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are major components of circulating plasma holding insights into pathological processes. Here, we demonstrate high levels of EVs in plasma from patients with Plasmodium vivax (PvEVs), the most widely distributed human malaria parasite. Moreover, mass spectrometry analysis identified parasite proteins in PvEVs and their in vivo distribution demonstrated major spleen tropism. PvEVs were preferentially taken up by human spleen fibroblasts (hSFs) and this uptake induced specific and dose-dependent upregulation of ICAM-1 associated with the translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus. After activation of hSFs by PvEVs, P. vivax-infected reticulocytes from patients showed specific adhesion properties reversed by inhibiting NF-kB translocation to the nucleus. Together, these data provide novel physiological EV-based insights into the mechanisms of human malaria pathology and support the existence of P. vivax-adherent parasite subpopulations in the microvasculature of the human spleen

### Sample Protocol
EVs from plasma samples of healthy donors and P. vivax patients were isolated by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). Three SEC fractions from samples of 10 P. vivax patients and of 10 healthy donors were individually pooled. Pools were processed for protein extraction and tryptic digestion. One microgram of each sample was analyzed by LCMS with a 90 minute gradient and in data-dependent-acquisition mode in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired with XCalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data files were analyzed with the search algorithm Mascot v2.5.1 (http://www.matrixscience.com) in the Proteome Discoverer Software V2.0 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a customized protein P. v 348 ivax database including all sequences from the strains deposited at UniProt and the UniProt human database (November 2016). Peptides were filtered based on: i) minimum peptide length of 7; (ii) maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins of 1%; (iii) minimum peptides per protein of 1 and minimum unique peptides per protein of 1; (iv) minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40; (v) main search error of 4 ppm. The filtered list of human proteins were compared to the public extracellular vesicle

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human malaria parasite. Previous studies have shown that circulating microparticles during P. vivax acute attacks are indirectly associated with severity. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are therefore major components of circulating plasma holding insights into pathological processes. Here, we demonstrate that plasma-derived EVs from Plasmodium vivax patients (PvEVs) are preferentially uptaken by human spleen fibroblasts (hSFs) as compared to the uptake of EVs from healthy individuals. Moreover, this uptake induces specific upregulation of ICAM-1 associated with the translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus. After this uptake, P. vivax-infected reticulocytes obtained from patients show specific adhesion properties to hSFs, reversed by inhibiting NF-kB translocation to the nucleus. Together, these data provide physiological EV-based insights into the mechanisms of human malaria pathology and support the existence of P. vivax-adherent parasite subpopulations in the microvasculature of the human spleen.

### Keywords
Plasma, Plasmodium vivax, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG/UPF, Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG/UPF, Barcelona, Spain


