### Accession
PXD012519

### Title
wheat, pollen, MALDI-TOF/TOF-MSMS

### Description
In order to better understand chemical hybridizing agent (CHA) SQ-1-induced pollen abortion in wheat better, comparative proteomic analyses were conducted. A total of 61 proteins showed statistically significant differences in abundance, among which, 18 proteins were highly abundant and 43 proteins were less abundant in CHA-SQ-1 treated plants. Here, 60 proteins were successfully identified using MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. These proteins were found to be involved in pollen maturation. Interactions between these proteins were predicted using bioinformatics analysis. Gene ontology and pathway analyses revealed that the majority of the identified proteins were involved in diverse biological processes. These results provide information for the molecular events (carbohydrate metabolism and energy metabolism) underlying CHA-SQ-1-induced pollen abortion and may serve as an additional guide for practical hybrid breeding.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The pollen protein was extracted with TCA/acetone methods. Briefly, pollen gains were ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen. This powder was then suspended in -20°C pre-cooled solution of 10% TCA, 0.07% β-ME and 1 mM PMFS and kept at -20°C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellets were rinsed with a pre-cooled acetone solution containing 0.07% (v/v) β-ME and 1 mM PMSF. They were then centrifuged at 25 000 × g for 30 min. Three rounds of rinsing and centrifugation were performed. Then the vacuum-dried pellets were dissolved in lysis solution containing 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, 65 mM DTT, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, and 0.5% (v/v) Bio-Lyte (Bio-Rad, USA) and 0.001% (w/v) bromophenol blue. Insoluble materials were centrifuged out, and protein concentration was determined using a Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit II (Bio-Rad, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  Approximately 550 μg of protein was separated by loading the sample onto a 17 cm pH 4–7 linear pH gradient IPG strip (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was then subjected to electrophoresis on the IPGphor apparatus (Protean IEF Cell; Bio-Rad, USA) at 80 kV-h. The second electrophoretic dimension was performed using 12% SDS-PAGE. The gels were stained with CBB-G250. There were three independent biological replicates per sample. Image analysis The stained gels were imaged using a PowerLook 2100XL scanner (UMAX, Taiwan, China) and analyzed using PDQuest 2-DE 8.0.1 (Bio-Rad, USA). Analysis was based on total densities of gels as percent volume, and spots were considered to have significant differences in expression if the mean abundance varied more than 1.5-fold (P <0.05) as indicated by the t test. MS analysis  DAPs detected in stained gels were selected manually and excised for protein identification. Specifically, it was performed after destaining, reduction, and alkylation, and executed by incubation at 37 °C for 16 h in trypsin solution. All samples were subjected to MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectroscopy on a 5800 MALDI Time of Flight (TOF)/TOFTM analyzer (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA). Mass spectra were acquired by TOF/TOFTM Series ExplorerTM Software (version 4.1, AB Sciex) that recorded across a range of mass from 700 to 4000 Da with a focus on 1700 Da.

### Data Protocol
All of the MS/MS data were checked against the NCBInr database using the Mascot search engine (www.matrix science.com) with the taxonomy parameter set to green plants. Other parameters were as follows: enzyme of trypsin, one missed cleavage site, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys), variable modification of Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and oxidation (Met), peptide tolerance of 100 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.3 Da, and peptide charge of 1+.  For positive identification, the peptides were considered to be identified when the scoring value exceeded the identity or extensive homology threshold score of identity value, as calculated by Mascot, based on the MOWSE score. Sequences of proteins identified as unknown, hypothetical, or of uncharacterized function served as queries in a search for their homologues using the BLASTP algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
In plants, pollen grain transfers the haploid male genetic material from anther to stigma, both between flowers (cross-pollination) and within the same flower (self-pollination). In order to better understand chemical hybridizing agent (CHA) SQ-1-induced pollen abortion in wheat, comparative cytological and proteomic analyses were conducted. Results indicated that pollen grains underwent serious structural injury, including cell division abnormality, nutritional deficiencies, pollen wall defect and pollen grain malformations in the CHA-SQ-1-treated plants, resulting in pollen abortion and male sterility. A total of 61 proteins showed statistically significant differences in abundance, among which 18 proteins were highly abundant and 43 proteins were less abundant in CHA-SQ-1 treated plants. 60 proteins were successfully identified using MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. These proteins were found to be involved in pollen maturation and showed a change in the abundance of a battery of proteins involved in multiple biological processes, including pollen development, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, stress response, protein metabolism. Interactions between these proteins were predicted using bioinformatics analysis. Gene ontology and pathway analyses revealed that the majority of the identified proteins were involved in carbohydrate and energy metabolism. Accordingly, a protein-protein interaction network involving in pollen abortion was proposed. These results provide information for the molecular events underlying CHA-SQ-1-induced pollen abortion and may serve as an additional guide for practical hybrid breeding.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof/tof-msms, Pollen, Wheat

### Affiliations
Yangtze University
College of Agriculture/Hubei Key Laboratory of Waterlogging Disaster and Agricultural Use of Wetland, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, Hubei 434025, China

### Submitter
Shuping Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Shuping Wang
College of Agriculture/Hubei Key Laboratory of Waterlogging Disaster and Agricultural Use of Wetland, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, Hubei 434025, China


