### Accession
PXD000274

### Title
Redox proteomics in NO-mediated protection on hypoxic cardiomyocyte

### Description
We developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative approach using a set of novel iodoacetyl-based cysteine-reactive isobaric tags (iodoTMT) endowed with unique irreversible Cys-reactivities to differentially quantify the multiple redox-modified forms of a Cys site in the original cellular context. The established method was than applied to map global Cys-redoxomic regulation in NO-mediated ischemic cardioprotection. Upon cell lysis, iodoacetamide was first added to the cell lysates to block free thiols. Reversible Cys modifications were then selectively reduced and labeled by different isobaric sets of iodoTMT. After tryptic digestion, the iodoTMT-labeled peptides were immuno-enriched, and analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with nanoACQUITY (Waters). All MS and MS/MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using the Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) with the following constraints: only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites; taxonomy: Rattus; and mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.05 Da for the fragment ions. iodoTMT labeled (C), carbamidomethyl (C), deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and acetyl (protein N-term) were specified as dynamic modifications. False discovery rates were calculated by target-decoy strategy with or without using Mascot Percolator. All peptide hits were filtered with a 1% FDR cutoff.

### Sample Protocol
For examining the NO-mediated protective effects on hypoxic cardiomyocyte, 200mM of IAM was included in lysis buffer during cell lysis. After removing the cell debris, proteins were taken from each sample individually and IAM blocking was continued by adding three volumes of HENS buffer containing 100 mM of IAM and incubated at 37째C for 1h. Excess reagents were remived by acetone precipitation. S-nitrosylated thiols were specifically reduced and labeled by resuspending protein pellets in HENS containing 20 mM of ascorbate and 1 mM of iodoTMT1 reagents carrying the desirable reporter ions and incubated at 37째C for 2h. After removing the excess reagents again with acetone precipitation, all other remaining reversible modified thiols were reduced and labeled by reacting with 5mM of TCEP and 1mM of iodoTMT2 carrying a distinct set of reporter ions different from iodoTMT1, at 37째C for 1h. Upon completion of labeling, all samples to be analyzed were mixed. Acetone precipitation was performed again and the resulting pellet was dissolved in 25mM of ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, containing 0.5% of RapiGest SF (Waters), followed by adding sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37째C overnight. The iodoTMT-labeled peptides were immunocaptured following the manufacturer's instruction and dried in SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (20110531/529056 sequences entries) database using the Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) with the following constraints: only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites; taxonomy: Rattus; and mass accuracy of 10?ppm for the parent ion and 0.05?Da for the fragment ions. iodoTMT or cysTMT-labeled (C), carbamidomethyl (C), deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and acetyl (protein N-term) were specified as dynamic modifications. FDRs were calculated by target-decoy strategy with or without using Mascot Percolator. All peptide hits were filtered with a 1% FDR cutoff. All reporter ion areas were calculated by Proteome Discoverer with the integration tolerance of 20?ppm. Missing values were replaced with minimal intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation, Redox cysteine modifications, Hypoxia, Mass spectrometry, Redox-proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Kay-Hooi Khoo
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


