### Accession
PXD030578

### Title
Reanalysis of publicly available medium size protein complex data set with MaxLynx

### Description
Reanalysis of the publicly available medium size protein complex data set by Kokic and co-workers, Nat Commun. 2019 (PXD013947)

### Sample Protocol
The data set was prepared as described in Kokic and co-workers, Nat Commun. 2019 (PXD013947).

### Data Protocol
We re-processed a publicly available data set of medium-sized complex (PXD013947). The search database that was provided by Kokic and co-workers contains 9 protein sequences. We ran MaxLynx and the recent pLink2.3.9 (Chen et. al Nat Comm 2019). The common search settings were as follows: Oxidation of methionine with and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were taken as variable and fixed modification. The cross linker was BS3. The minimum peptide length was six and the maximum peptide mass 6000 Da. Trypsin was selected as enzyme with maximum three missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment tolerances were 10ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the MaxLynx-specific search settings, higher charges and losses addition were disabled for the MS/MS analyzer.  Results were compared at separate FDR=1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxquant, Cross-linking, Maxlynx

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Research Group Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Cox
Research Group Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany


