### Accession
PXD018508

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of virulence proteins in Cronobacter sakazakii based on data-independent acquisition coupled with LC-MS/MS

### Description
high-virulence strain SAKA80220 and the low-virulence strain SAKA80221 with the same sequence type (ST) but with distinct virulence effects were selected for identification of differentially expressed proteins using Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) proteomic analysis. A total of 2203 proteins were identified and quantified.

### Sample Protocol
A modified phenol-based protein extraction method was used (Wu et al., 2014). Cell pellets were mixed and ground for 10 min with 6 mL of protein extraction buffer (500 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0), 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl, 2% mercaptoethanol and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, HCl pH 8.0). An equal volume of saturated phenol was added, and the samples were thoroughly ground for another 10 min. For better dissolution, the protein solution was ultrasonicated for 5 min at 4°C before centrifugation at 5500* g for 10 min. The protein-containing phenol solution was aspirated into a new ice-cold centrifuge tube, mixed with 6 mL of extraction buffer and centrifuged at 5000*g for 10 min at 4°C. The phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube with ice-cold acetone and stored at -20°C overnight. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 5000* g for 10 min at 4°C, and then, the protein pellets were cleaned twice with 2 mL of ice-cold acetone before centrifugation at 5000* g for 5 min at 4°C. Finally, the protein concentration was quantified using the Bradford method. A total of 100 ug of protein from each sample was digested using the FASP method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Disulfide bonds were cleaved and the sites were blocked using 10 mM dithiothreitol(DTT) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA),respectively. The proteins were then transferred to a 10-kDa filter and cleaned sequentially using 8 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 12000*g and 20°C. Trypsin was added to each sample at a ratio of 1:50(mass/mass), and the proteins were digested in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C for 16 h. A mixed sample was prepared with equal amount of digested peptides from each sample and separated into three fractions using a modified high-pH reversed-phase (high-pH RP) method (Dimayacyac-Esleta et al., 2015). Briefly, a homemade C18 stage tip was cleaned using 80% ACN/H2O after activation with methanol. Then, the stage tip was equilibrated with ammonium hydroxide (pH 10) before peptide loading. A series of ACN/ammonium hydroxide (pH 10) buffers—6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, 35% and 50%—were utilized to elute the peptides. For generation of the spectral library, peptides from each eluted sample were mixed acquired three times with data dependent acquisition mode using Q Exactive HF (Bremen, Thermo Fisher). And then, the peptide mixtures were separated on an EasyNano LC1000 system (Thermo, San Jose, USA) using a homemade C18 column (3um, 75um*15cm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A 120-minute linear gradient was set as follows: 5% B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile/H2O)/95% A (0.1% FA in H2O) to 8% B in 10 min, 8% B to 25% B in 83 min, 25% B to 45% B in 21 min, 45% B to 95% B in 1 min and maintaining at 95% B for 5 min. For data acquisition, a top 20 scan mode with an MS1 scan range of 400-1200 m/z was employed, and the other parameters were set as follows: the MS1 and MS2 resolutions were set to 120 K and 30 K, respectively; automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 and MS2 were set to 3e6 and 1e6, respectively; the isolation window was 2.0 Th; the normalized collision energy was 27 eV; and the dynamic exclusion time was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were searched against the UniProt protein database for C. sakazakii using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo, San Jose, USA). The protein sequence was affixed with the iRT fusion protein sequence (Biognosys). The parameter of search engine SequestHT was set as the following: Digestion: trypsin; Miss cleavages: 2; Variable modifications: oxidation (M), Deamidated(N, Q); Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl(C); Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; Peptide FDR: less than 1%; Protein FDR: q value less than 1%. The search results were transferred into a spectral library using Spectronaut 10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). Only high-confidence peptides were used for the generation of the spectral library. Fragment ions within a mass range of 300-1800 m/z was retained, and peptides with less than three fragment ions were removed. Each sample treated with the same amount of iRT was analyzed by the DIA method. For DIA acquisition, the procedure consisted of one full MS1 scan with a resolution of 60 K using an AGC of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms; MS2 scan with a resolution of 30 K using an AGC of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. All the LC conditions were exactly the same as those used for DDA, which are listed above. DIA raw data was processed using Spectronaut 10; the default, which includes: peak detection; dynamic iRT; correction factor 1; interference correction and cross run normalization, enabled; and all peptides were filtered using Q value<0.01, was used for protein identification and quantitation. Average quantity of fragment ion areas from top 3 peptides was employed to compare protein abundance between samples. Screening of significantly differentially expressed proteins was performed with abundance ratios >3 and <0.33 and student test p-value<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cronobacter sakazakii</i> is foodborne pathogen that causes serious illnesses such as necrotizing enterocolitis, meningitis and septicemia in infants. However, the virulence determinants and mechanisms of pathogenicity of these species remain unclear. In this study, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) was performed on 34 <i>C. sakazakii</i> strains and two strains with the same sequence type (ST) but distinct adhesion/invasion capabilities were selected for identification of differentially expressed proteins using data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomic analysis. A total of 2,203 proteins were identified and quantified. Among these proteins, 210 exhibited differential expression patterns with abundance ratios &#x2265;3 or &#x2264;0.33 and <i>P</i> values &#x2264;0.05. Among these 210 proteins, 67 were expressed higher, and 143 were expressed lower in <i>C. sakazakii</i> SAKA80220 (strongly adhesive/invasive strain) compared with <i>C. sakazakii</i> SAKA80221 (weakly adhesive/invasive strain). Based on a detailed analysis of the differentially expressed proteins, the highly expressed genes involved in flagellar assembly, lipopolysaccharide synthesis, LuxS/AI-2, energy metabolic pathways and iron-sulfur cluster may be associated with the adhesion/invasion capability of <i>C. sakazakii</i>. To verify the accuracy of the proteomic results, real-time qPCR was used to analyze the expression patterns of some genes at the transcriptional level, and consistent results were observed. This study, for the first time, used DIA proteomic to investigate potential adhesion/invasion related factors as a useful reference for further studies on the pathogenic mechanism of <i>C. sakazakii</i>.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cronobacter sakazakii

### Affiliations
Tianjin university of science and technology

### Submitter
Ping Li

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Li
Tianjin university of science and technology


