### Accession
PXD036518

### Title
Oilseed protein isolates as albumin alternatives for muscle cell culture media

### Description
The development of cost-effective serum-free media is essential for the development of cell-cultured meat technologies. While some effective media have been developed for relevant cells (e.g., bovine muscle stem cells), these rely on costly recombinant albumin which is too expensive for a scalable system. In this study, we explored bulk protein isolates from rapeseed, cottonseed, and soybean as alternatives to recombinant albumin, and show that rapeseed protein isolate (RPI) is effective in replacing albumin for the serum-free culture of bovine muscle stem cells. We additionally performed proteomic characterization of the three oilseed protein isolates used in the study to compare how proteomic differences might be associated with functional differences between these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Oilseed protein isolates were prepared by extracting proteins in alkali solution (pH 12.5), precipitating proteins in acidic conditions (pH 4.5), resolubilizing those proteins that were soluble at physiological pH (pH 7.2), and concentrating protein solutions via ultrafiltration (3 kDa MWCO). This resulted in concentration protein solutions.  Proteomic analysis was performed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Koch Institute Proteomics core. First, Proteins were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 10 minutes at 95°C and then alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 25°C in the dark. Proteins were than digested with trypsin on S-trap micro columns (Protifi #C02-micro-80) per the manufacturer’s instruction. Next, the tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Ultimate 3000) using a Thermo PepMap RSLC C18 column (2um tip, 75umx50cm #ES903) over a 100-minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using an Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient conditions were 1% B (0-10 min at 300 nL/min), 1% B (10-15 min, 300 nL/min to 200 nL/min), 1-7% B (15-20 min, 200nL/min), 7-25% B (20-54.8 min, 200nL/min), 25-36 B (54.8-65 min, 200nL/min), 36-80% B (65-65.5 min, 200 nL/min), 80% B (65.5-70 min, 200nL/min), 80-1% B (70-70.1 min, 200nL/min), 1% B (70.1-90 min, 200nL/min). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 120,000 across 375-1600 m/z and maximum IT 25 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for as many precursor ions in a two second cycle with a NCE of 28, dynamic exclusion of 20 s and resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo). Sequest search parameters were: 20 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.05 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10-plex modification on the lysines and peptide N-termini; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation, methionine loss at the N-terminus of the protein, acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein and also Met-loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus. For peptide groups data only PSMs with a Xcorr score greater than 2, isolation interference less than or equal to 30 and a deltaM(ppm) between -3 and 3 were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soybean protein isolate, Cottonseed protein isolate, Serum-free cell culture, Culture media, Albumin, Rapeseed protein isolate, Cultured meat

### Affiliations
Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA
Tufts University

### Submitter
Andrew Stout

### Lab Head
Dr David L. Kaplan
Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA


