### Accession
PXD004089

### Title
Comprehensive characterization of Minichromosome Maintenance Complex (MCM) protein interactions using affinity and proximity purifications coupled to mass spectrometry.

### Description
This project is the complete interactome of the Minichromosome Maintenance (MCM) complex by using AP-MS and BioID approaches for all the different MCM proteins. Overall, our analysis identified unique and shared interaction partners and proteins enriched for distinct biological processes including DNA replication, DNA repair and cell cycle regulation. Furthermore, we mapped the changes in protein interactions of the MCM complex in response to DNA damage, identifying a new role for this complex in DNA repair. In summary, we demonstrate the complementarity of these approaches for the characterization of protein interactions within the MCM complex.

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion  For each immunoprecipitations, proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS– PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Life Technologies) and visualized by Coomassie staining (Simply Blue Safe Stain, Life Technologies). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 8 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation, Wisconsin, USA). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 100% acetonitrile, lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid. Streptavidin purification from SILAC labelled U2OS cells grown in each SILAC medium were harvested separately by scraping in PBS and the cell pellets were lysed in High salt buffer (1% NP-40, 50 mM Tris ph7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM NaF, 10% glycerol, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) for 10 minutes on ice. The lysates were then sonicated 3 times for 5 second and centrifugated for 10 minutes at 13,000g at 4 oC.  The lysates from the three SILAC conditions were combined and an equal amount of proteins were incubated with Streptavidin high Performance beads (GE healthcare) for 2 hours at 4 oC. Beads were then washed three times with Hight-salt buffer and five times with 20mM NH4HCO. The samples processed for on-beads digestion.  On-beads digestion For each immunoprecipitations, proteins on beads were reduced in 10 mM DTT, boiled and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation, Winconsin, USA). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 60% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid, lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS  Trypsin digested peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 10 l of sample (a total of 2 g) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid was loaded with a constant flow 9 of 4 l/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment peptides were eluted off onto a PepMap C18 nano column (75 m x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 minutes with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 oC. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Quantification and Bioinformatics Analysis Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.4.1.2 employing the Human Uniprot database (16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. A mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions. The re-quantify option was selected to calculate the ratio for isotopic patterns not assembled in SILAC pairs as often observed during pulldown experiments. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. A minimum of 2 peptides were quantified for each protein. Protein isoforms and proteins that cannot be distinguished based on the peptides identified are grouped and displayed on a single line with multiple accession numbers.

### Publication Abstract
The extensive identification of protein-protein interactions under different conditions is an important challenge to understand the cellular functions of proteins. Here we use and compare different approaches including affinity purification and purification by proximity coupled to mass spectrometry to identify protein complexes. We explore the complete interactome of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex by using both approaches for all of the different MCM proteins. Overall, our analysis identified unique and shared interaction partners and proteins enriched for distinct biological processes including DNA replication, DNA repair, and cell cycle regulation. Furthermore, we mapped the changes in protein interactions of the MCM complex in response to DNA damage, identifying a new role for this complex in DNA repair. In summary, we demonstrate the complementarity of these approaches for the characterization of protein interactions within the MCM complex.

### Keywords
Bioid, Ap-ms, Mcm complex

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke


