### Accession
PXD013506

### Title
Proteomic comparison of Prochlorococcus marinus ecotypes MED4, MIT9319 and SS120.

### Description
Prochlorococcus marinus is a highly abundant picocyanobacterium in Earth’s oceans and therefore a significant contributor to global primary production. This organism exists as different ecotypes, each occupying particular environments in the euphotic zone that differ in both solar penetration and nutrient levels. The ecotypes analysed here were isolated from depths of 5 m (MED4), 135 m (MIT9313) and 120 m (SS120) and cultured at low illumination. MED4, adapted to high light levels closer to the surface, was compared at both low and high illumination. In contrast to other cyanobacteria such as Synechocystis with a dominance of photosystem I (PSI) over photosystem II (PSII) complexes in the thylakoid membranes, MED4 and MIT9313 showed about equal levels. In MED4, the relative levels were almost the same in both the high and low light cultures. SS120 thylakoids contained a lower cytochrome b6f content and around two-fold more PSII than PSI. Additionally a significantly higher abundance of light-harvesting Pcb proteins was found in SS120 than the other ecotypes. This proteomic comparison was employed in conjunction with thylakoid membrane AFM imaging to rationalize the strategies these ecotypes use to survive in the different oceanic environments.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes were prepared by sucrose density gradient centrifugation of cell lysate. Proteins were extracted from the membranes by precipitation using a 2-D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare) and the resultant pellets dissolved at 5 µg/µL in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 37 C for 30 min and S-alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 30 min. Protein digestion was performed with (1:25 w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) for 2 h at 37 C. After 8.5-fold dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 the digestion was continued overnight at 37 C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 0.5% TFA and the resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 3 h at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching Prochlorococcus marinus proteome databases (MED4: www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001026, 1924 proteins, downloaded on 17-03-16), MIT9313: www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001423, 2830 proteins, downloaded on 31-10-16 and SS120: www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001420, 1881 proteins, downloaded on 17-03-16) using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.16) with the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) option selected and all other parameters as per default. Protein identifications and associated iBAQ intensities were processed using Perseus (v. 1.6.0.7). Normalization was by a factor derived from the ion intensity of the trypsin auto-proteolysis peptide VATVSLPR present in all analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Prochlorococcus is a major contributor to primary production, and globally the most abundant photosynthetic genus of picocyanobacteria because it can adapt to highly stratified low-nutrient conditions that are characteristic of the surface ocean. Here, we examine the structural adaptations of the photosynthetic thylakoid membrane that enable different Prochlorococcus ecotypes to occupy high-light, low-light and nutrient-poor ecological niches. We used atomic force microscopy to image the different photosystem I (PSI) membrane architectures of the MED4 (high-light) Prochlorococcus ecotype grown under high-light and low-light conditions in addition to the MIT9313 (low-light) and SS120 (low-light) Prochlorococcus ecotypes grown under low-light conditions. Mass spectrometry quantified the relative abundance of PSI, photosystem II (PSII) and cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>f complexes and the various Pcb proteins in the thylakoid membrane. Atomic force microscopy topographs and structural modelling revealed a series of specialized PSI configurations, each adapted to the environmental niche occupied by a particular ecotype. MED4 PSI domains were loosely packed in the thylakoid membrane, whereas PSI in the low-light MIT9313 is organized into a tightly packed pseudo-hexagonal lattice that maximizes harvesting and trapping of light. There are approximately equal levels of PSI and PSII in MED4 and MIT9313, but nearly twofold more PSII than PSI in SS120, which also has a lower content of cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>f complexes. SS120 has a different tactic to cope with low-light levels, and SS120 thylakoids contained hundreds of closely packed Pcb-PSI supercomplexes that economize on the extra iron and nitrogen required to assemble PSI-only domains. Thus, the abundance and widespread distribution of Prochlorococcus reflect the strategies that various ecotypes employ for adapting to limitations in light and nutrient levels.

### Keywords
Cytochrome b6f, Prochlorococcus marinus, Pcb proteins, Photosystem i, Photosystem ii

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK.

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Neil Hunter
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK.


