### Accession
PXD039810

### Title
Translatome analyses by bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid labeling reveal that MR1-activated MAIT cells induce an M1 phenotype and antiviral programming in antigen-presenting monocytes_bicellular 3

### Description
MAIT cells are multifunctional innate-like effector cells recognizing bacterial-derived vitamin B metabolites presented by the non-polymorphic MHC class I related-1 molecule (MR1). Activated MAIT cells can exert regulatory, pro-inflammatory, or cytotoxic responses that enable the direct killing of infected cells. While tremendous progress regarding the multifaceted roles of MAIT cells has been made in the last decade, our understanding of the MR1-mediated responses of MAIT cells upon their interaction with other immune cells is still incomplete. Here, we performed the first translatome study of primary human MAIT cells interacting with THP-1 monocytes in a bicellular system. We analyzed the interaction between MAIT and THP-1 cells in the presence of the activating 5-OP-RU or the inhibitory Ac-6-FP MR1-ligand. Using bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) we were able to enrich selectively those proteins that were newly translated during MR1-dependent cellular interaction. Subsequently, newly translated proteins were measured cell-type-specifically by ultrasensitive proteomics to decipher the coinciding immune responses in both cell types. This strategy identified over 2,000 MAIT and 3,000 THP-1 active protein translations following MR-1 ligand stimulations. Translation of both cell types was more efficiently induced by 5-OP-RU in comparison to Ac-6-FP, which correlated with higher conjugation frequencies and CD3 polarization at immunological synapses. In addition to known effector responses, protein translations uncovered type I and type II Interferon-driven protein expression profiles in both 5-OP-RU-stimulated MAIT and THP-1 cells. Interestingly, the translatome of THP-1 macrophages suggested that activated MAIT cells can impact M1/M2 polarization in these cells. Indeed, gene and surface expression of CXCL10, IL-1, CD80, and CD206 confirmed an M1-like phenotype of macrophages being induced in the presence of 5-OP-RU-activated MAIT cells. Furthermore, we validated that the Interferon-driven translatome was accompanied by the induction of an antiviral phenotype in THP-1 cells, which were found able to suppress viral replication following conjugation with MR1-activated MAIT cells. In conclusion, BONCAT translatomics extended our knowledge of MAIT cell immune responses at the protein level and discovered that MR1-activated MAIT cells are sufficient to induce M1 polarization and an anti-viral program of macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
For translatome analysis of the bicellular system, we isolated MAIT cells from 6 healthy human donors by FACS as described above.  The labeling of proteins during their translation was realized by co-culturing 400,000 sorted MAIT cells and 1,000,000 THP-1 cells in 1 mM AHA medium (RPMI1640 without methionine supplemented with 1 mM AHA, 10% dialyzed FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin). Cells were treated with 50 ng/ml 5-OP-RU, 50 ng/ml Ac-6-FP, or a MOCK-control for 20 hours (7.5% CO2, 37 °C). For the monocellular system, equal cell numbers and stimulation conditions were used but MAIT cells of 4 different donors and 3 THP-1 replicates were cultured in absence of the respective other cell type.  After stimulation, an aliquot was taken for verification of MAIT/THP-1 cell viability and MAIT cell activation by flow cytometry as described above. MAIT and THP-1 cells from the bicellular system were separated by FACS as described for gene expression analyses by RT-qPCR above. Cells were lysed and AHA-containing proteins were enriched using the Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen™). Translated proteins were separated from resin beads using 10 μM MobiSpinColumn filters (MoBiTec) after tryptic digest. Peptides were further processed for proteomic analysis using single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3, Hughes et al., 2019). The binding of peptides to SP3 carboxylated beads was enabled using 95% Acetonitrile (ACN) while incubating the samples overnight at room temperature at 700 rpm. SP3 beads were washed with ACN and the supernatant was incubated again with SP3 beads overnight to ensure complete binding of all peptides. Beads were washed two times with ACN and air-dried at room temperature. Peptides were eluted from beads first with 2% DMSO and second with ddH2O. Samples were dried and solved in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid/ 3% ACN. Samples were ultracentrifuged for 20 minutes at 50,000xg before measuring them by LC-MS/MS on timsTOF™Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Application Version 6.2.0.7) coupled to the High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system EvosepOne (Evosep). The default method by EvosepOne for short gradients with 60 samples per day was used for HPLC separation (Bache et al. 2018). All spectra were acquired using Compass Data Analysis v5.3 (Bruker). The MS/MS raw data files were processed using PEAKS Studio 10.6 using Label-free Quantification (LFQ). Peptides were identified using the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot protein human database and contaminant database (Accessed Dec 2020, http://lotus1.gwdg.de/mpg/mmbc/maxquant _input.nsf/7994124a4298328fc125748d0048fee2/$FILE/contaminants.fasta). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. If not stated otherwise, default parameters of PEAKS Studio 10.6 were used. Parent and fragment mass error tolerance was set as 20 ppm/0.3 Da. Only peptides with a retention time between three and 21 min and a charge of [2-4] were selected for data analyses. Furthermore, only peptides with none or maximal one missed cleavage site and three variable posttranslational modifications were considered for protein identification and quantification. The main steps of the translatome workflow are also summarized in Supplementary Table S3.   The specificity of the Click-reaction (Enrichment controls) was validated by culturing MAIT cells and THP-1 cells in normal RPMI complete medium (no AHA) and used to determine low-confident/non-AHA-specific protein translations (see next chapter). The stimulation, sorting, and Click-Reaction were performed as described above.

### Data Protocol
Protein intensities, which were calculated by LFQ based on the top three peptides per protein, were processed with Perseus 1.6.15.0 and Rv4.0.2 (R Core Team 2022) in R studio (R Core Team 2022) with packages tidyverse (Wickham et al. 2019), openxlsx (Schauberger et al., 2021),  ggrepel (Slowikowski et al., 2021), rstatix (Kassambara 2021), ggpubr (Kassambara 2020), ggplot2 (Wickham 2016), tibble (Müller et al., 2021) (Accessed on Jan 2021). In brief, protein contaminants were excluded and data were grouped into the 3 stimulation conditions: unstimulated, 5-OP-RU, and Ac-6-FP. Protein translations were considered robust in primary MAIT and THP-1 cells, if protein groups were detected in at least 4 out of 6 donors (or 3 out of 4 donors in the monocellular system). Protein groups that were exclusively found in one condition were determined using Venn diagrams that were calculated with Perseus. To analyze the regulation of translated proteins, intensities of protein groups were log2-transformed and missing values were replaced from a normal distribution with default parameters of Perseus. Subsequently, fold changes (FCs) were calculated in comparison to unstimulated samples using the median of intensities per group. P-values were calculated using the Student’s paired t-test in Rv4.0.2. Proteins with a p-value≤0.05 and lg2(FC)>[1] were considered differentially regulated. Regulated protein translations were analyzed at the level of pathways using the Reactome database (Fabregat et al. 2018). Enrichment controls (no AHA) were processed as described before to determine proteins that were not AHA-selectively clicked. Proteins identified in those controls, which were equally regulated in the absence, and presence of AHA were considered low-confident protein translations. Low-confident protein translations were marked in red in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 and not included in pathway analysis and data interpretation. Pathway analysis was performed by analyzing differentially upregulated proteins (except low-confident proteins) using the Reactome database (Fabregat et al. 2018). Lowest p-values indicate the most affected pathways. Graphs and statistical analyses of proteomic results were completed using Rv4.0.2 in R studio.

### Publication Abstract
MAIT cells are multifunctional innate-like effector cells recognizing bacterial-derived vitamin B metabolites presented by the non-polymorphic MHC class I related protein 1 (MR1). However, our understanding of MR1-mediated responses of MAIT cells upon their interaction with other immune cells is still incomplete. Here, we performed the first translatome study of primary human MAIT cells interacting with THP-1 monocytes in a bicellular system. We analyzed the interaction between MAIT and THP-1 cells in the presence of the activating 5-OP-RU or the inhibitory Ac-6-FP MR1-ligand. Using bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) we were able to enrich selectively those proteins that were newly translated during MR1-dependent cellular interaction. Subsequently, newly translated proteins were measured cell-type-specifically by ultrasensitive proteomics to decipher the coinciding immune responses in both cell types. This strategy identified over 2,000 MAIT and 3,000 THP-1 active protein translations following MR1 ligand stimulations. Translation in both cell types was found to be increased by 5-OP-RU, which correlated with their conjugation frequency and CD3 polarization at MAIT cell immunological synapses in the presence of 5-OP-RU. In contrast, Ac-6-FP only regulated a few protein translations, including GSK3B, indicating an anergic phenotype. In addition to known effector responses, 5-OP-RU-induced protein translations uncovered type I and type II Interferon-driven protein expression profiles in both MAIT and THP-1 cells. Interestingly, the translatome of THP-1 cells suggested that activated MAIT cells can impact M1/M2 polarization in these cells. Indeed, gene and surface expression of <i>CXCL10</i>, <i>IL-1&#x3b2;</i>, CD80, and CD206 confirmed an M1-like phenotype of macrophages being induced in the presence of 5-OP-RU-activated MAIT cells. Furthermore, we validated that the Interferon-driven translatome was accompanied by the induction of an antiviral phenotype in THP-1 cells, which were found able to suppress viral replication following conjugation with MR1-activated MAIT cells. In conclusion, BONCAT translatomics extended our knowledge of MAIT cell immune responses at the protein level and discovered that MR1-activated MAIT cells are sufficient to induce M1 polarization and an anti-viral program of macrophages.

### Keywords
Translatome, Mr1-mediated mait cell activation, Proteomics, Antiviral, Boncat, Mait cell, M1 macrophage polarization

### Affiliations
Cellular Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany
HZI

### Submitter
Lothar Jaensch

### Lab Head
Dr Lothar Jaensch
Cellular Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany


