### Accession
PXD039049

### Title
Complement is activated by elevated IgG3 hexameric platforms and deposits C4b onto distinct antibody domains

### Description
IgG3 is unique among the IgG subclasses due to its extended hinge, allotypic diversity and enhanced effector functions, including highly efficient pathogen neutralization and complement activation. It is also underrepresented as an immunotherapeutic candidate, partly due to a lack of structural information. Here, we use cryoEM to solve structures of antigen-bound IgG3 alone and in complex with complement components. These structures reveal a propensity for IgG3-Fab clustering, which is possible due to the IgG3 specific flexible upper hinge region and may maximize pathogen neutralization by forming high density antibody arrays. IgG3 forms elevated hexameric Fc platforms that extend above the protein corona to maximize binding to receptors and the complement C1 complex, which here adopts a unique protease conformation that may precede C1 activation. Mass spectrometry revealed that C1 deposits C4b directly onto specific IgG3 residues proximal to the Fab domains. Structural analysis shows this to be caused by the height of the C1-IgG3 complex. Together, these data provide the first structural insights into the role of the unique IgG3 extended hinge, which will aid the development and design of upcoming immunotherapeutics based on IgG3.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands were subjected to reduction and alkylation (dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide) followed by in-gel trypsin (Worthington) digestion using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA). Peptides were extracted from the gel slices, lyophilized, dissolved in 100:0.1 water:formic acid (FA) v/v and subsequently analysed by on line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm). The gradient was run from 2-40% solvent B (20:80:0.1 water:acetonitrile:FA v/v/v) in 30 min. Solvent A was 100:0.1 water:FA v/v The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with a cycle time of 3 sec. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000 and the scan range 400-1,500, at an AGC target of 400,000 with maximum fill time of 50 ms. For MS2, precursors (charge stated 2-5) were selected using the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Th. Fragmentation was performed using HCD at a normalised collision energy at 32% and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion after n=1 was set, with an exclusion duration of 10 sec.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Subsequently, cross-linked peptides were identified using XlinkX v2.5 54 as a node in PD. The database consisted of five proteins (IgG1/3 light and heavy chains, human C4b). Trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 2 and 20 ppm, respectively. For the identification of thioester mediated crosslinked peptides, crosslinks between Q and S/T/K were defined (loss of NH3). Only crosslinked peptides between C4B and IgG1/3 with a score above 25 were selected for further analysis by manual interpretation of the MS/MS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
IgG3 is unique among the IgG subclasses due to its extended hinge, allotypic diversity and enhanced effector functions, including highly efficient pathogen neutralisation and complement activation. It is also underrepresented as an immunotherapeutic candidate, partly due to a lack of structural information. Here, we use cryoEM to solve structures of antigen-bound IgG3 alone and in complex with complement components. These structures reveal a propensity for IgG3-Fab clustering, which is possible due to the IgG3-specific flexible upper hinge region and may maximise pathogen neutralisation by forming high-density antibody arrays. IgG3 forms elevated hexameric Fc platforms that extend above the protein corona to maximise binding to receptors and the complement C1 complex, which here adopts a unique protease conformation that may precede C1 activation. Mass spectrometry reveals that C1 deposits C4b directly onto specific IgG3 residues proximal to the Fab domains. Structural analysis shows this to be caused by the height of the C1-IgG3 complex. Together, these data provide structural insights into the role of the unique IgG3 extended hinge, which will aid the development and design of upcoming immunotherapeutics based on IgG3.

### Keywords
Igg, Igg3, Cryoem

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands


