### Accession
PXD009157

### Title
Phosphodiesterase beta controls cAMP signalling during malaria parasite erythrocyte invasion

### Description
Cyclic nucleotide signalling is a major regulator of malaria parasite differentiation. Specific phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes are known to control cGMP levels in the parasite, but the mechanisms by with cAMP is regulated remain enigmatic. Here we show that P. falciparum PDEbeta translocates via the ER to an apical location and finally to the plasma membrane of merozoites within the segmented schizont. PDEbeta is essential for blood stage replication, with conditional gene disruption causing a profound invasion phenotype and rapid death of those merozoites that are able to invade a host erythrocyte. Importantly we also demonstrate that PDEbeta is able to hydrolyse both cAMP and cGMP. Loss of PDEbeta activity results in significantly elevated levels of cAMP which correlate temporally with the observed reduction in merozoite invasion. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis revealed a >2-fold increase in phosphorylation for >250 phosphosites following silencing of PfPDEbeta. These included a highly significant increase in phosphorylation at PKA substrate consensus sequences. Our results suggest that dysregulated phosphorylation of MyoA S19 and AMA1 S610 likely contributes to the PfPDEbeta knockout invasion phenotype, that PKG activity governs cAMP levels and PKA activation prior to merozoite egress, and that PfPDEbeta has an essential function in regulation cAMP levels in early intra-erythrocytic development in P. falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
3D7/DiCre/PDEbeta parasites were grown in RPMI-HEPES supplemented with 5% Albumax II and synchronised in 2-3 consecutive intra-erythrocytic cycles. 24 h post invasion, the culture was split in two and one treated with 100 nM rapamycin for 1-2 h, the other treated with DMSO. Mature cultures were harvested and cell lysed by sonication in 8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES buffer supplemented with benzonase, cOmplete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor. 350 µg of protein sample was reduced by 5 mM dithriothreitol, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and quenched with 7.5 mM dithriothreitol. Samples were diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to trypsin digestion. Peptides were desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge under vacuum and dried. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and the corresponding TMTsixplex (0.8 mg) label (resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile) was added. Hydroxylamine was added to quench the reaction, the samples mixed and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 1 M glycolic acid + 80% acetonitrile + 5% trifluoroacetic acid and added to titanium dioxide beads (5:1 (w/w) beads:protein), washed under acidic pH and eluted from the beads by adding 1% ammonium hydroxide, followed by 5% ammonium hydroxide and dried by vacuum centrifugation. One third of the material was desalted with the use of a C18 Stage Tip, and the other two-thirds was fractionated and desalted by the use of a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit.

### Data Protocol
An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was used for data acquisition. Desalted phosphopeptide mixtures were re-suspended in 25 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injected twice (10 µl per injection); high-pH fractionated phosphopeptide mixtures were re-suspended in 15 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injection once (10 µl). Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution (75 µm x 50 cm C18 column) with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) being the selected activation method. MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) was used for all data processing. The data were searched against UniProt extracted H. sapiens and P. falciparum proteome FASTA files. A decoy database containing reverse sequences was used to estimate false discovery rates and set the false discovery rate at 1%. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Reporter ion MS2 with the 6plex TMT isobaric labels was selected, Phospho(STY) was added as a variable modification, 'Filter labeled amino acids' was deselected, requantify was selected with the instruction to keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides within parameter groups and match between runs was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic nucleotide signalling is a major regulator of malaria parasite differentiation. Phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes are known to control cyclic GMP (cGMP) levels in the parasite, but the mechanisms by which cyclic AMP (cAMP) is regulated remain enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that Plasmodium falciparum phosphodiesterase &#x3b2; (PDE&#x3b2;) hydrolyses both cAMP and cGMP and is essential for blood stage viability. Conditional gene disruption causes a profound reduction in invasion of erythrocytes and rapid death of those merozoites that invade. We show that this dual phenotype results from elevated cAMP levels and hyperactivation of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Phosphoproteomic analysis of PDE&#x3b2;-null parasites reveals a &gt;2-fold increase in phosphorylation at over 200 phosphosites, more than half of which conform to a PKA substrate consensus sequence. We conclude that PDE&#x3b2; plays a critical role in governing correct temporal activation of PKA required for erythrocyte invasion, whilst suppressing untimely PKA activation during early intra-erythrocytic development.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Malaria, Pka, Tmt, Orbitrap, Camp

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK


