### Accession
PXD030459

### Title
Measurement of deaminated cytosine adducts in DNA  using a novel hybrid thymine DNA glycosylase

### Description
The hydrolytic deamination of cytosine and 5-methylcytosine drives many of the transition mutations observed in human cancer. The deamination-induced mutagenic intermediates are either uracil or thymine adducts mispaired with guanine. While a substantial array of methods exists to measure other types of DNA adducts, the cytosine deamination adducts pose unusual analytical problems and adequate methods to measure them have not yet been developed. We describe here a novel hybrid thymine DNA glycosylase, hyTDG, which is comprised of a 29-amino acid sequence from human thymine DNA glycosylase linked to a thymine glycosylase found in an archaeal thermophilic bacterium. Using defined-sequence oligonucleotides, we show that hyTDG has robust mispair-selective activity against deaminated U:G and T:G mispairs. We have further developed a method for separating glycosylase-released free bases from oligonucleotides and DNA followed by GC-MS/MS identification and quantification. Using this approach, we have measured for the first time the levels of total Uracil (U), U:G and T:G in calf thymus DNA. The method presented here will allow the measurement of the formation, persistence, and repair of a biologically important class of deaminated cytosine adducts.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 10 mg of recombinant hyTDG was purified by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Gel bands were cut from the gel, destained with 50% methanol in water and dried. Gel bands were resuspended in 50 mL acetic anhydride and 200 mL acetic acid to chemically acetylate protein lysine residues. After incubation at 37 oC for 1 h, liquid was removed, and gel bands were washed three times with 1 mL deionized water. Gel bands were then dried and ground into a fine powder. Ammonium bicarbonate solution (100 mL, 50 mM) was added and the pH of the resulting gel was increased to approximately 8 with aqueous ammonia. Trypsin was then added, and the proteins were digested overnight at 37oC.  Tryptic peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried, and resuspended in 50 mL of 1% formic acid for LC/MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a reversed -phase ProteoPreTM column loaded with Waters 5 m XSelect HSS T3 resin and Waters YMC ODS-AQ S-5 100 A resin and eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The LC column  was directly interfaced with a QExactive mass analyzer which acquired data at a resolution of 35,000 in full scan mode and 17,500 in MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
The topmost intense peptides in each MS survey were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peptides were identified with the PEAKS 8.5 software for de novo peptide sequencing. Acetylation of K, S T, C, Y and H as well as oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deamination, Dna repair, Dna damage, Cytosine, Mutation, Mass spectrometry, Glycosylase

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,  University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lawrence Sowers
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,  University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555


