### Accession
PXD009595

### Title
Soil Metaproteome - proteome data analysis 

### Description
Phosphorus (P) limitation will play a key role in the productivity of agriculture in the coming decades. Struvite is an ammonium magnesium phosphate mineral that can be recovered from wastewater-treatment plants and can be considered as an alternative source of P. However, the impact of struvite on the plant yield and, particularly, on the soil microbial community is barely known. Here, we tested the impacts of struvite, sewage sludge, and their combination on the barley yield, soil macro and micronutrients, and biochemical and microbiological soil properties. Amendment with struvite alone and its combination with sludge increased the availability of P in soil, the plant uptake of P and Mg, and the barley yield. The analysis of phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs) and metaproteomics approaches revealed significant effects of struvite on the biomass of Gram-positive bacteria and, particularly, on actinobacterial populations in soil.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from soil and mass spectrometric analysis Protein extraction was performed according to the method described by Chourey et al. (2010), which has been found to be suitable for semiarid soils (Bastida et al., 2014). The cell lysis and disruption of soil aggregates were performed by boiling at 100 ºC for 10 min in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and, after electrophoresis, the gels were stained using colloidal Coomassie brilliant blue. The gel area containing the protein mixture of each sample was sliced into one piece. The samples were further processed by in-gel reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, in-gel tryptic cleavage, and elution as well as desalting of tryptic peptides (Bastida et al., 2016). The peptide lysates were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS measurement. Separation of peptide lysates was performed using an 85-min, non-linear gradient from 3.2% to 80% acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid, on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm, C18, Thermo Scientiﬁc) in a UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Idstein, Germany). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive HF MS (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. The mass spectrometer full scans were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer within the mass range of 350–1,550 m/z, at 60,000 resolution, using an automatic gain control target of 1×106 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms. An MS/MS isolation window for ions in the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z. The MS/MS scans were acquired using the higher energy dissociation mode at a normalized collision-induced energy of 28%, within a scan range of 200–2,000 m/z and using a resolution of 15,000. The exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification and the MS/MS spectra acquired were searched with Sequest HT against the specific semiarid soil metagenome database (containing 48,094,830 protein-coding sequences) (Bastida et al., 2017). Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed, using 5 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation (methionine) was selected as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as a static modification. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01, calculated by Percolator (Käll et al., 2007), and a peptide rank of 1 were considered as identified. The “PROteomics results Pruning & Homology group ANotation Engine” (PROPHANE) (http://www.prophane.de) was applied to assign proteins to their phylogenetic and functional origin. The composition of the bacterial community was calculated based on the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) at the phylum and order levels. In total, 1,995 protein groups with 3,889 peptides were identified in the soil samples. In metaproteomics studies, the number of unique peptides and also the peptide count per protein are generally low. All peptides analyzed here were measured in high-resolution mode, which means that the quality and confirmation of identity are of high fidelity. Data analysis One-way ANOVA was used to determine significant effects of the soil amendment with struvite and sewage sludge on soil parameters. The Tukey post-hoc test was used for multiple comparison of the average values of each variable across the soil treatments and the sampling times, and to determine significant differences at P<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Soil microbiome, Agriculture

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823


