### Accession
PXD000322

### Title
Signatures for Mass Spectrometry Data Quality, part 3 of 5

### Description
Logistic regression classification models were fit to manually classified quality control (QC) LC-MS/MS datasets to develop a model that can predict whether a dataset is in or out of control. Model parameters were optimized by minimizing a loss function that accounts for the tradeoff between false positive and false negative errors.  In addition to the 1152 training/testing datasets, we are including 2662 additional datasets, all of the same QC sample (whole cell lysate of Shewanella oneidensis).  Datasets originate from 6 Thermo instrument platforms: Exactive, LTQ, VelosPro, Orbitrap, Q-Exactive, and Velos Orbitrap.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Ensuring data quality and proper instrument functionality is a prerequisite for scientific investigation. Manual quality assurance is time-consuming and subjective. Metrics for describing liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) data have been developed; however, the wide variety of LC-MS instruments and configurations precludes applying a simple cutoff. Using 1150 manually classified quality control (QC) data sets, we trained logistic regression classification models to predict whether a data set is in or out of control. Model parameters were optimized by minimizing a loss function that accounts for the trade-off between false positive and false negative errors. The classifier models detected bad data sets with high sensitivity while maintaining high specificity. Moreover, the composite classifier was dramatically more specific than single metrics. Finally, we evaluated the performance of the classifier on a separate validation set where it performed comparably to the results for the testing/training data sets. By presenting the methods and software used to create the classifier, other groups can create a classifier for their specific QC regimen, which is highly variable lab-to-lab. In total, this manuscript presents 3400 LC-MS data sets for the same QC sample (whole cell lysate of Shewanella oneidensis), deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000320-PXD000324.

### Keywords
Qc, Quameter, Metrics, Quality control, Data quality

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head


