### Accession
PXD019348

### Title
Proteome-Wide Effects of Naphthalene-Derived Secondary Organic Aerosol in BEAS-2B Cells Are Caused by Short-Lived Unsaturated Carbonyls

### Description
Exposure to air pollution causes adverse health outcomes but the toxicity mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we investigated the dynamic toxicities of naphthalene-derived secondary organic aerosol (NSOA) in human bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS-2B) and identified the chemical components responsible for toxicities. The chemical composition of NSOA was found to vary with six simulated atmospheric aging conditions (C1-C6), as characterized by high-resolution mass spectrometry and ion mobility mass spectrometry. Global proteome profiling reveals dynamic evolution in toxicity: stronger proteome-wide impacts were detected in fresh NSOA, but the effects declined along with atmospheric aging. While Nrf2-regulated proteins (e.g., NQO1) were significantly upregulated, the majority (78-97%) of proteins from inflammation and other pathways were down-regulated by NSOA exposure (e.g., Rho GTPases). This pattern is distinct from the reactive oxygen species (ROS) mediated toxicity pathway, and an alternative cysteine-reaction pathway was revealed by the decreased abundance of proteins (e.g., MT1X) prone to post-translational thiol modification. This pathway was further validated by observing decreased Nrf2 response in reporter cells, after pre-incubating NSOA with cysteine. Ethynyl-naphthalene probe was employed to confirm the alkylation of cellular proteome thiols on the proteome-wide level by fresh NSOA via in-gel fluorescence imaging. Nontarget analysis identified several unsaturated carbonyls, including naphthoquinones and hydroxylated naphthoquinones, as the toxic components responsible for cysteine reactivity. Our study provides insights into the dynamic toxicities of NSOA during atmospheric aging and identifies short-lived unsaturated carbonyls as the predominant toxic components at the post-translational level.

### Sample Protocol
A freeze-thaw cycle was performed 3 times between the -80 °C freezer and 37 °C water bath to open the cell walls. Then the cells were lysed using the Ultrasonic Sonifier SFX250 Cell Disruptor (BRANSON). After centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4 °C, the supernatant was transferred to new tubes where the lysate’s total protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. In order to remove interfering compounds, especially any remaining protease inhibitor, aliquots of 20 μg protein of each sample were precipitated with 4 times its volume of acetone at -20 °C overnight. The supernatant was decanted after centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was then air dried and resuspended with 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB. A 60-minute incubation of 2mM TCEP at ambient temperature was used to reduce any disulfide bonds within the proteins. Alkylation occurred over an incubation of 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 4 mM. Proteins were further digested by trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:40 for 16 h at 37 °C and digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%.  Stable isotope dimethyl labeling method as described previously was performed for protein quantification (17). In this work, digested peptides were isotope labeled parallelly to 3 different mass shifts respectively. Then 3 differentially labeled samples were pooled together and desalted by C18 TopTip (Glygen Columbia, MD) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Eluents were vacuum dried and reconstituted in 120 μL HPLC water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The FASTA file of Homo sapiens was obtained from the UniProt database. MaxQuant algorithms (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.2.3) were utilized to process the proteomic raw files to identify and quantify the proteins

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Nsoa, Maxquant, Beas-2b, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 3H6
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Jiajun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Peng
Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 3H6


