### Accession
PXD009568

### Title
Lgl protein interactome -  Lgl reduces endosomal vesicle acidification and Notch signaling by promoting the interaction between Vap33 and the V-ATPase complex

### Description
To identify Lgl binding proteins, we purified Lgl-containing protein complexes from cultured Drosophila S2 cells, using the single-step streptavidin purification from stable cell lines expressing SBP-tagged Lgl, followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the interactors. This study revealed the binding of Lgl to Vap33, which we further connected to the function of the vacuolar ATPase and regulation of Notch signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila S2 cells were transfected with 1.5 μg pMK33-Lgl-SBP plasmid, and stable cell lines were selected for approximately four weeks in Schneider medium containing 0.5 mM Hygromycin B (Sigma). Cells were amplified to 50 ml dense culture. Proteins were then induced with 0.07 mM CuSO4 overnight and lysed in Default Lysis Buffer (DLB: 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 0.2% IGEPAL, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 125 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4). Lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min and incubated with Streptavidin beads (Pierce) for 2 hrs at 4°C. Beads were washed with DLB three times, and protein complexes were eluted with 100 μl of 2 mM biotin (Sigma). The eluate was loaded on SDS-polyacrylimide gel, and electrophoresed so that the dye front migrated ~1 cm in the separating gel. The gel was then stained with Coomassie blue, and the lane was cut into two 5 mm x 5 mm pieces and sent for mass spectrometry analysis (Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School). Samples were digested with trypsin in-gel and peptides were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on two biological replicates for our experimental samples (Lgl), and six biological replicates for controls (untransfected S2 cells).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Sequest and searches were run using a database of annotated Drosophila proteins created in February 2017. Mass tolerance = 2, mass units = amu, fragment ion tolerance = 1, ion series = nB;nY;b;y, Mods = 15.9949146221 M 14.0157 C, enzyme = trypsin. Data were further analyzed using the SAINT algorithm, and the final SAINT output table is provided in the publication (Portela et al., Science Signaling, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial cell polarity is linked to the control of tissue growth and tumorigenesis. The tumor suppressor and cell polarity protein lethal-2-giant larvae (Lgl) promotes Hippo signaling and inhibits Notch signaling to restrict tissue growth in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> Notch signaling is greater in <i>lgl</i> mutant tissue than in wild-type tissue because of increased acidification of endosomal vesicles, which promotes the proteolytic processing and activation of Notch by &#x3b3;-secretase. We showed that the increased Notch signaling and tissue growth defects of <i>lgl</i> mutant tissue depended on endosomal vesicle acidification mediated by the vacuolar adenosine triphosphatase (V-ATPase). Lgl promoted the activity of the V-ATPase by interacting with Vap33 (VAMP-associated protein of 33 kDa). Vap33 physically and genetically interacted with Lgl and V-ATPase subunits and repressed V-ATPase-mediated endosomal vesicle acidification and Notch signaling. Vap33 overexpression reduced the abundance of the V-ATPase component Vha44, whereas Lgl knockdown reduced the binding of Vap33 to the V-ATPase component Vha68-3. Our data indicate that Lgl promotes the binding of Vap33 to the V-ATPase, thus inhibiting V-ATPase-mediated endosomal vesicle acidification and thereby reducing &#x3b3;-secretase activity, Notch signaling, and tissue growth. Our findings implicate the deregulation of Vap33 and V-ATPase activity in polarity-impaired epithelial cancers.

### Keywords
Lgl, S2 cells, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Biology Department, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA
University of Massachusetts Boston

### Submitter
Alexey Veraksa

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Veraksa
Biology Department, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA


