### Accession
PXD032079

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana PATLN 2 interactome

### Description
Import of ferrous iron (Fe2+) via the plasma membrane ZIP transporter IRON-REGULATED TRANSPORTER1 (IRT1) bears the risk of oxidative damage and lipid peroxidation. The plasma membrane-associated SEC14-like lipid transfer protein PATL2 interacts with the large cytosolic loop and variable region of IRT1 (IRT1vr). PATL2 affects Fe reduction and reactive oxygen species-related responses in roots and alleviates lipid peroxidation upon Fe acquisition. PATL2 binds α-tocopherol, an antioxidant of the vitamin E group.

### Sample Protocol
HA-PATLN2 was immunoprecipitated from transgenic Arabidopsis roots in five biological replicates. Immunoprecipitated proteins were prepared by in-gel digestion with trypsin essentially as described in PMID 29322779.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) for protein identification and quantification using sequence information from the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome set (UP000006548, downloaded on 7th Mai 2019). Standard parameters were used, except of the options label-free quantification and 'match between runs' enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Organisms require micronutrients, and Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) IRON-REGULATED TRANSPORTER1 (IRT1) is essential for iron (Fe2+) acquisition into root cells. Uptake of reactive Fe2+ exposes cells to the risk of membrane lipid peroxidation. Surprisingly little is known about how this is avoided. IRT1 activity is controlled by an intracellular variable region (IRT1vr) that acts as a regulatory protein interaction platform. Here, we describe that IRT1vr interacted with peripheral plasma membrane SEC14-Golgi dynamics (SEC14-GOLD) protein PATELLIN2 (PATL2). SEC14 proteins bind lipophilic substrates and transport or present them at the membrane. To date, no direct roles have been attributed to SEC14 proteins in Fe import. PATL2 affected root Fe acquisition responses, interacted with ROS response proteins in roots, and alleviated root lipid peroxidation. PATL2 had high affinity in vitro for the major lipophilic antioxidant vitamin E compound &#x3b1;-tocopherol. Molecular dynamics simulations provided insight into energetic constraints and the orientation and stability of the PATL2-ligand interaction in atomic detail. Hence, this work highlights a compelling mechanism connecting vitamin E with root metal ion transport at the plasma membrane with the participation of an IRT1-interacting and &#x3b1;-tocopherol-binding SEC14 protein.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Roots, Ferroptosis, Iron, Patln2

### Affiliations
Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


