### Accession
PXD026010

### Title
Acetylome Profiling Reveals the Endogenous Substrates of HDAC6

### Description
HDAC6 inhibitors are novel targeted therapies showing good clinical response in a variety of different malignancies. However, their use and farther development is hampered by the limited knowledge regarding what are the endogenous substrates of HDAC6 enzyme. Here we plan to complete acetylome profiling of HAP1 cells with and without HDAC6 knockout to identify which are the HDAC6 substrates and what are the differences between the wildtype and HDAC6-KO cells.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were lysed, digested and labeled with 11 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each. The mixture was desalted and fractionated into 10 fractions on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Each of the 10 fractions was subjected to enrichment by PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Cell Signaling Technology) antibody. Each fraction was depleted 3 times with antibody. The resulting peptides were resuspended in 2uL of 5% formic acid. In the acidic pH LC-MS/MS analysis, each fraction was run sequentially on a column (75 μm x 25 cm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) interfaced with the Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processed by the in-house JUMP program. The resultant data were compared to the UniProt human database and concatenated with a reversed protein sequence decoy database. Searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 25 ppm for precursor ions and 15 ppm mass tolerance for fragment ions, fully tryptic restriction with two maximum missed cleavages, three maximum modification sites, and assignment of the a, b and y ions. TMT tags on lysine residues and N-termini (+229.162932 Da) and the carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for determining static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) and lysine acetylation (+42.01056) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce the false discovery rate (FDR) to approximate 1%. The lysine acetylated peptides were quantified by summarizing reporter ion counts across all matched peptide spectrums with the JUMP software suite.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hap1 cell, Acetylome, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital

### Submitter
Yuxin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital


