### Accession
PXD046112

### Title
Identification of immune-based biomarkers associated with response to abatacept (CTLA4-Ig) in rheumatoid arthritis patients.

### Description
RA patients (according to ACR/EULAR 2010 criteria) who started abatacept due to high disease activity (DAS28>5.1), were recruited to perform immunological studies at baseline, 3 and 6 months of therapy. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and immune cell populations were characterized using flow cytometry. Proteomic analysis was performed on baseline sera.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration of plasma samples was measured by the Bradford assay. An appropriate volume containing 200 μg total protein per sample was processed with the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced with DTE (0.1 M), alkylated with iodoacetamide (0.05 M), and digested overnight by trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5. The peptides originating from tryptic digestion were lyophilized and kept at −80 °C. The peptides were further clean-up using the Sp3 protocol for peptides. Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled in line with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an  25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75 µm ID) using an one-hour long  run, starting with a gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5 min and then  kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375- 1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60 ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy  (NCE) of 26.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Human Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot 20583 proteins entries, 8/11/2022) using the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to re-analyze them  (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methionine residues and  acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Abatacept (CTLA4-Ig)-a monoclonal antibody which restricts T cell activation-is an effective treatment for rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Nevertheless, only 50% of RA patients attain clinical responses, while predictors of response are rather limited. Herein, we aimed to investigate for early biomarkers of response to abatacept, based on a detailed immunological profiling of peripheral blood (PB) cells and serum proteins. We applied flow cytometry and proteomics analysis on PB immune cells and serum respectively, of RA patients starting abatacept as the first biologic agent. After 6 months of treatment, 34.5% of patients attained response. At baseline, Th1 and FoxP3+ T cell populations were positively correlated with tender joint counts (<i>p</i>-value = 0.047 and <i>p</i>-value = 0.022, respectively). Upon treatment, CTLA4-Ig effectively reduced the percentages of Th1 and Th17 only in responders (<i>p</i>-value = 0.0277 and <i>p</i>-value = 0.0042, respectively). Notably, baseline levels of Th1 and myeloid cell populations were significantly increased in PB of responders compared to non-responders (<i>p</i>-value = 0.009 and <i>p</i>-value = 0.03, respectively). Proteomics analysis revealed that several inflammatory mediators were present in serum of responders before therapy initiation and strikingly 10 amongst 303 serum proteins were associated with clinical responses. Finally, a composite index based on selected baseline cellular and proteomics' analysis could predict response to abatacept with a high sensitivity (90%) and specificity (88.24%).

### Keywords
Ctla4-ig, Abatacept, Rheumatoid arthritis, Biomarkers, Secretome, Th1, Immune cells

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Laboratory of Rheumatology, Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Medical School, University of Crete, 71003 Heraklion, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Prodromos Sidiropoulos
Laboratory of Rheumatology, Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Medical School, University of Crete, 71003 Heraklion, Greece.


