### Accession
PXD021760

### Title
Proteomic reveals reasons for acquired drug resistance in lung cancer derived brain metastasis based on a newly established multi-organ microfluidic chip model

### Description
Anti-tumor drugs can effectively shrink the lesions of primary lung cancer; however, it has limited therapeutic effect on patients with brain metastasis (BM). A BM preclinical model based on a multi-organ microfluidic chip has been established proficiently in our previous work. In this study, the BM subpopulation (PC9-Br) derived from the parental PC9 cell line was isolated from the chip model and found to develop obvious resistance to antineoplastic drugs including chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, carboplatin, pemetrexed) and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) which target epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR); this suggested that the acquisition of drug-resistance by brain metastatic cells was attributable to the intrinsic changes in PC9-Br. Hence, we performed proteomic and revealed a greatly altered spectrum of BM protein expression compared with primary lung cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Extraction Cells was harvested and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 3. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  4.  HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrometry data was retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Retrieval parameter settings: the database is SwissProt Human (20317 sequences), an anti-library is added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common pollution library is added to the database to eliminate contaminated proteins in identification The effect of enzyme digestion is set to Trypsin / P; the number of missed cleavage sites is set to 2; the minimum length of peptides is set to 7 amino acid residues; the maximum number of modifications of peptides is set to 5; The ion mass error tolerance is set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion is 0.02 Da. The cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, and the variable modification was the oxidation of methionine, the acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Anti-tumor drugs can effectively shrink the lesions of primary lung cancer; however, it has limited therapeutic effect on patients with brain metastasis (BM). A BM preclinical model based on a multi-organ microfluidic chip has been established proficiently in our previous work. In this study, the BM subpopulation (PC9-Br) derived from the parental PC9 cell line was isolated from the chip model and found to develop obvious resistance to antineoplastic drugs including chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, carboplatin, pemetrexed) and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) which target epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR); this suggested that the acquisition of drug-resistance by brain metastatic cells was attributable to the intrinsic changes in PC9-Br. Hence, we performed proteomic and revealed a greatly altered spectrum of BM protein expression compared with primary lung cancer cells. We identified the hyperactive glutathione (GSH) metabolism pathway with the overexpression of various GSH metabolism-related enzymes (GPX4, RRM2, GCLC, GPX1, GSTM4, GSTM1). Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH1A1, ALDH3A1) were also found to be upregulated in BM. What's more, loss of EGFR and phosphorylated EGFR in PC9-Br gave reasons for the TKIs resistance. Collectively, our findings indicated potential mechanisms for the acquirement of drug resistance occurred in BM, providing new strategies to overcome therapeutic resistance in lung cancer BM.

### Keywords
Lung cancer; brain metastasis; microfluidic organ-on-a-chip; drug resistance; proteomic.

### Affiliations
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Qi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qi Wang
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University


