### Accession
PXD019824

### Title
Oxysterols Modify NLRP2 in Epithelial Cells, Identifying a Mediator of Ozone-induced Inflammation.

### Description
Ozone (O3) is a prevalent air pollutant that causes lung inflammation following exposure. Previous studies demonstrate that O3 oxidizes lipids, such as cholesterol, in the airway to produce oxidized cholesterol products (oxysterols), such as secosterol-A (secoA), which form covalent linkages preferentially with lysine residues and consequently modify protein function. The breadth of proteins modified by this oxysterol as well as the biological consequences in the lung are unknown. Using an alkynyl-tagged form of secosterol-A and shotgun proteomics, we identified NLR Family Pyrin Domain Containing 2 (NLRP2) to be adducted at lysine (K1019) in the terminal leucine-rich-repeat, a known regulatory region for NLR proteins. We characterized NLRP2 expression in airway epithelial cells and used CRISPR-Cas9 knockout and shRNA knockdown of NLRP2 for analysis of inflammasome complex activity and pro-inflammatory mediator production following O3 exposure. We observed an increase in caspase-1 activity in response to O3, which was not altered by knocked down NLRP2 expression. O3-induced pro-inflammatory gene expression for CXCL1, CXCL2, and IL8 was further enhanced in NLRP2 knockout cells. Together, our findings uncover NLRP2 as a highly abundant, key component of pro-inflammatory signaling pathways in airway epithelial cells and formation of oxysterol-NLRP2 adduct as a novel mediator of O3-induced inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
16HBE cells were plated 2 x 106 in 10 cm plates then allowed to settle and grow for 24 h. The cells were then incubated for 4h with either DMSO (0.1% v/v) or a-SecoA (20 μM) diluted in starving medium (MEM + FBS (2%) + Penicillin/Streptomycin (1%) + Glutamine (2mM)). Cell types were harvested in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1% SDS, pH=7) containing protease inhibitors on ice. Equal amount of proteins were proceeded to click reacted with a photo-cleavable azido-biotin, which permits enrichment of a-SecoA modified proteins. After sequential washes of the beads to remove non-specifically bound proteins using SDS, urea, NaCl, and ammoniumbicarbonate, only a-SecoA modified proteins were eluted from the bead by UV exposure (365 nm). The freed protein adducts were dried and then re-suspended in LDS buffer followed by a short stacking SDS-PAGE run. The Coomassie blue stain gel was used to confirm that a-SecoA adducts were captured, which were subsequently excised followed by in-gel trypsin digestion, extraction, and reconstitution for MudPIT LC-MS/MS analysis. Trypsinized peptides were loaded onto a self-packed biphasic C18/SCX MudPIT column using a Helium-pressurized cell (pressure bomb). The MudPIT column consisted of 360 μm O.D. x 150 μm I.D. fused silica, which was fritted with a filter-end fitting (IDEX Health & Science) and packed with 6 cm of Phenomenex Luna® SCX material (04A-4398, 5 μm, 100Å) followed by 4 cm of Phenomenex Jupiter® C18 material (04A-4053, 5 μm, 300Å).  Once the sample was loaded, the MudPIT column was connected using an Inline MicroFilter union (M-520, IDEX Health & Science) to an analytical column (360 μm O.D. x 100 μm I.D.), equipped with a laser-pulled emitter tip and packed with 20 cm of C18 reverse phase material (Phenomenex Jupiter®, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex).  Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and Autosampler,  MudPIT analysis was performed with a 8-step salt pulse gradient (25, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 750mM, and 1M ammonium acetate). Following each salt pulse, peptides were gradient-eluted from the reverse analytical column at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, with the mobile phase solvents consisting of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile (solvent B). For the peptides from the first 8 SCX fractions, the reverse phase gradient consisted of 0-1 min 2%B  5%B for 5 min  60% B for 64 min  99%B for 10 min  99%B for 5 min followed by an equilibration at 2%B. Peptides were introduced via nano-electrospray into a Q Exactive™ Plus hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  The Q Exactive™ was operated in the data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R = 17,500) after each MS1 scan (R = 70,000) on the 15 most abundant ions using an MS1 ion target of 3 × 106 ions and an MS2 target of 5 × 104 ions. The maximum ion time for MS/MS scans was set to 40 ms, the HCD-normalized collision energy was set to 27, dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Thermo .RAW datafiles from data dependent mode were converted to an mzML format using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.5211). The mzML files were searched using MS-GF+beta (version 9517) against humanRefSeq_Version54 database (34589 proteins). MS-GF+beta was configured allowing semi-tryptic search with maximum 3 missed cleavages.  A fixed carbamidomethyl modification on Cys (+57.0215 Da ) and 3 dynamic modifications on Met oxidation (+15.9949 Da), N-term Gln deamidation (-17.0265 Da), and Lys-aSA adduct (+541.3880 Da, aSA-triazole-hexanoic acid modification; C32H51N3O4)  were allowed per peptide with a precursor tolerance 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance 20 ppm.  Protein identifications required a minimum of two distinct identified peptides, two minimum spectra, and one additional peptide per protein. Maximum protein level FDR was 1 % calculated by diving the number of reverse sequence proteins identified by the total number of protein identified, multiplying by two and converting to a percent. For protein assembly and peptide visualization, IDPicker (3.1.9288 64-bit) was used. For the ambiguous assignment for the aSA modified peptides, the identified spectra are manually inspected following the criteria: (1) the modified peptide precursor error within 10 ppm (2) the modified peptides containing diagnostic fragment m/z 512.

### Publication Abstract
Ozone (O<sub>3</sub>) is a prevalent air pollutant causing lung inflammation. Previous studies demonstrate that O<sub>3</sub> oxidizes lipids, such as cholesterol, in the airway to produce oxysterols, such as secosterol A (SecoA), which are electrophiles that are capable of forming covalent linkages preferentially with lysine residues and that consequently modify protein function. The breadth of proteins modified by this oxysterol as well as the biological consequences in the lung are unknown. By using an alkynyl-tagged form of SecoA and shotgun proteomics, we identified 135 proteins as being modified in bronchial epithelial cells. Among them was NLRP2 (NLR family pyrin domain-containing protein 2), which forms an alkynyl-tagged SecoA-protein adduct at lysine residue 1019 (K1019) in the terminal leucine-rich repeat region, a known regulatory region for NLR proteins. NLRP2 expression in airway epithelial cells was characterized, and CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (KO) and shRNA knockdown of NLRP2 were used to determine its function in O<sub>3</sub>-induced inflammation. No evidence for NLPR2 inflammasome formation or an NLRP2-dependent increase in caspase-1 activity in response to O<sub>3</sub> was observed. O<sub>3</sub>-induced proinflammatory gene expression for <i>CXCL2</i> and <i>CXCL8</i>/<i>IL8</i> was further enhanced in NLRP2-KO cells, suggesting a negative regulatory role. Reconstitution of NLRP2-KO cells with the NLRP2 K1019 mutated to arginine partially blocked SecoA adduction and enhanced O<sub>3</sub>-induced IL-8 release as compared with wild-type NLRP2. Together, our findings uncover NLRP2 as a highly abundant, key component of proinflammatory signaling pathways in airway epithelial cells and as a novel mediator of O<sub>3</sub>-induced inflammation.

### Keywords
Human, Alkynylated secosterol, Lc-msms, Secosterols, Ozone, Click, Airway epithelium, Lung inflammasome, Protein modification

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Hye-Young Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Ned A. Porer, Hye-Young H. Kim
Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University


