### Accession
PXD021445

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 is required for translesion DNA synthesis (total proteome)

### Description
Lesions on DNA can uncouple DNA synthesis from helicase unwinding, generating stretches of unreplicated single stranded DNA (ssDNA) behind the replication fork. These ssDNA gaps need to be filled in to complete DNA duplication and thereby avoid the generation of DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs), a major source of genomic instability. Gap filling repair involves either translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) or template switching (TS) to bypass the lesion. At the heart of these processes, ubiquitylated PCNA recruits many proteins that dictate pathway choice, but the enzymes regulating PCNA ubiquitylation in vertebrates remain poorly defined. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 promotes non-specific ubiquitylation of proteins on ssDNA, to enhance protein accumulation and stimulate gap filling repair. The absence of RFWD3 leads to a profound defect in recruitment of key repair and signaling factors to damaged chromatin, including ubiquitin and proteins known to ubiquitylate and interact with ubiquitylated PCNA. As a result, PCNA ubiquitylation is severely inhibited without RFWD3, and TLS across different DNA lesions drastically impaired. We propose that RFWD3 is an essential coordinator of the response to ssDNA gaps, where it triggers non-specific ubiquitylation to drive recruitment of effectors of PCNA ubiquitylation and DNA damage bypass.

### Sample Protocol
Xenopus nucleoplasmic egg extracts (NPE) were either mock- or RFWD3-depleted, by addition of 0.2 volumes of PAS beads bound to IgG (mock), RFWD3-N antibody, or RFWD3-F antibody. Beads were incubated for 15 min at room temperature prior to removal from the extracts, after which the depletion procedure was repeated once. Extracts were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM ABC and digested using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:100 w/w; Sigma), for 30 min at 30°C. Subsequently, TCEP and CAA were added to final concentrations of 10 mM, and digestion was allowed to continue for a total of 3 hours. Tryptic peptides were fractionated on-StageTip at high-pH, and eluted as eight fractions (F1-8) using 80 μL of 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 17, 25, and 40% ACN in 50 mM ammonium. All fractions were dried to completion in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac for 3 h at 60°C, after which the dried peptides were dissolved using 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and stored at −20°C until MS analysis. Between 3 μL and 10 μL were used from each fraction, depending on peptide content, to equalize protein load for analysis by MS.  All MS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 µm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 60 min ranging in buffer B from 5-25% for F1, 5-29% for F2, 5-33% for F3, 6-36% for F4, 8-38% for F5, 10-40% for F6, 12-42% for F7, and 14-44% for F8. The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source (Thermo). Spray voltage set at 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Full scan range was set to 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to “200” (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 maximum injection time to “Auto”. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was enabled in “Peptide” mode. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s, with an exclusion mass tolerance of 15 ppm, exclusion of isotopes, and exclusion of alternate charge states for the same precursor. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, MS2 AGC target to “200” (200,000 charges), MS2 intensity threshold to 430,000, MS2 maximum injection time to “Auto”, and TopN to 18.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.5.3.30. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 10th of February, 2018. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 4 missed cleavages. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine (default), protein N-terminal acetylation (default), deamination of asparagine, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate formation from glutamine and glutamic acid. Maximum variable modifications per peptide were reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled, with “Fast LFQ” disabled, and “LFQ min. ratio count” set to 3. iBAQ was enabled. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR data filtering at the PSM- and protein-levels was applied (default). Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min, with matching only allowed within the same fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Lesions on DNA uncouple DNA synthesis from the replisome, generating stretches of unreplicated single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) behind the replication fork. These ssDNA gaps need to be filled in to complete DNA duplication. Gap-filling synthesis involves either translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) or template switching (TS). Controlling these processes, ubiquitylated PCNA recruits many proteins that dictate pathway choice, but the enzymes regulating PCNA ubiquitylation in vertebrates remain poorly defined. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase RFWD3 promotes ubiquitylation of proteins on ssDNA. The absence of RFWD3 leads to a profound defect in recruitment of key repair and signaling factors to damaged chromatin. As a result, PCNA ubiquitylation is inhibited without RFWD3, and TLS across different DNA lesions is drastically impaired. We propose that RFWD3 is an essential coordinator of the response to ssDNA gaps, where it promotes ubiquitylation to drive recruitment of effectors of PCNA ubiquitylation and DNA damage bypass.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Ubiquitin, Rfwd3, Pcna, Dna, Chromass, Total proteome, Tls, Damage, Ts

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


