### Accession
PXD021155

### Title
Development of a comprehensive toxicity pathway model for 17α-ethinylestradiol in early life stage fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas)

### Description
The goal of this study is to characterize molecular toxicity pathways associated with ethinylestradiol-induced toxicity and link these molecular perturbations to apical outcomes of regulatory relevance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell disruption and protein solubilization were done using SDT (4% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA; Cat# 436143), 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA, Cat# R0862), 0.1 M Tris/HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 10812846001; pH = 7.6) lysis buffer in a Thermomixer® (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Quality of protein extracts was assessed by use of 1D SDS-PAGE (12% gels). Protein extracts were then processed following standard protocol for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# I1149) and digested using trypsin (Sequencing grade; Promega, Madison WI, USA, Cat# V5111) on a 30 kDa membrane filter unit. Resulting peptides were eluted with ammonium bicarbonate (AB) buffer and the FASP eluates were kept at -80oC until further LC-MS/MS analysis. FASP eluates were cleaned using 3 iterations of ethylacetate extraction to remove SDS contamination and then were completely dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Cleaned peptides were reconstituted by acid extraction using 50 µl of (1:1) 5% formic acid (LC-MS grade, >99% purity; Fisher Scientific Cat# A11750) and 100% acetonitrile (HPLC grade, >99.9%; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 34851), with 1.5 µl of 0.01% poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG; Millipore-Sigma, Cat# 95172) to reduce sample loses. The final solution was transferred to a TPX (polymethylpentane) vial and vacuum concentrated using SpeedVac vacuum concentrator to a final volume of 15 µl.  LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid Mass Spectrometer system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected online to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (consisted of SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted on a cartridge trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5μm particles, 100 A; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#160454) using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164570) by non-linear gradient (2-35% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile). The analytical column was directly connected to the Digital PicoView® 550 (New Objective, Woburn MA, USA) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; P/N: FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD; ESI Source Solutions, Woburn MA, USA) was installed to the LC-MS/MS system to isolate the experiment from variable background ion interferences. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent acquisition strategy, selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350 - 2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at 200 m/z) with a target value of 4×105 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5×104 and resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43 with built-in Andromeda search engine. Samples were mapped against the FHM reference proteome (NCBI Acc# WIOS00000000), combined with the cRAP contaminant database (January 2020; 246 sequences). The reference proteome was cleaned for duplicated and highly similar sequences (>95% similarity; minimum of 35 amino acids; a total of 35,108 proteins) prior to analysis. Oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as optional modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and two enzymes miss-cleavages were set for the first and main search. Peptides and proteins with an FDR (q-value) < 1% and at least one razor peptide were selected for downstream analyses.  All downstream differential protein abundance analyses were done in KNIME using the OmicsWorkflow pipeline found at the repository https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows. Protein groups with missing quantification values on all replicates within a treatment group were filtered out. Median normalization strategy was applied to all protein group intensities across samples. Significance of differentially abundant protein (DAP) groups was assessed using LIMMA, with a cut-off moderated p-value of ≤ 0.05 and a minimum effect size threshold of |FC| > 1.5 relative to the solvent control group.

### Publication Abstract
There is increasing pressure to develop alternative ecotoxicological risk assessment approaches that do not rely on expensive, time-consuming, and ethically questionable live animal testing. This study aimed to develop a comprehensive early life stage toxicity pathway model for the exposure of fish to estrogenic chemicals that is rooted in mechanistic toxicology. Embryo-larval fathead minnows (FHM; <i>Pimephales promelas</i>) were exposed to graded concentrations of 17&#x3b1;-ethinylestradiol (water control, 0.01% DMSO, 4, 20, and 100 ng/L) for 32 days. Fish were assessed for transcriptomic and proteomic responses at 4 days post-hatch (dph), and for histological and apical end points at 28 dph. Molecular analyses revealed core responses that were indicative of observed apical outcomes, including biological processes resulting in overproduction of vitellogenin and impairment of visual development. Histological observations indicated accumulation of proteinaceous fluid in liver and kidney tissues, energy depletion, and delayed or suppressed gonad development. Additionally, fish in the 100 ng/L treatment group were smaller than controls. Integration of omics data improved the interpretation of perturbations in early life stage FHM, providing evidence of conservation of toxicity pathways across levels of biological organization. Overall, the mechanism-based embryo-larval FHM model showed promise as a replacement for standard adult live animal tests.

### Keywords
Toxicity, 17-alpha-ethinylestradiol, Fathead minnows

### Affiliations
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan, Canada
University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Alper James Alcaraz

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hecker
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan, Canada


