### Accession
PXD034597

### Title
Xenografted Tumor decellularization provides cell-specific in vitro 3D environment

### Description
In vitro cell culture studies are common in cancer research field, and reliable biomimetic 3D models are needed to ensure physiological relevance. In this manuscript, we hypothesized that decellularized xenograft tumors can serve as an optimal 3D substrate to generate a top-down approach for in vitro tumor modeling. Methods: Multiple tumor cell lines were xenografted and the formed solid tumors were recovered for their decellularization by several techniques and further characterization by histology and proteomics techniques. Selected decellularized tumor xenograft samples were seeded with human triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)c ells and cell behavior was compared among them and with other control 2D and 3D cell culture methods. Results: A soft treatment using Freeze-EDTA-DNAse allows proper decellularization of xenografted tumor samples. Interestingly, proteomic data show that samples decellularized from TMBC xenograft models had different extracellular matrix (ECM) composition compared to the rest of xenograft tumors tested. The in vitro re-cellularization of decellularized ECM (dECM) yields tumor-type specific cell-behavior in TNBC context. Conclusions: Data indicate that dECM derived from xenograft tumors is a feasible substrate for re-seeding purposes, thereby promoting tumor-type specific cell behavior. These data serve as a proof-of-concept for further potential generation of patient-specific in vitro research models.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from decellularized samples using a mixture of 7M urea 2M Thiourea 4% CHAPS and 5mM DTT, and then digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al with minor modifications. Briefly, trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:20, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore).Samples were analyzed in a timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a Evosep ONE liquid chromatograph (Evosep). 200ng were directly loaded onto the Evosep ONE and resolved using the 30 samples-per-day protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software  using default settings except for the match between runs (match time window 5 min, alignment tie window 20min) and an LFQ min. ratio count of 1. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human and mouse protein entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data (LFQ intensities) was loaded onto Perseus platform  and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation) before statistical analysis (Student’s t-test, ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
<i>In vitro</i> cell culture studies are common in the cancer research field, and reliable biomimetic 3D models are needed to ensure physiological relevance. In this manuscript, we hypothesized that decellularized xenograft tumors can serve as an optimal 3D substrate to generate a top-down approach for <i>in vitro</i> tumor modeling. Multiple tumor cell lines were xenografted and the formed solid tumors were recovered for their decellularization by several techniques and further characterization by histology and proteomics techniques. Selected decellularized tumor xenograft samples were seeded with the HCC1806 human triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) basal-like subtype cell line, and cell behavior was compared among them and with other control 2D and 3D cell culture methods. A soft treatment using Freeze-EDTA-DNAse allows proper decellularization of xenografted tumor samples. Interestingly, proteomic data show that samples decellularized from TNBC basal-like subtype xenograft models had different extracellular matrix (ECM) compositions compared to the rest of the xenograft tumors tested. The <i>in vitro</i> recellularization of decellularized ECM (dECM) yields tumor-type-specific cell behavior in the TNBC context. Data show that dECM derived from xenograft tumors is a feasible substrate for reseeding purposes, thereby promoting tumor-type-specific cell behavior. These data serve as a proof-of-concept for further potential generation of patient-specific <i>in vitro</i> research models.

### Keywords
Tumor xenograft; decellularization; in vitro 3d model; breast cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio Spain


