### Accession
PXD003946

### Title
Biochemical Foundations of Health and Energy Conservation in Hibernating Free-Ranging Subadult Brown Bear Ursus arctos

### Description
Brown bears (Ursus arctos) hibernate for 5-7 months without eating, drinking, urinating and defecating at a metabolic rate of only 25% of the summer activity rate. Nonetheless, they emerge healthy and alert in spring. We analyzed the physiological adaptations for hibernation by comparing the proteome, metabolome, and hematologic features of blood from hibernating and active free-ranging sub-adult brown bears with a focus on conservation of health and energy. We found that the concentrations of most plasma proteins and white blood cell types decreased during hibernation. Strikingly, antimicrobial defense proteins increased in concentration. Central functions in hibernation involving the coagulation response and protease inhibition, as well as lipid transport and metabolism, were upheld by increased levels of very few key or broad-specificity proteins. A dramatic 45-fold increase in sex-hormone-binding-globulin SHBG levels during hibernation draws, for the first time, attention to its significant but unknown role in maintaining hibernation physiology. We propose that energy for the costly protein synthesis is reduced by three mechanisms, (i) dehydration, which increases protein concentration without de novo synthesis; (ii) reduced protein degradation rates due to a 6°C reduction in body temperature, decreased protease activity, and increased plasma viscosity; and (iii) a marked redistribution of energy resources only increasing de novo synthesis of few key proteins. This comprehensive global data identified novel biochemical strategies for bear adaptations to the extreme condition of hibernation, and have implications for our understanding of physiology in general.

### Sample Protocol
14 paired plasma samples (summer and winter) from 7 bears were analyzed. Furthermore, summer and winter samples were each pooled and enriched using the ProteoMiner protein enrichment kit. Additionally two commercially available human plasma reference samples were measured. All samples were analyzed in triplicates.   Protein was digested with trypsin by essentially applying the FASP method as described by Wiśniewski et al. (2009) using a 30 k Amicon ultra cell. Recovered peptides were desalted using C18 microcolumns (as described by Rappsilber et al. (2003 and 2007)) with a disc of polystyrenedivinylbenzene. A volume of suspended R3 beads were added to the column.   The LC-MS/MS analysis was done using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system connected to a Q Exactive. The flow settings were 8 µL per min for the sample loading onto a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 100 µm ID pre-column with particle size of 5 µm. The nanoflow was set to 300 nL per min for the peptide separation on the analytical column. The analytical column was a 50 cm Acclaim PepmapRSLC C18 column with 75 µm ID and 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-electrospray was done using a Picotip ‘Silicatip’ emitter (New Objectives Inc., Ma USA). The LC solvents were A: 0.1 % formic acid, 0.005 % heptafluorobutyric acid for the aqueous phase, and B: 90 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 0.005 % heptafluorobutyric acid for the organic phase. The applied gradient was from 12 % to 20 % solvent B over 60 min, followed by 20 % to 40 % solvent B over 60 min. Initial tests showed that this gradient gave the best distribution of plasma protein tryptic peptides over the entire gradient.  The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. A full MS scan in the mass range of 350-1,850 m/z was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×10^6 and maximum fill time set to 250 ms. Instrument lock mass correction was applied using the contaminant ion at 391.28429 m/z. In each cycle, the mass spectrometer triggers up to 12 MS/MS acquisitions on abundant peptide precursor ions. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a dynamic mass range at a resolution of 17,500, and with an AGC target of 2×10^5 and maximum fill time of 60 ms. The precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole isolation window of 3 m/z, and then fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) trap with a normalized collision energy set to 30. The under-fill ratio was set to 3.5 % with the intensity threshold at 1.2×10^5. Apex triggering was 3 s to 10 s with charge and exclude isotopes exclusion on, and dynamic exclusion set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Three technical replicates for each plasma sample were generated using LC-MS/MS as described above. The six raw data files (winter and summer) for each bear and for controls were analyzed separately in Progenesis LC-MS v4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK). The raw file features were automatically aligned to an assigned reference file among the six raw files, and peak picking was also done in automatic mode. Peak filtering was carried out with respect to charge state (up to 7 charges) and retention time features within 30 min to 140 min were kept. Protein identifications were obtained using Mascot Server v2.3 (Matrix Sciences, London UK). The database search parameters were precursor and fragment tolerances of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. One missed cleavage was allowed, cysteine carboxymethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. False discovery rates (FDR) were 0.3-0.95% with an average of 0.71%. The protein database (Uma db, Bear-protein-db-Febr2013.fasta) was translated from predicted polar bear Ursus maritimus coding sequences (Liu et al., 2014). The genome sequences of polar bear and brown bear are similar, showing, on average, two substitutions per 1,000 bp (Cahill et al., 2013). 93 % could be annotated by homology using a BLASTP search against the human refseq database (E-value ≤ 1×10^-5). This Uma db contained 21,143 entries; 42 % showed ≥ 90 % identity to the human homolog. The Uma db yielded approximately 12 % more identified proteins than our initial db based on a combination of translated giant panda Ailuropoda melanoleuca genes and American black bear Ursus americanus EST sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Brown bears (Ursus arctos) hibernate for 5-7 months without eating, drinking, urinating, and defecating at a metabolic rate of only 25% of the summer activity rate. Nonetheless, they emerge healthy and alert in spring. We quantified the biochemical adaptations for hibernation by comparing the proteome, metabolome, and hematological features of blood from hibernating and active free-ranging subadult brown bears with a focus on conservation of health and energy. We found that total plasma protein concentration increased during hibernation, even though the concentrations of most individual plasma proteins decreased, as did the white blood cell types. Strikingly, antimicrobial defense proteins increased in concentration. Central functions in hibernation involving the coagulation response and protease inhibition, as well as lipid transport and metabolism, were upheld by increased levels of very few key or broad specificity proteins. The changes in coagulation factor levels matched the changes in activity measurements. A dramatic 45-fold increase in sex hormone-binding globulin levels during hibernation draws, for the first time, attention to its significant but unknown role in maintaining hibernation physiology. We propose that energy for the costly protein synthesis is reduced by three mechanisms as follows: (i) dehydration, which increases protein concentration without de novo synthesis; (ii) reduced protein degradation rates due to a 6 &#xb0;C reduction in body temperature and decreased protease activity; and (iii) a marked redistribution of energy resources only increasing de novo synthesis of a few key proteins. The comprehensive global data identified novel biochemical strategies for bear adaptations to the extreme condition of hibernation and have implications for our understanding of physiology in general.

### Keywords
Ursus arctos, Hibernation, Proteomics, Brown bear, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Professor of Biotechnology Aalborg University, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Fr Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg East, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Malene Brohus

### Lab Head
Dr Karen G Welinder
Professor of Biotechnology Aalborg University, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Fr Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg East, Denmark


