### Accession
PXD013613

### Title
Deoxynivalenol and human epidermal cells: proteomic profiling indicates alterations of cell membrane integrity and barrier function

### Description
The possibility to combine untargeted proteomic workflows to more classical experimental approaches is continuously opening new insights in all branches of biological sciences. Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most recurrent mycotoxins worldwide. DON is known to inhibit protein synthesis and as such to interact with the different cell types in multiple and complex ways. For the purpose of this study epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 and primary human HEKn cells were incubated with DON for 24h and toxin dependent alteration of the proteome profile was observed in the nuclear and cytoplasmic fraction. In A431 cells, DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements (OXPHOS regulation) and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). In line with the impairment of the mitochondrial function, altered metabolic capability was observed, with particular target of the lipid synthesis machinery. Effect of the mycotoxin on cell membrane was verified by confocal microscopy (morphology) and by membrane fluidity measures (biophysical properties). The toxicological relevance of these findings was independently confirmed with the primary human keratinocytes HEKn.

### Sample Protocol
For digestion of proteins, a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 10kD MWCO filters (Merck KGaA) were rinsed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH). 20µg of protein samples was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 14000g for 20min to get a final sample volume of 10-20µl. For reduction, 200µl of DTT solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer), pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 37°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 30min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200µl of IAA solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ABC buffer) were added and incubated in the dark for 30min at 30°C. After centrifugation at 14000g for 30min, the filter was washed with ABC buffer. Dual enzyme digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega) was performed overnight followed by an additional incubation with fresh enzymes for another 4h. Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation. The eluates of three elution steps were pooled and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis was performed. Dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 5µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.338 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins worldwide. Crop infestation results not only in food and feed contamination, but also in direct dermal exposure, especially during harvest and food processing. To investigate the potential dermotoxicity of DON, epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 were compared to primary human neonatal keratinocytes (HEKn) cells via proteome/phosphoproteome profiling. In A431 cells, 10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements (OXPHOS regulation) and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). Mitochondrial impairment was reflected in altered metabolic competence, apparently combined with interference of the lipid biosynthesis machinery. Functional effects on the cell membrane were confirmed by live cell imaging and membrane fluidity assays (0.1-10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON). Moreover, a common denominator for both A431 and HEKn cells was a significant downregulation of the squalene synthase (FDFT1). In sum, proteome alterations could be traced back to the transcription factor Klf4, a crucial regulator of skin barrier function. Overall, these results describe decisive molecular events sustaining the capability of DON to impair skin barrier function. Proteome data generated in the study are fully accessible via ProteomeXchange with the accession numbers PXD011474 and PXD013613.

### Keywords
Vomitoxin); human epidermal keratinocytes (hekn), Lipid synthesis machinery, Deoxynivalenol (don

### Affiliations
University of Vienna Faculty of Chemistry Department of Analytical Chemistry
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna Faculty of Chemistry Department of Analytical Chemistry


