### Accession
PXD036133

### Title
Profiling the heme-binding proteomes of bacteria using chemical proteomics

### Description
Heme is a cofactor with myriad roles and is essential to almost all living organisms. Accordingly, bacte-rial pathogens have developed numerous mechanisms to acquire heme from their hosts. Beyond classi-cal gas transport and catalytic functions, heme is increasingly appreciated as a tightly controlled signal-ling molecule regulating protein expression. However, heme acquisition, biosynthesis and regulation is poorly understood beyond a few model organisms, and the heme-binding proteome has yet to be fully characterised in bacteria. Yet as heme homeostasis is critical for bacterial survival, heme-binding pro-teins are promising drug targets. Herein we report a chemical proteomics method for global profiling of heme-binding proteins in live cells for the first time. Employing a panel of heme-based clickable and photoaffinity probes enabled the profiling of 32-54% of the known heme-binding proteomes in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, and revealed previously unknown potential heme interactors. This simple-to-implement profiling strategy could be interchangeably applied to different cell types and sys-tems and fuel future research into heme biology.

### Sample Protocol
Full proteome analysis (details of lysate preparation can be found in the research article supplementary methods) 100 µg of each prepared lysate was precipitated using 4 volumes of acetone (-20 °C, 16 h), followed by washing of the protein pellet with MeOH (2 × 1 mL) with sonication (10% intensity, 10 s) to resuspend the pellet. The proteins were then resuspended in 200 μL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 and reduced (5 mM TCEP, 1 h, 37 °C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 10 mM, 30 min, 25 °C). Alkylation was quenched with DTT (final concentration 10 mM, 30 min, 25 °C) then the proteins digested with LysC (0.5 μg, Wako, 1 h, 25 °C). The samples were diluted with 600 μL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (1.5 μg, Promega, 15 h, 37 °C). Tryptic digest was terminated with the addition of 10 μL formic acid (FA) and the trypsinised peptides were desalted with 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corp.). Desalted peptides were dried, then reconstituted in 50 μL 1% FA using a water bath sonicator and filtered through 0.22 μm Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filters (Merck, UFC30GVNB). Samples were stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement (1 μL injection) on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) and equipped with an Acclaim C18 PepMap 100 75 μm ID × 2 cm trap column (Thermo Fisher) and Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 75 μm ID × 50 cm separation column (Thermo Fisher), both heated to 50 °C. Samples were first loaded on the trap column with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (5 μL/min flow rate), then transferred to the separation column for a 152 min gradient using buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% FA and 0.30 μL/min flow rate. The gradient consisted of the following steps: buffer B at 5% for 7 min, gradient increase of buffer B to 22% over 105 min, then to 32% over the subsequent 10 min and finally to 90% over 10 more min. 90% buffer B was then maintained for another 10 min before decrease over 0.1 min to 5% for the rest of the run. MS settings can be found in the research article supplementary methods.  Heme proteome profiling enrichment experiments -Enrichment of heme-binding proteins and sample preparation for LC-MS/MS measurement (cell treatments can be found in the research article supplementary methods). Cell pellets were frozen overnight at -80 °C before resuspension in 1 mL lysis buffer (0.4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1% Triton-X100 and 1 × Roche cOmplete™ EDTA-free Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail in PBS). Cell lysis was achieved with bead disruption (Precellys 24 Homogenizer, Bertin Technologies, 3 × 30 s at 6500 rpm and 20 s cooling breaks using liquid nitrogen air flow). Lysates were clarified (13 000 rpm, 4 °C, 15 min) and the protein concentration of the supernatant determined by BCA assay (Roti Quant, Roth). 0.2-0.5 mg of lysate per sample was subjected to a click reaction to biotin.  For alkyne-containing probes: using 0.2 mM biotin-PEG3-azide (10 mM stock in DMSO, Sigma #762024), 1 mM TCEP (52 mM stock in ddH2O, Roth), 0.1 mM TBTA ligand (1.67 mM stock in 4:1 t-butanol:DMSO, TCI), and 1 mM CuSO4 (50 mM stock in ddH2O) for 1 h (25 °C,1000 rpm shaking).  For azide-containing probe 3: using 10 μL EZ-Link™ Phosphine-PEG3-Biotin (10 mM stock in DMSO, Thermo Scientific #88901) for 4 h (37 °C,1000 rpm shaking), followed by 20 h at room temperature. Excess click reagents were then removed by protein precipitation using 4 volumes of acetone (-20 °C, 16 h) and the samples prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as above. Samples were stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement (1 μL injection) on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC (Dionex) equipped with an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 μm ID × 2 cm trap column (Thermo Fisher) and a 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm × 75 μm ID, 1.6 μm FSC C18) (Ionoptics) in an EASY-spray setting. Both columns were heated to 40 °C during the measurement process. Samples were first loaded on the trap column with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (5 μL/min flow rate), then transferred to the separation column for a 152 min gradient using buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% FA and 0.400 μL/min flow rate. The gradient consisted of the following steps: buffer B at 5% for 7 min, gradient increase of buffer B to 22% over 105 min, then to 32% over the subsequent 10 min and finally to 90% over 10 more min. 90% buffer B was then maintained for another 10 min before decrease over 0.1 min to 5% for the rest of the run. Peptides were ionized at a capillary temperature of 275 °C and the instrument was operated in a Top12 data dependent mode. MS settings can be found in the research article supplementary methods.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) and its MaxLFQ algorithm (min ratio =1). MS spectra were searched against the following UniProt Reference proteomes: E. faecalis V583 (ID: UP000001415, retrieved 16.11.2020), B. subtilis 168 (ID: UP000001570, retrieved 03.12.2021), P. aeruginosa PAO1 (ID: UP000002438, retrieved 28.06.2021) and E. coli CFT073 (ID: UP000001410, retrieved 29.11.2021) alongside a list of common contaminants. The search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, peptides and peptide-spectrum matches. Contaminants, proteins only identified by site modification and reverse hits were removed.  LFQ intensity distributions were subjected to log2 transformation. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8, total matrix). Fold change and significance of protein enrichment upon probe treatment vs. DMSO control were calculated using an empirical Bayes method for two group comparison implemented with the R Bioconductor package limma.

### Publication Abstract
Heme is a cofactor with myriad roles and essential to almost all living organisms. Beyond classical gas transport and catalytic functions, heme is increasingly appreciated as a tightly controlled signalling molecule regulating protein expression. However, heme acquisition, biosynthesis and regulation is poorly understood beyond a few model organisms, and the heme-binding proteome has not been fully characterised in bacteria. Yet as heme homeostasis is critical for bacterial survival, heme-binding proteins are promising drug targets. Herein we report a chemical proteomics method for global profiling of heme-binding proteins in live cells for the first time. Employing a panel of heme-based clickable and photoaffinity probes enabled the profiling of 32-54&#x2009;% of the known heme-binding proteomes in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This simple-to-implement profiling strategy could be interchangeably applied to different cell types and systems and fuel future research into heme biology.

### Keywords
Bacterial pathogens, Heme, Lc-ms/ms, Cofactor

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Centre for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Munich, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8, D-85748 Garching, Germany.

### Submitter
Isabel Wilkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Centre for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Munich, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8, D-85748 Garching, Germany.


