### Accession
PXD001718

### Title
Brain microvessels onotogeny-INSERM ERI28

### Description
Acquired neonatal brain lesions result from the co-incidence of environment deleterious factors occurring at a specific development stage. Hypoxia-ischemia and inflammation are the major triggers of brain damage in late pregnancy and early infancy, and result in a variety of damages depending on whether it affected fetuses, early or late preterm infants or at term neonates. Indeed brain responses to insults are different depending on age, since cerebral tissue presents a rapidly evolving cellular and biochemical substrate in this period. Clearly age-dependent etiology is largely documented; e.g. Intraventricular/intraparenchymal (IVH/IPH) brain hemorrhage in fetuses and extreme preterm (less than 28 gestation weeks; GW); focal or diffuse periventricular leucomalacia in preterm aged 28-34 GW or cortical necrosis in term infants. Definite periods of occurrence of preterm-encephalopathy are associated to particular vulnerability of distinct cell populations. Functional deficits remain in grown-up and represent a human and economical burden. IVH/IPH affects extreme preterm infants. It specific periventricular germinal matrix (GM) localization reveal vascular vulnerability at this site during a definite period. GM is the site of particularly intense metabolism due to neural cell precursor multiplication and angiogenesis. In addition, GM is at risk of hypoperfusion or perfusion arrest due to its watershed situation between centripetal and centrifugal vascular supplies, especially in very preterm infants otherwise subjected to fluctuant hemodynamics. Thus vascular bed in GM cumulates hypoxia-ischemia risks. The vulnerability of vasculature in this area was referred to be linked to intense angiogenesis and micro-vessels remodeling. Indeed endothelial support by pericytes and astrocytes end-feet is loose in these vessels and angiogenic factors also exhibit pro-hemorrhage potential. The blood to brain interface referred to as neurovascular unit is the multicellular structure shaping endothelial cells to regulate vascular permeability. The blood brain barrier (BBB) restrains pericellular diffusion and allows specific trans-endothelial transports. In previous studies in mice, we have observed structural and functional differences between young and adult brain microvascular endothelial cells (mvEC). Of note mvEC from neonates express the NMDA receptor and glutamate in these cells elicit protease secretions involved in vascular remodeling, while adult mvEC did not. Genetic inactivation of the t-PA inhibitor-1 allowed to mimick an age dependent IVH/IPH up to 5 days post-natal (P5) in mice. These observations (and others) support the hypothesis that mouse brain microvessels represent a heuristic paradigm in the study of vascular maturity as a favoring background for age dependent neonate brain hemorrhage. The present project was designed at studying constitutive protein contents of brain microvessels in a large scale, around the period of high disruption propensity (P5). We prepared enriched fractions of mouse forebrain microvessels (fMV) in order to insolating the neurovascular unit made of endothelial cells linked by blood brain barrier junctions, basal lamina including pericytes, astrocyte and neuritic end-feet from P5 (pro-hemorrhagic state), P10 (Immature hemorrhage resistant state) and P60 (Mature) mice, to study proteome onotogeny in fMV.

### Sample Protocol
Forebrain microvessels (fMV) were obtained from 5-days old (P5), 10-days old (P10) and adult (Ad) mice dissected brain. fMV were isolated from tissue homogenate by differential centrifugation and filtration on nylon mesh (70µm). fMV were solubilized in three steps: i) a mild sonication and centrifugation (supernatant S0), ii) a strong sonication and centrifugation (supernatant S1), iii) a strong sonication in a detergent mix allowing complete solubization (supernatant S2). Supernatant S0 and S1 were combined (v/v) due to heterogeneity of protein yield in S0 depending on age. Thirty µg of fMV proteins lysates were in-gel digested by trypsin (0.1 µg/µl). Peptides, treated with iodoacetamide and DTT, were extracted from gel by successive washings with acetonitrile. One µg of protein samples were separated by nano-liquid chromatograph (Easy-nLC II, Thermo Scientific). nLC was composed of an enrichment column (Cap Trap C8, 0.5 x 2 mm, Michrom Bioresources) and a reversed phase column (C18, L153, ID 5 µm, 100 Å pore size, under 200 bar pressure, Nikkyo Technos, Japan). nLC was online coupled to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite,ThermoScientific) for tandem mass spectrometry analysis (MS/MS). Peptides eluted from C18 were injected in LTQ-Orbitrap by electrospray ionization at 1.5kV and 200°C. Tandem MS/MS was performed in a “data dependent” mode. The 20 most intense ions in full scan MS were selected and fragmented in a C-trap using collision induced dissociation method. MS and MS/MS analyses were done with 300 to 2000 m/z range and scan resolution set at 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Three independent fMV pools were analyzed for P5 and P10 and two for Ad. Two software were used to identify and quantify protein from raw spectrometer files. They both used Mascot® identification engine with the following parameters: tryptic peptides, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as variable post traductional modifications and a cut-off score set at 25. Proteome Discoverer® (v 1.3.0.339, Thermo Scientific) used spectral counting for quantification with peptide confidence filter high as quality filter. A post-software filtering was done with the following criteria: a protein was considered as identified if it was detected in at least 2 over 3 P5 or P10 samples and in the 2 Ad samples. Progenesis® LC-MS (v 4.0.4441.29989, Nonlinear Dynamics) allowed inter-age quantitative comparisons based on extracted ionic current. Statistical filters were applied, both at peptide and protein levels, for inter-age ANOVA : p<0.05, q<0.05 and power >0.8.

### Publication Abstract
Preterm infants born before 29 gestation weeks incur major risk of subependymal/intracerebral/intraventricular hemorrhage. In mice, neonate brain endothelial cells are more prone than adult cells to secrete proteases under glutamate challenge, and invalidation of the Serpine 1 gene is accompanied by high brain hemorrhage risk up to five days after birth. We hypothesized that the structural and functional states of microvessels might account for age-dependent vulnerability in mice up to five days after birth and might represent a pertinent paradigm to approach the hemorrhage risk window observed in extreme preterms. Mass spectrometry proteome analyses of forebrain microvessels at days 5, 10 and in adult mice revealed 899 proteins and 36 enriched pathways. Microarray transcriptomic study identified 5873 genes undergoing at least two-fold change between ages and 93 enriched pathways. Both approaches pointed towards extracellular matrix, cell adhesion and junction pathways, indicating delayed microvascular strengthening after P5. Furthermore, glutamate receptors, proteases and their inhibitors exhibited convergent evolutions towards excitatory aminoacid sensitivity and low proteolytic control likely accounting for vascular vulnerability in P5 mice. Thus, age vascular specificities must be considered in future therapeutic interventions in preterms. Data are available on ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD001718) and NCBI Gene-Expression-Omnibus repository (identification GSE67870).

### Keywords
Brain, Neonate, Mouse, Development, Microvessels, Ltq-orbitrap

### Affiliations
INSERM-ERI28
NeoVasc; Microvascularendothelium and neonatal acquired cerebral lesions Laboratory INSERM-ER28 Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy University of Rouen, 22 Boulevard Gambetta 76183, Rouen cedex France

### Submitter
Philippe LEROUX

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Bruno Gonzalez
NeoVasc; Microvascularendothelium and neonatal acquired cerebral lesions Laboratory INSERM-ER28 Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy University of Rouen, 22 Boulevard Gambetta 76183, Rouen cedex France


