### Accession
PXD020479

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine acetylation in Fusarium oxysporum

### Description
Lysine  acetylation (Kac), a  discovered post-translational modification, plays a key role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes. Fusarium oxysporumis a destructive necrotrophic fungal pathogen distributed worldwide with broad ranging hosts. However, the functions of Kac are unknown in Fusarium oxysporumr any other plant fungal pathogens. Here, we comprehensively evaluated the acetylation proteome ofFusarium oxysporum .

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction FromFusarium oxysporum  The protein extraction was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 x g in 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (PH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search MaxQuant and Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.1.8) were used to analyze the raw data of MS/MS (Cox and Mann, 2008;Cox et al., 2009). The tandem mass spectra collected were searched againsFusarium oxysporum database from UniProt. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor were set as 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavage, 5 charges and 5 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine was specified as fixed modification and acetylation on lysine was fixed as variable modification. The minimal peptide was set to seven, and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for modification sites and peptides were set as 1%. The Kac site localization probability of <0.75 was exclude (Zhou et al., 2016;Yang et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Fusarium oxysporum</i> f. sp. <i>lycopersici</i> (Fol) is the causal agent of Fusarium wilt disease in tomato. Proteins secreted by this pathogen during initial host colonization largely determine the outcome of pathogen-host interactions. Lysine acetylation (Kac) plays a vital role in the functions of many proteins, but little is known about Kac in Fol secreted proteins. In this study, we analyzed lysine acetylation of the entire Fol secretome. Using high affinity enrichment of Kac peptides and LC-MS/MS analysis, 50 potentially secreted Fol proteins were identified and acetylation sites determined. Bioinformatics analysis revealed 32 proteins with canonical N-terminal signal peptide leaders, and most of them were predicted to be enzymes involved in a variety of biological processes and metabolic pathways. Remarkably, all 32 predicted secreted proteins were novel and encoded on the core chromosomes rather than on the previously identified LS pathogenicity chromosomes. Homolog scanning of the secreted proteins among 40 different species revealed 4 proteins that were species specific, 3 proteins that were class-specific in the Ascomycota phylum, and 25 proteins that were more widely conserved genes. These secreted proteins provide a starting resource for investigating putative novel pathogenic genes, with 26 up-regulated genes encoding Kac proteins that may play an important role during initial symptomless infection stages.

### Keywords
Fusarium oxysporum, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China


