### Accession
PXD018951

### Title
Dental Pulp Stem Cells LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
This study focuses on the impact of ECM (extra-cellular matrix) over cell processes such as proliferation, differentiation or mineralization which is more specifically related to our dental pulp cells. We cultured these dental pulp stem cells (DPSC) in mineralization growth or normal growth conditions. After 21 days, cells were incubated in decellularized solution until no intact cells are seen. After ECM was washed, we studied the mineralization associated to these two different ECM. Matrisome proteins were identified through proteomics. DPSC matrisome is composed of 225 individual different proteins. We classified them according to different categories, the 3 core matrisome categories: glycoproteins, collagens, proteoglycans and the 3 matrisome associated proteins categories: the regulators, affiliated and secreted. When comparing the proteins in the N-ECM and OM-ECM, most of the core matrisome proteins are downregulated in OM conditions, except 3 glycoproteins, as well as regulators and secreted factors. However, annexins were found to be upregulated in OM condition. Cell adhesion, tensile strength and growth factor binding are over-represented in NM ECM. The collagen group and glycoproteins were higher in N-ECM than OM-ECM Thereafter, gingival stem cells (GSC), the less inherit osteogenic potency cells, were seeded on these N-ECM and OM-ECM. When GSCs were seeded on DPSC-derived ECM, the OM-ECM dramatically promoted mineral deposition compared with N-ECM. We hypothesize that annexins could participate in the osteogenic inductive properties. ECM plays a pivotal role in many physiological processes, it regulates cells behavior and can orient cell differentiation. Dental pulp and oral mucosa share embryological origins but differ in their reactions to insults. Dental pulp can mineralize while oral mucosa heals ad integrum. We hypothesize that ECM participate in these characteristics.

### Sample Protocol
DPSC were cultured in two different conditions as two groups. First group as normal ECM group (N) were maintained in normal growth medium. Second group as osteogenic ECM group (OM), cells were maintained in osteogenic induction medium. After 21 days, cells were incubated in decellularized solution containing 0.5% Triton-X100 in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide for 5 minutes until no intact cells are seen. After cell lysis, ECM was washed twice with sterile PBS and once with sterile deionized water. Subsequently, ECM was incubated with 0.0025% DNase for 30 minutes for nucleotide removal. ECM at day 21 was subjected for protein extraction and isolation using Compartment Protein Extraction Kit  (Millipore). Protein pellets were obtained according to Naba JOVE 2015.  Proteomic of ECM-enriched samples from DPSC ECM solubilization and digestion was performed essentially as described (Naba et al. 2012a) with the following modifications: 13-51 mg ECM-enriched pellets were solubilized and reduced in a solution of 8M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 with vortexing at 37°C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to 25mM for 30 min. After diluting to 2M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were deglycosylated with PNGaseF (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA: 100 units for 1 mg sample) and vortexing at 37°C for 2 hours, followed by digestion with trypsine/LysC (Promega), at a ratio of 1:10000 enzyme:substrate, with vortexing at 37°C for 2 hours. Final digestions were done using trypsine (Worthington Biochemical Corporation), at a ratio of 1:1000 enzyme:substrate, with vortexing at 37°C overnight, followed by a second aliquot of trypsine/LysC (Promega), at a ratio of 1:10000 enzyme:substrate, and an additional 4 hours of incubation. Solutions becoming cloudy upon initial reconstitution were cleared after overnight digestion. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptide were analyzed using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a QExactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) SwissProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) “and with carbamidomethy modification were used”. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=3). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on two-tailed T-test was performed and p-values were adjusted using Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure. Matrisome proteins (Human Matrisome with at least three total peptides in all replicates, a 1.5-fold enrichment and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched in sample comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mineralization, Proteomics, Extracellular matrix, Cell differentiation, Oral mucosa, Dental pulp

### Affiliations
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry platform (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry platform (LSMP)


