### Accession
PXD040207

### Title
Cell type-specific control of secondary cell wall formation by Musashi-type translational regulators in Arabidopsis

### Description
Deciphering the mechanism of secondary cell wall/SCW formation in vascular plants is key to understanding their development and the molecular basis of biomass recalcitrance. A sophisticated network of transcription factors has been implicated in SCW synthesis in plants, but little is known about the implication of RNA-binding proteins in this process. Here we report that two RNA-binding proteins homologous to the animal translational regulator Musashi, Musashi-Like2/MSIL2 and Musashi-Like4/MSIL4, function redundantly to control SCW formation in interfascicular fibers and the setting of biomass recalcitrance. We show that the disruption of MSIL2/4 decreases the abundance of lignin in fibers and triggers an hypermethylation of glucuronoxylan that is linked to an over-accumulation of GlucuronoXylan Methyltransferase1/3 (GXM1/3) proteins. We demonstrate that MSIL4 binds to the GXM1/3 mRNAs, likely repressing their translation in wild-type plants. Our results reveal cell-type-specific mechanisms underlying SCW formation in Arabidopsis and point to a novel aspect of SCW regulation linking translational repression to regulation of glucuronoxylan methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinked immunoprecipitations (IP) were carried out as described in Scheer at al. (2021), with a minor modification for the lysis buffer composition (50mM tris pH8, 50mM NaCl, 1% Triton , 2mM MgCl2 , Protease inhibitor Roche "complete" EDTA free, 0.375 % formaldehyde). After cell debris removal by centrifugation, supernatants were incubated for 30 min with 50 µl of magnetic microbeads coupled to anti-HA antibodies (Miltenyi). Negative control IPs were performed under the exact same conditions with Col-0 plants. Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
IP data were searched against the TAIR 10 database (A. thaliana samples, 54563 sequences) with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.6, Matrix Science) and data were imported into Proline software (version 2.0). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, a PSM score above 25, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra (BASIC Spectral Count value from Proline software) was used to quantify each protein in the two control replicates and in the two IP replicates. Volcano plots display the adjusted p values and fold changes in Y- and X-axis, respectively, and show the enrichment of proteins co-purified with tagged MSIL2F and MSIL4F IPs as compared to control IPs. The statistical analysis based on spectral counts was performed using a homemade R package that calculates fold change and p values using the quasi-likelihood negative binomial generalized log-linear model implemented in the edgeR package. The size factor used to scale samples were calculated according to the DESeq2 normalization method (i.e., median of ratios method). P value was adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg method from stats R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Musashi-type transcriptional regulator, Interactomic, Arabidopsis, Cell wall

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Gagliardi
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France


