### Accession
PXD027435

### Title
Proteomic analysis of drought stress response in Opium poppy

### Description
Main aim of the project is to analyze differentially expressed genes and proteins in early germination stages of Opium poppy plants under drought stress conditions. These results will be used for selection of drought resistant varieties for dry regions and also for further breeding of drought resistant varieties.  Side aim of the project is to utilize standard set of methods for sample preparation and processing for proteomic and transcriptomic analysis, that would lead to more comparable results for future assessments in the field of poppy drought stress resistance research.

### Sample Protocol
Whole plants of opium poppy were homogenised by mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. Homogenates were then lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 30 min, 95°C, 750 rpm). After that, samples were centrifuged (15 min, 20,000 x g) and the supernatants (100 μg of total protein) used for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described elsewhere (Wisniewski et al. 2009) using 0.5 μg of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). Trizol isolates were directly used for FASP in same conditions. Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptides were done using RSLCnano system (UltiMate™ 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particles; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 160454). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 164570) by 50 min gradient program (3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed.  MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–2,000). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3×106 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50,000 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.17) (Cox J, Mann M. 2008) with inbuild Andromeda search engine (Cox J et al 2011). Search was done against protein databases of Papaver somniferum (41,351 protein sequences, version from 03-11-2020, downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000316621_3469.fasta.gz) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, version from 22-11-2018, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Modifications were set as follows for database search: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers reverse hits and contaminant protein groups (cRAP) removal, protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (loessF) and LIMMA statistical tests.

### Publication Abstract
Water deficiency is one of the most significant abiotic stresses that negatively affects growth and reduces crop yields worldwide. Most research is focused on model plants and/or crops which are most agriculturally important. In this research, drought stress was applied to two drought stress contrasting varieties of <i>Papaver somniferum</i> (the opium poppy), a non-model plant species, during the first week of its germination, which differ in responses to drought stress. After sowing, the poppy seedlings were immediately subjected to drought stress for 7 days. We conducted a large-scale transcriptomic and proteomic analysis for drought stress response. At first, we found that the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles significantly differ. However, the most significant findings are the identification of key genes and proteins with significantly different expressions relating to drought stress, e.g., the heat-shock protein family, dehydration responsive element-binding transcription factors, ubiquitin E3 ligase, and others. In addition, metabolic pathway analysis showed that these genes and proteins were part of several biosynthetic pathways most significantly related to photosynthetic processes, and oxidative stress responses. A future study will focus on a detailed analysis of key genes and the development of selection markers for the determination of drought-resistant varieties and the breeding of new resistant lineages.

### Keywords
Dehydrins, Plant stress, Proteomics, Papaver somniferum, Opium poppy, Drought response

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
Central european institute of technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central european institute of technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno


