### Accession
PXD033447

### Title
ERG activity is regulated by endothelial FAK coupling with TRIM25/USP9x in vascular patterning

### Description
Precise vascular patterning is critical for normal growth and development. The ERG transcription factor drives Delta like ligand 4 (DLL4)/Notch signalling  and is thought to act as pivotal regulators of endothelial cell (EC) dynamics and developmental angiogenesis. However, molecular regulation of ERG activity remains obscure. Using a series of EC specific Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK)-knockout (KO) and point-mutant FAK-knockin mice, we show that loss of ECFAK, its kinase activity or phosphorylation at FAK-Y397, but not FAK-Y861, reduces ERG and DLL4 expression levels together with concomitant aberrations in vascular patterning. Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass Spectrometry of Endogenous Proteins identified that endothelial nuclear-FAK interacts with the de-ubiquitinase USP9x and the ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 enzymes. Further in silico analysis corroborates that ERG interacts with USP9x and TRIM25. Moreover, ERG levels are reduced in FAKKO ECs via a ubiquitin-mediated post-translational modification programme involving USP9x and TRIM25. Re-expression of ERG in vivo and in vitro rescues the aberrant vessel sprouting defects observed in the absence of ECFAK. Our findings identify ECFAK as a regulator of retinal vascular patterning by controlling ERG protein degradation via TRIM25/USP9x.

### Sample Protocol
Method for Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins The protocol was adapted from(Mohammed et al., 2016).  Briefly, HUVECs (#C2517AS [single donor] Lonza) were grown in complete media (#C-22111, Promocell).  Confluent cell cultures (~10 × 107 per biological replicate) were starved with serum-free, unsupplemented media (Opti-MEM I-Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific #31985070) for 6 h and stimulated with PBS (control) or VEGF (50 ng/ml) for 30 min.  The media was replaced with Opti-MEM I-Gibco containing 1% formaldehyde (#28908, ThermoFisher Scientific) and crosslinked for 8 min. Crosslinking was quenched by adding glycine to a final concentration of 0.2 M. For the performance of RIME experiments, 15 µl of agarose-conjugated FAK antibody (#16-173, Millipore/MERK) or 15 µg agarose-conjugated mouse IgG or Protein G agarose beads (#sc-2343, Santa Cruz and #A0919, Sigma). For nuclear extraction the cell pellet was resuspended in LB1 buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40 and 0.25% Triton X-100) followed by rotation mixing for 10 min at 4 °C. Then, nuclei were pelleted and resuspended in LB2 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM EGTA) and rotated at 4 °C for 5 min. The samples were resuspended in LB3 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate and 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine). Chromatin/protein were sheared by sonication (Diagenode) for 10 x 30 sec with 30 sec of rest on ice in between to produce DNA fragments of 100–1,000 bp. The bead-bound antibody and chromatin/protein (300 ?g total protein lysates) were incubated overnight at 4oC. The next day the beads were washed 10 times with 1 ml ice-cold RIPA buffer and twice with 500 µl 100 mM AMBIC (ammonium bicarbonate).

### Data Protocol
The FAK nuclear protein complexes were subjected to on-bead proteolytic digestion, desalting, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, as described(Turriziani et al., 2014). .

### Publication Abstract
Precise vascular patterning is crucial for normal growth and development. The ERG transcription factor drives Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4)/Notch signalling and is thought to act as a pivotal regulator of endothelial cell (EC) dynamics and developmental angiogenesis. However, molecular regulation of ERG activity remains obscure. Using a series of EC-specific focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-knockout (KO) and point-mutant FAK-knock-in mice, we show that loss of ECFAK, its kinase activity or phosphorylation at FAK-Y397, but not FAK-Y861, reduces ERG and DLL4 expression levels together with concomitant aberrations in vascular patterning. Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins identified that endothelial nuclear-FAK interacts with the deubiquitinase USP9x and the ubiquitin ligase TRIM25. Further in silico analysis confirms that ERG interacts with USP9x and TRIM25. Moreover, ERG levels are reduced in FAKKO ECs via a ubiquitin-mediated post-translational modification programme involving USP9x and TRIM25. Re-expression of ERG in vivo and in vitro rescues the aberrant vessel-sprouting defects observed in the absence of ECFAK. Our findings identify ECFAK as a regulator of retinal vascular patterning by controlling ERG protein degradation via TRIM25/USP9x.

### Keywords
Fak, Rime, Huvec

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


