### Accession
PXD030391

### Title
Adipose tissue is a pro-active player in sex dependent response to neuropathy

### Description
Both epidemiological data and scientific reports corroborate the higher incidence of
neuropathy and chronic pain in female gender not only in patients with metabolic
disorders but also in normometabolic subjects and in murine models. Our previous
results showed different immune and neuroimmune response to neuropathic pain
(NeP) between male and female mice as well as a different metabolic pattern in
proteins expressed in sciatic nerve. Here, we provide evidence that adipose tissue
(AT) plays a contributing role in sex-dependent differences before and after peripheral
nerve injury-induced NeP in mice. The metabolic parameters assessed, the metabolic
profile signature (metabolomics), the energy expenditure evaluation, the AT proteomic
analysis and the adipokines mobilization reveal a sex-specific AT response to
peripheral nerve damage. Of interest, an alteration of lipolysis and fatty acids oxidation
(FAO) emerges in females as well as an enhancement of whole-body energy
expenditure and higher secretion of sex hormones from AT, affecting glucose and
insulin metabolism. On the contrary, neuropathy in males induced an engagement of
glycolysis pathway, a decrease of systemic energy expenditure and unsaturated fattyacids levels. In males, AT responds favoring molecules useful in regenerative
processes and in the oxidative stress, as well as stimulating peroxisome proliferator
activated receptors (PPARs) gamma subtype (PPAR-γ) and adiponectin.
This study discloses new factors underlying the higher susceptibility of female sex to
NeP, indicating in AT a crucial player for the regulation of sex-dependent inflammatory
and metabolic response to nerve lesion.


### Sample Protocol
Total proteins have been extracted from  mice adipose tissue with classical RIPA buffer. Proteins concentration was determined and 50 μg of total protein  were transferred on a Microcon-10 Centrifugal filter with 10kDa cutoff  (Millipore) to perform trypsin digestion according  to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Digested peptides  solution  was spiked by 300fmol of Yeast Enolase Digestion Standard (Waters Corp.) and  diluted in a solution of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3% acetonitrile (ACN) in order to load 0.3 μg of each digested sample on a 5 μm Symmetry C18 trapping column 180 μm × 20 mm (Waters). Peptides were thus separated by a 120 min reverse phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 2–40% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40°C on a UPLC ACQUITY M Class (Waters). Separated peptides were analyzed in a shotgun experiment on a Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer (Waters), directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Data have been acquired in MSE mode, a data-independent acquisition protocol

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data from four replicate runs for each sample have been processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software Progenesis QI for proteomics, (Waters Corp.). The qualitative identification of proteins has been obtained by searching in the UniProt KB database release 2021_04 restricted  to  Mus Musculus Taxonomy,  to which the sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Enolase 1 (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot AC: P00924) was appended.

### Publication Abstract
Epidemiological data and research highlight increased neuropathy and chronic pain prevalence among females, spanning metabolic and normometabolic contexts, including murine models. Prior findings demonstrated diverse immune and neuroimmune responses between genders in neuropathic pain (NeP), alongside distinct protein expression in sciatic nerves. This study unveils adipose tissue's (AT) role in sex-specific NeP responses after peripheral nerve injury. Metabolic assessments, metabolomics, energy expenditure evaluations, AT proteomic analyses, and adipokine mobilization depict distinct AT reactions to nerve damage. Females exhibit altered lipolysis, fatty acid oxidation, heightened energy expenditure, and augmented steroids secretion affecting glucose and insulin metabolism. Conversely, male neuropathy prompts glycolysis, reduced energy expenditure, and lowered unsaturated fatty acid levels. Males' AT promotes regenerative molecules, oxidative stress defense, and stimulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR-&#x3b3;) and adiponectin. This study underscores AT's pivotal role in regulating gender-specific inflammatory and metabolic responses to nerve injuries, shedding light on female NeP susceptibility determinants.

### Keywords
Nepain  lc-ms, Hdmse, Mice, Wat

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit Experimental Neuroscience Department IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation  Roma, Italy
Proteomic and Metabolomic Unit, IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation, Roma 

### Submitter
Luisa Pieroni

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Pieroni
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit Experimental Neuroscience Department IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation  Roma, Italy


