### Accession
PXD044938

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream form mitochondrion is capable of ATP production by substrate-level phoshorylation

### Description
The bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei maintains its essential mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) through the proton-pumping activity of the FoF1-ATP synthase operating in the reverse mode. The ATP that drives this hydrolytic reaction has long been thought to be generated by glycolysis and imported from the cytosol via an ATP/ADP carrier (AAC). Indeed, we demonstrate that AAC is the only carrier that can import ATP into the mitochondrial matrix to power the hydrolytic activity of the FoF1-ATP synthase. However, contrary to expectations, the deletion of AAC has no effect on parasite growth, virulence or levels of ΔΨm. This suggests that ATP is produced by substrate-level phosphorylation pathways in the mitochondrion. Therefore, we knocked out the succinyl-CoA synthetase (SCS) gene, a key mitochondrial enzyme that produces ATP through substrate-level phosphorylation in this parasite. Its absence resulted in changes to the metabolic landscape of the parasite, lowered virulence, and reduced mitochondrial ATP content. Strikingly, these SCS mutant parasites become more dependent on AAC as demonstrated by a 25-fold increase in their sensitivity to the AAC inhibitor, carboxyatractyloside. Since the parasites were able to adapt to the loss of SCS in culture, we also analyzed the more immediate phenotypes that manifest when SCS expression is rapidly suppressed by RNAi. Importantly, when performed under nutrient-limited conditions mimicking various host environments, SCS depletion strongly affected parasite growth and levels of ΔΨm. In totality, the data establish that the bloodstream form mitochondrion is capable of generating ATP via substrat-level phosphorylation pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic measurement was performed on an Exactive 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with an online-mounted C18-packed capillary column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) by eluting along a 90 minute gradient of 2% to 40% acetonitrile using an EasyLC 1200 uHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated with a top20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the tritrypDB-8.1_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins database (11,567 entries) and standard settings, except activating the match between run feature and the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Protein groups marked as contaminants, reverse entries, and only identified by site were removed prior to bioinformatics analysis, as well as protein groups with less than 2 peptides (minimum 1 unique).

### Publication Abstract
The long slender bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei maintains its essential mitochondrial membrane potential (&#x394;&#x3a8;m) through the proton-pumping activity of the FoF1-ATP synthase operating in the reverse mode. The ATP that drives this hydrolytic reaction has long been thought to be generated by glycolysis and imported from the cytosol via an ATP/ADP carrier (AAC). Indeed, we demonstrate that AAC is the only carrier that can import ATP into the mitochondrial matrix to power the hydrolytic activity of the FoF1-ATP synthase. However, contrary to expectations, the deletion of AAC has no effect on parasite growth, virulence or levels of &#x394;&#x3a8;m. This suggests that ATP is produced by substrate-level phosphorylation pathways in the mitochondrion. Therefore, we knocked out the succinyl-CoA synthetase (SCS) gene, a key mitochondrial enzyme that produces ATP through substrate-level phosphorylation in this parasite. Its absence resulted in changes to the metabolic landscape of the parasite, lowered virulence, and reduced mitochondrial ATP content. Strikingly, these SCS mutant parasites become more dependent on AAC as demonstrated by a 25-fold increase in their sensitivity to the AAC inhibitor, carboxyatractyloside. Since the parasites were able to adapt to the loss of SCS in culture, we also analyzed the more immediate phenotypes that manifest when SCS expression is rapidly suppressed by RNAi. Importantly, when performed under nutrient-limited conditions mimicking various host environments, SCS depletion strongly affected parasite growth and levels of &#x394;&#x3a8;m. In totality, the data establish that the long slender bloodstream form mitochondrion is capable of generating ATP via substrate-level phosphorylation pathways.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


