### Accession
PXD041182

### Title
Impact of de novo variants in the PSMC3 proteasome AAA-ATPase subunit gene on the protein pattern of patient-derived primary T-cells in comparison to their wild-type counterparts.

### Description
To better understand the cellular consequences of loss-of-function mutations in the proteasome AAA-ATPase PSMC3, we performed a mass spectrometry-based comparative analysis of the T-cell proteome of subjects with PSMC3 mutations (p.Arg304Trp and p.Glu305Asp) to that of their wild-type counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from primary T cells by five cycles of freezing (liquid nitrogen) and thawing (30oC, 1,400 rpm) in 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea. Protein from each sample was reduced (2.5 mM DTT ultrapure, Invitrogen, for 15 min at 37 °C) and alkylated (10 mM iodacetamide, Sigma Aldrich, for 30 min at 37 °C). Proteolysis was performed using trypsin (1:25 ratio to protein) overnight at 37 °C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The tryptic digestion was stopped by adding acetic acid (final concentration 1%) followed by desalting using ZipTip-µC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Eluted peptides were concentrated by evaporation under vacuum and subsequently resolved in 0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN) containing HRM/iRT peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). Mass spectrometric data was recorded on QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Before MS data acquisition tryptic peptides were separated on a 25 cm Accucore column using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were eluted at a constant temperature of 40 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The detection was carried out in DIA mode with 56 isolation windows of 13 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using SpectronautTM Pulsar 13.9 software (Biognosys AG) by DirectDIA search against a spectral library generated from data-dependent acquisition measurements of a SCX-fractionated peptide pool. The spectral library construction by Spectronaut was based on a database search using a human protein database (Uniprot vs 03_2019, 20404 entries). The search included carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation at methionine and acetylation at protein N-termini as variable modifications. A protein Q-value cut-off of 0.01 and a precursor Q-value cut-off of 0.001 were applied.

### Publication Abstract
A critical step in preserving protein homeostasis is the recognition, binding, unfolding, and translocation of protein substrates by six AAA-ATPase proteasome subunits (ATPase-associated with various cellular activities) termed PSMC1-6, which are required for degradation of proteins by 26<i>S</i> proteasomes. Here, we identified 15 de novo missense variants in the <i>PSMC3</i> gene encoding the AAA-ATPase proteasome subunit PSMC3/Rpt5 in 23 unrelated heterozygous patients with an autosomal dominant form of neurodevelopmental delay and intellectual disability. Expression of <i>PSMC3</i> variants in mouse neuronal cultures led to altered dendrite development, and deletion of the <i>PSMC3</i> fly ortholog Rpt5 impaired reversal learning capabilities in fruit flies. Structural modeling as well as proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of T cells derived from patients with <i>PSMC3</i> variants implicated the <i>PSMC3</i> variants in proteasome dysfunction through disruption of substrate translocation, induction of proteotoxic stress, and alterations in proteins controlling developmental and innate immune programs. The proteostatic perturbations in T cells from patients with <i>PSMC3</i> variants correlated with a dysregulation in type I interferon (IFN) signaling in these T cells, which could be blocked by inhibition of the intracellular stress sensor protein kinase R (PKR). These results suggest that proteotoxic stress activated PKR in patient-derived T cells, resulting in a type I IFN response. The potential relationship among proteosome dysfunction, type I IFN production, and neurodevelopment suggests new directions in our understanding of pathogenesis in some neurodevelopmental disorders.

### Keywords
Primary t-cells, Psmc3 variants, Protein homeostasis, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald


