### Accession
PXD016385

### Title
Proteins associated with RORalpha binding element on SULT1E1 gene

### Description
Estrogen sulfotransferase (SULT1E1) metabolically inactivates estrogen and SULT1E1 expression is tightly regulated by multiple nuclear receptors in cells. A series of biochemical techniques have clearly demonstrated that nuclear receptors HNF4alpha and phosphorylated RORalpha at Ser100 form as complexes binding to the SULT1E1 enhancer to activate gene transcription in response to a high glucose (450 mg/dL) signal. However, the kinase that mediates this phosphorylation at high glucose condition remain in mysterious. To identify these binding factors and possible kinases that mediate the phosphorylation on the SULT1E1 enhancer, the SULT1E1 enhancer was biotinylated and conjugated to magnetic beads, which were subsequently used to enrich the binding factors from low glucose (40 mg/dL) and high glucose (450 mg/dL) treated HepG2 cell nuclear extracts.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were seeded and were exposed to low glucose (40 mg/dL) or high glucose (450 mg/dL) condition for 48 hours respectively, followed by nuclear protein extractions. The 22 bp SULT1E1 enhancer was repeated four times and was subcloned into pGL3-TK basic plasmid between KpnI and BglII. The 4×SULT1E1 enhancer was amplified from the plasmid by using the primers and was purified by using a QIAquick gel extraction kit (QIAGEN, MD, USA). The purified DNAs were biotinylated by using DNA Polymerase I, Large (Klenow) Fragment (NEB, MA, USA), and were immobilized to Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, NY, USA) for enriching the associated gene regulatory complexes from the HepG2 cells nuclear extracts. Beads containing biotinylated DNAs were incubated with the nuclear extracts for 3 hours. A lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 10 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaVO4, protease inhibitors cocktail) was used to wash the DNA-protein complexes which were eluted by an elution buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 7.5, 500 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl), followed by mass spectroscopic analysis.  Eluted protein samples were digested with 1 microgram of trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) overnight at 37 oC.  Peptides were then desalted using SampliQ C18 (100 mg x 1 mL) (Agilent) and a positive pressure manifold with N2 gas as the head pressure.  The SPE cartridges were first pre-conditioned by passing 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile through the cartridges and then equilibrating with 2 x 0.5 mL water.  After sample loading, 3 x 0.5 mL water was passed over the cartridges followed by an elution with 2 x 0.3 mL 0.1% formic acid in 1:1 water:acetonitrile.  The eluants were dried to completion using a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco) and then resuspended in 20 microliters of water prior to LC-MS analyses. Protein digests were analyzed by LC/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a 75 micron x 150 mm BEH dC18 column (1.8 micron particle, Waters Corporation) and a C18 trapping column (180 micron × 20 mm) with 5 micron particle size at a flow rate of 400 nL/min.  The trapping column was positioned in-line of the analytical column and upstream of a micro-tee union which was used both as a vent for trapping and as a liquid junction. Trapping was performed using the initial solvent composition.  5 microliters of digested sample was injected onto the column. Peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and 1% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) to 40% solvent B over 60 minutes. For the mass spectrometry, a data acquisition method was employed with an exclusion time of 15 seconds and an exclusion of +1 charge states.  The mass spectrometer was equipped with a NanoFlex source and was used in the positive ion mode.  Instrument parameters were as follows: sheath gas, 0; auxiliary gas, 0; sweep gas, 0; spray voltage, 2.7 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; S-lens, 60; scan range (m/z) of 200 to 2000; 2 m/z isolation window; resolution: 70,000; automated gain control (AGC), 2 × 10e5 ions; and a maximum IT of 200 ms.  Mass calibration was performed before data acquisition using the Pierce LTQ Velos Positive Ion Calibration mixture (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peak list were generated from the LC/MS data using Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science) and the resulting peak lists were converted to Spectrum Mill searchable lists using the data extractor feature of the Spectrum Mill software suite from Agilent. The data extractor settings included filtering for deconvoluted ions observed between 400 and 6000 Da. Moreover, of the remaining MS/MS spectra, only spectra that contained sequence tag information greater than two residues were submitted for database searching. The resulting extracted data were then searched against the SwissProt/ UniProt database using the MS/MS search function in the Spectrum Mill software. Search settings included a trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 25 ppm, a product ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm, variable methionine oxidation, and a minimum matched spectral intensity of 50%.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen sulfotransferase (SULT1E1) metabolically inactivates estrogen and SULT1E1 expression is tightly regulated by multiple nuclear receptors. Human fetal, but not adult, livers express appreciable amounts of SULT1E1 protein, which is mimicked in human hepatoma-derived HepG2 cells cultured in high glucose (450&#x2005;mg/dl) medium. Here, we have investigated this glucose signal that leads to phosphorylation of nuclear receptor ROR&#x3b1; (NR1F1) at Ser100 and the transcription mechanism by which phosphorylated ROR&#x3b1; transduces this signal to nuclear receptor HNF4&#x3b1;, activating the SULT1E1 promoter. The promoter is repressed by non-phosphorylated ROR&#x3b1; which binds a distal enhancer (-943/-922&#x2005;bp) and interacts with and represses HNF4&#x3b1;-mediated transcription. In response to high glucose, ROR&#x3b1; becomes phosphorylated at Ser100 and reverses its repression of HNF4&#x3b1; promoter activation. Moreover, the casein kinase CK1&#x3b1;, which is identified in an enhancer-bound nuclear protein complex, phosphorylates Ser100 in in vitro kinase assays. During these dynamic processes, both ROR&#x3b1; and HNF4&#x3b1; remain on the enhancer. Thus, ROR&#x3b1; utilizes phosphorylation to integrate HNF4&#x3b1; and transduces the glucose signal to regulate the SULT1E1 gene in HepG2 cells and this phosphorylation-mediated mechanism may also regulate SULT1E1 expressions in the human liver.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-msms, Roralpha binding element, Sult1e1 gene

### Affiliations
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences

### Submitter
Jason Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Williams
Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences


