### Accession
PXD014487

### Title
Adipocyte vesicles: ‘all-in-one’ packages that stimulate tumor mitochondrial metabolism and dynamics

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are emerging key actors in adipocyte communication. Notably, small extracellular vesicles shed by adipocytes promote melanoma aggressiveness through fatty acid oxidation, with a heightened effect in obesity. However, the vesicular actors and cellular processes involved remain largely unknown. Here, we elucidate the mechanisms linking adipocyte extracellular vesicles to metabolic remodeling and cell migration. Using an adapted SILAC technique, we show that adipocyte vesicles stimulate melanoma fatty acid oxidation by providing both enzymes and substrates. In obesity, the heightened effect of extracellular vesicles depends on increased transport of fatty acids, not fatty acid oxidation related enzymes as shown by classical LC-MS/MS analysis. These fatty acids, stored within lipid droplets in cancer cells, drive fatty acid oxidation after release through lipophagy. This increase in mitochondrial activity redistributes mitochondria to membrane protrusions of migrating cells, which is necessary to increase cell migration in the presence of adipocyte vesicles. Our results provide key insights into the role of extracellular vesicles in the metabolic cooperation that takes place between adipocytes and tumors with particular relevance in obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis of SILAC EV After EV preparation as described in material and methods, 50μg of proteins were reduced with 25mM DTT in 40mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 5% glycerol, 2% SDS for 15min at 65°C, alkylated by addition of 100mM chloroacetamide for 30min at room temperature in the dark and loaded on SDS-PAGE for a short run (0.5cm after entering the running phase of the gel). Proteins were stained using Coomassie Blue (Quick Coomassie Stain from Generon) and a single protein band was cut out and incubated three times on a shaker for 15min at 37°C in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). The gel slices were then vacuum-dried and rehydrated in the presence of 1μg of modified sequencing-grade trypsin solution (ratio trypsin/protein 1/50) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (overnight at 37°C). The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel slices using two incubations (15min at 37°C) under shaking in 10% formic acid, ACN (1:1). The two successive extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, vacuum-dried. The peptidic fractions were resuspended in 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, loaded on ZipTipUC18 (Milipore) to avoid potential contaminant and eluted in 80% ACN, 0.1 TFA. Peptides were vacuum dried and re-suspended in 50μL of 2% ACN and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reach 1μg/μL.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode. Two μg of each sample were loaded onto a C18 precolumn (300μm inner diameter x 5mm, Thermo Scientific) at 20μL/min in 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA. After 5min of desalting, the precolumn was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (75μm inner diameter × 50cm, in‐house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% ACN, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with two steps of solvent B gradient: a 5-25% gradient for 165min then a 25-50% gradient for 135min, at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–1500 m/z range, with the resolution set to 70,000. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation and resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.  Comparative proteomic analysis of EV from lean and obese adipocytes  After preparation of EV proteins, 30μg of denaturated proteins were processed as described for the SILAC experiment. Then, peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five μg of each sample was loaded on a C18 precolumn (300μm inner diameter × 5mm, Thermo Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA, at a flow rate of 20μL/min. After 5min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75μm inner diameter × 50cm, in‐house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using first a 5–25% gradient of solvent B for 75min, then a 25%-50% gradient for 30min, at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data‐dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–1800 m/z range, with the resolution set to 60,000. The 20 most intense ions survey scans were selected for fragmentation by collision‐induced dissociation (CID), and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap. Dynamic exclusion was used within 60s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis of SILAC EV The Xcalibur raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21, Thermo Fischer Scientific) for database search with the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) search optimization. The following parameters were set for creation of the peak list: parent ions in the mass range 350-5000 and no grouping of MS/MS scans. Peak list was searched against SP-mouse database released of 11th december 2018, 16979 entries. The search included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation, SILAC labels Lys6 and Arg6 as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Up to two missed trypsin/P cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 25mmu, respectively. Mascot results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at the same size. The Percolator algorithm was used to calculate a q-value for each peptide-spectrum matches (PSM), peptides and PSM were validated based on Percolator q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) set to 1%.  Comparative proteomic analysis of EV from lean and obese adipocytes  For protein identification and quantification, raw MS files converted to the mzdb format and were processed with the mzdb-access library (https://github.com/mzdb) to generate peaklists. Data were searched with Mascot (version 2.6.1) against SP-mouse database released of 11th december 2018, 16979 entries. The search included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Specificity of digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine for trypsin-digested samples and two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for the precursor ion. It was set to 0.8 Da for fragment  ions in CID mode. Validation and quantification of identifications were performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Missing protein intensity values were replaced by a constant value calculated independently for each sample as the 5-percentile value of the protein population. A Welch t-test (two-tailed t-test, unequal variances) was then performed on log2 transformed values for each protein The thresholds for the significant proteins were set to 0.05 for the p-value and 2 for the fold change.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles are emerging key actors in adipocyte communication. Notably, small extracellular vesicles shed by adipocytes stimulate fatty acid oxidation and migration in melanoma cells and these effects are enhanced in obesity. However, the vesicular actors and cellular processes involved remain largely unknown. Here, we elucidate the mechanisms linking adipocyte extracellular vesicles to metabolic remodeling and cell migration. We show that adipocyte vesicles stimulate melanoma fatty acid oxidation by providing both enzymes and substrates. In obesity, the heightened effect of extracellular vesicles depends on increased transport of fatty acids, not fatty acid oxidation-related enzymes. These fatty acids, stored within lipid droplets in cancer cells, drive fatty acid oxidation upon being released by lipophagy. This increase in mitochondrial activity redistributes mitochondria to membrane protrusions of migrating cells, which is necessary to increase cell migration in the presence of adipocyte vesicles. Our results provide key insights into the role of extracellular vesicles in the metabolic cooperation that takes place between adipocytes and tumors with particular relevance to obesity.

### Keywords
Exosome / fatty acid oxidation / lipophagy / melanoma / obesity / lc-msms

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 31077 Toulouse, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Manuelle Ducoux-Petit

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Burlet-Schiltz
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 31077 Toulouse, France


