### Accession
PXD039240

### Title
Evaluation of depletion of abundant plasma proteins for proteomics characterization of EVs

### Description
In this study, we aimed to investigate if the removal of abundant plasma proteins prior to EV isolation could improve plasma-derived EV characterization by LC-MS/MS by improving the proteome coverage. Plasma depletion was performed using single-use spin columns prior to SEC-based EV isolation. Afterwards, EVs derived from undepleted and depleted plasma were characterized by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample (plasma samples (1 µg) and EV samples (70 µL)) was reduced using TCEP 0.1 M (final concentration 5 mM, 30 min, 37°C) (SigmaAldrich), alkylated using iodoacetamide 150 mM (final concentration 15 mM, 60 min, RT, in dark condition) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested by an overnight tryptic digestion (w/w ratio 1:50, 37°C) (Promega). The RapiGest surfactant was cleaved by incubating samples with 0.5% trifluoacetic acid (45 min, 37 °C) (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were desalted on a C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Apparatus) and remaining peptides were dried in Savant SPD111V SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fischer). They were stored at −80°C and prior to MS injection, they were resuspended in 5% ACN 0.1% FA with addition of iRT peptides (ratio 1:20) (Biognosys). Plasma samples to assess the efficacy of plasma depletion were diluted in 10 μL of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 4 μL were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3 μm, 75 μm x 20 mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 125 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run from 8 % B to 28 % B in 105 min, then to 42% B in 20 min, then to 95% B in 5 min with a final stay of 20 min at 95 % B. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min and total run time was of 150 min. Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with fix windows. MS1 was performed with an AGC target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a scan range from 400 to 1240 m/z. DIA MS2 was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27%. Isolation windows was set to 28 m/z with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. EV and plasma samples were diluted in 10 μL of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 4 μL were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Settings were identical to those used for MS acquisitions in [20]. Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with fix windows. MS1 was performed with an AGC target of 1 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 1240 m/z. DIA MS2 was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30%. Isolation windows was set to 28 m/z with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
DirectDIA performance was used in Spectronaut™ (Biognosys AG, Zurich, Switzerland) to match DIA MS raw data. DirectDIA was used with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Precursor Qvalue cut-off was set to 1%, while Protein Qvalue cut-off (experiment) to 1% and (run) to 5%. Single Hit Proteins were excluded. Only precursors passing the q-value cut-offs were considered as quantified (i.e. Precursor Filtering "Identified (Qvalue)"). Sum of peptides (area, MS2 level) was applied for quantification. Proteotypicity filter was set to "Only Protein Group Specific".

### Publication Abstract
Blood extracellular vesicles (EVs) play essential roles in cell-cell communication and their molecular cargo is a promising source of disease biomarkers. However, proteomic characterization of plasma-derived EVs is challenged by the presence of highly abundant plasma proteins, which limits the detection of less abundant proteins, and by the low number of EVs in biological fluids. The aim of this study was to investigate if the removal of abundant plasma proteins prior to EV isolation could improve plasma-derived EV characterization by LC-MS/MS and expand the proteome coverage. Plasma depletion was performed using a single-use spin column and EVs were isolated from only 100 &#xb5;L of non-depleted and depleted plasma by size exclusion chromatography. Afterwards, EVs were characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis and mass spectrometry-based proteomics using a data-independent acquisition approach. Depleted plasma-derived EVs had higher particle concentrations and particle-to-protein ratios. Depletion did increase the protein coverage with a higher number of identifications in EVs from depleted plasma (474 proteins) than from non-depleted (386 proteins). However, EVs derived from non-depleted plasma carried a slightly higher number of common EV markers. Overall, our findings suggest that plasma depletion prior to EV isolation by size exclusion chromatography provides higher yield and protein coverage, but slightly lower identification of EV markers. This study also showed the possibility to characterize the proteome of EVs derived from small plasma volumes, encouraging the clinical feasibility of the discovery of EV biomarkers.

### Keywords
Ev, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Plasma depletion

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarker Group, Department of Medicine, University of Geneva
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Sandrine Reymond

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, Department of Medicine, University of Geneva


