### Accession
PXD018142

### Title
Plasma proteomic profile differences between healthy and white-nose affected Myotis lucifugus

### Description
We compared the proteomic profile of blood plasma in healthy and white-nose syndrome affected Myotis lucifugus in order to identify patho-physiological changes associated with the disease. Using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry we identified differentially expressed proteins for acute phase response, constitutive and adaptive immunity, oxidative stress defense, metabolism and structural proteins of exosomes and desmosomes, suggesting a systemic response against Pseudogymnoascus destructans infection in a North American bat species.

### Sample Protocol
We first performed 2-D Fluorescence Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2-D DIGE) analyses and to evaluate the expression pattern of protein spots separated by 2-D DIGE, all sample gels were analyzed using the Delta2D software (DECODON, Germany). Matched protein spots present in all sample images with a minimum of 1.5-fold change between the healthy and Pd-colonized state were later used for protein identification by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Preparative gel separation was performed with pooled samples. It was not possible to pick all differentially expressed spots as not all spots were distinguishable on the Coomassie blue stained gel. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system. For separation of tryptic peptides, a capillary column (PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 250 mm × 75 μm i.d.) was used. Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 3-50% B in 30 min. The mobile phases contained 0.1% formic acid in water (phase A) or acetonitrile (phase B). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with one MS survey scan (with a resolution of 60,000) in the Orbitrap and MS/MS scans of the five most intense precursor ions in the linear trap quadrupole. For the generation of a peak list, the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Toolbox (Matrix Science) was used.

### Data Protocol
We analysed the processed MS data on a MASCOT (mass spectral search algorithm) server (version 2.2.2, Matrix Science Ltd, London) and searched in-house against a combination of NCBI database of 3 Myotis species (M. brandtii, M. davidii, M. lucifugus) (FASTA files; 87021 entries). For LC-MS/MS, the mass tolerance of precursor and sequence ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.35 Da, respectively. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Methionine oxidation and the acrylamide modification of cysteine were used as variable modifications. A protein was accepted as identified if the total MASCOT score was greater than the significance threshold and at least two peptides appeared the first time in the report and were the top ranking peptides. For LC-MS/MS data, the ions score was -10*log(p), where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event, i.e. individual ions scores >41 indicate identity or extensive homology (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Emerging fungal diseases have become challenges for wildlife health and conservation. North American hibernating bat species are threatened by the psychrophilic fungus Pseudogymnoascus destructans (Pd) causing the disease called white-nose syndrome (WNS) with unprecedented mortality rates. The fungus is widespread in North America and Europe, however, disease is not manifested in European bats. Differences in epidemiology and pathology indicate an evolution of resistance or tolerance mechanisms towards Pd in European bats. We compared the proteomic profile of blood plasma in healthy and Pd-colonized European Myotis myotis and North American Myotis lucifugus in order to identify pathophysiological changes associated with Pd colonization, which might also explain the differences in bat survival. Expression analyses of plasma proteins revealed differences in healthy and Pd-colonized M.&#xa0;lucifugus, but not in M.&#xa0;myotis. We identified differentially expressed proteins for acute phase response, constitutive and adaptive immunity, oxidative stress defence, metabolism and structural proteins of exosomes and desmosomes, suggesting a systemic response against Pd in North American M.&#xa0;lucifugus but not European M.&#xa0;myotis. The differences in plasma proteomic profiles between European and North American bat species colonized by Pd suggest European bats have evolved tolerance mechanisms towards Pd infection.

### Keywords
Plasma, Myotis lucifugus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research
Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research


### Submitter
Gabor Czirjak

### Lab Head
Dr Gábor Á. Czirják
Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research


