### Accession
PXD041520

### Title
Synthesis of flavonol-bearing probes and chemical proteomic analysis of Asteraceae petals in search of flavonoid enzymes

### Description
In flowers of Asteraceae, yellow flavonols bearing an additional hydroxyl group at positions 6 or 8 (ring A) contribute to petal UV-absorbing pigmentation patterns, which play a crucial role in attracting pollinating insects. Understanding the biogenesis of these special flavonols requires the identification of any specific enzyme involved in these incorporations of extra hydroxyl groups on the quercetin ring A. To this aim, flavonol-bearing biotinylated probes have been designed and synthesized to explore their ability to selectively capture target proteins or biosynthetic enzymes under oxidative activation. These probes demonstrate the ability to capture several flavonoid enzymes from Rudbeckia and Tagetes microsomes and allow the identification of uncharacterized candidates for novel flavonoid enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Source of proteins: suspension of microsomes with petal proteins from Rudbeckia hirta ~1,5 mg/ mL and Tagetes erecta ~ 2-2.5 mg / mL in 0,1M Tris-HCl, 20% saccharose, 0,4% ascorbate. Titration: The minimal required amount of NaIO4 (Method O) was determined by a titration method we developed using 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP). For each proteome, a titration sample was prepared analogously to the capture samples by mixing the proteome with the polyphenolic probe (e.g., Q8). Subsequently, the indicator was added as 100 µL of freshly prepared 0.4 mM solution of DCPIPH2. Then, a stepwise addition of 10 µL (by 2 µL upon starting of colouration) of the 100 mM NaIO4 stock solution was repeated until the observation of a stable blue colouration. Capture assays were performed using flavanol-bearing probes Q8, Q6 or K8 (2 μL of 200 μM in DMSO, 400 pmol) with protein preparations (for Rudbeckia: 99 μL / for Tagetes: 60 μL). For the negative controls, 2 μL of DMSO were added instead of probe. Each sample (probe-containing and negative controls) was prepared in triplicates. Incubations with proteins were carried out in 1.5 mL Eppendorf low-binding tubes under shaking (1150 rpm) at 37°C for 30 min. Then the amount of NaIO4 determined by the titration was added to the protein samples: for Rudbeckia 20 µL NaIO4 (100 mM) diluted into 170 µL PBS pH 7.4 and for Tagetes 32 µL NaIO4 100 mM diluted into 178 µL PBS pH 7.4. The mixtures were allowed to shake (1150 rpm) at 23°C for 1 min and then quenched by addition of 400 μL of quenching buffer (4 mM Na2S2O4 in PBS pH 6.8). Samples were shaken again (1150 rpm) for 2 minutes and subsequently incubated with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (50 μL, Dynabeads®MyOneTM Streptavidin C1: prewashed and suspended in 250 μL of PBS pH 6.8 containing Tween, 0.1 % final concentration) for 1 h at 23 °C under shaking (1150 rpm). The beads were collected using a magnetic device and the supernatants were removed. The beads were first washed three times with some washing buffer (1 mL x 3 [(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.05% (wt/vol) octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside, 0.5 M NaCl, 2 mM β-mercaptoethanol)]), then twice with an aqueous solution of SDS 0.1% (1 mL x 2), once with a solution of SDS 0.2% + 2 mM β-mercaptoethanol in PBS buffer pH 6.8 (1 mL, 10 min at 23 °C, 1150 rpm), then once with MilliQ water (1 mL). At this stage, the Eppendorf tubes were changed (new low-binding tubes) and the last wash was with PBS buffer pH 6.8 (1 mL). 30 μL of denaturing Laemmli buffer was then added to the beads, and the resulting solutions were heated at 95°C for 5 min under shaking (1400 rpm). The resulting probe-labelled proteins were then analysed by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. This protocol was also implemented using probes Q8, Q6 or K8 without addition of NaIO4 (Method N) in the aim of assessing the extent of non-covalent captures and/or possible covalent captures through autoxidation, a process that can never be totally excluded when working with polyphenolic materials.  Sample preparation and protein digestion  Protein samples solubilized in Laemmli buffer were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel for concentration and cleaning purpose. Separation was stopped once proteins have entered resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% ACN, rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH.

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS/MS analysis and Label-Free Quantitative Data Analysis Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 50-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 45 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of R = 120 000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans were collected in the Ion Trap with a dynamic maximum injection time. Only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 35%, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 2 x 103 and normalized AGC target of 20%. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 5 x 103.  Database search and results processing Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against different databases (see below summary table 1). For Rudbeckia hirta protein samples (total microsome and captured samples) two distinct searches were performed against Helianthus annuus UNIPROT database (RPS_2019_09_Helianthus_annuus_UP000215914.fasta) supplemented by F6H sequences from Bidens ferulifolia (BidF6H.fasta) and from Rudbeckia hirta (RudF6H_K8_pYES.fasta) or against Rudbeckia hirta proteomic database  (New_rudbeckia_rename.fasta) derived from the combination of SAMN14886687 and SAMN14886688 transcriptomic databases provided by Halbwirth team, identically supplemented by F6H sequences from Bidens ferulifolia (BidF6H.fasta) and from Rudbeckia hirta (RudF6H_K8_pYES.fasta). For Tagetes erecta protein samples (total microsome and captured samples) two distinct searches were performed against Helianthus annuus UNIPROT database (RPS_2019_09_Helianthus_annuus_UP000215914.fasta) supplemented by F6H sequence from Rudbeckia hirta (RudF6H_K8_pYES.fasta) and against Tagetes erecta proteomic database (GGGQ01.1_proteomic.fasta) derived from the transcriptomic database provided by Feng G and coll. (see reference (1)) supplemented by F6H sequence from Tagetes erecta (TagF6H.fasta). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. Precursor Detector node was included. Search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), methionine loss (-131 Da), methionine loss with acetylation (-89 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (1) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Protein abundances were calculated as the sum of unique peptide intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount. Protein ratio were calculated from the grouped protein abundances. An ANOVA test was calculated based protein individual values. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of two peptides and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05. (1) : G. Feng, S. Huang, Yi. Liu, F. Xiao, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, Q. Chen, Y. Mao, X. Cao, Y. Wang, D. Chen, Y. Zhou, F. Yu, G. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Niu, Gene, 2018, 660, 18-27

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed at searching for the enzymes that are responsible for the higher hydroxylation of flavonols serving as UV-honey guides for pollinating insects on the petals of Asteraceae flowers. To achieve this aim, an affinity-based chemical proteomic approach was developed by relying on the use of quercetin-bearing biotinylated probes, which were thus designed and synthesized to selectively and covalently capture relevant flavonoid enzymes. Proteomic and bioinformatic analyses of proteins captured from petal microsomes of two Asteraceae species (<i>Rudbeckia hirta</i> and <i>Tagetes erecta</i>) revealed the presence of two flavonol 6-hydroxylases and several additional not fully characterized proteins as candidates for the identification of novel flavonol 8-hydroxylases, as well as relevant flavonol methyl- and glycosyltransferases. Generally speaking, this substrate-based proteome profiling methodology constitutes a powerful tool for the search for unknown (flavonoid) enzymes in plant protein extracts.

### Keywords
Natural products • plant polyphenols • proteomics • bioinformatics • biosynthesis of higher hydroxylated flavonols

### Affiliations
Team: Mass spectrometry of biological molecules Institute CBMN for Chemistry and Biology of Membranes and Nano-objects UMR 5248 CNRS-Bordeaux University 33607 Pessac - FRANCE
CNRS - French National Center for Scientific Research

### Submitter
Stéphane CHAIGNEPAIN

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Tokarski
Team: Mass spectrometry of biological molecules Institute CBMN for Chemistry and Biology of Membranes and Nano-objects UMR 5248 CNRS-Bordeaux University 33607 Pessac - FRANCE


