### Accession
PXD018926

### Title
RNF41 regulation of the dendritic cell receptor Clec9A

### Description
The dendritic cell receptor Clec9A facilitates processing of dead cell-derived antigens for cross-presentation and the induction of effective CD8+ T cell immune responses. This study investigates the role of E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF41 in Clec9A-mediated ubiquitination, and Clec9A-interactions.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-tagged full length mouse Clec9A (mClec9A-FLAG) was expressed in Freestyle 293F cells in the presence of Myc-tagged ubiquitin (Ub-Myc), and either full length RNF41 or RNF41-ΔRING. Expression plasmids (10 μg each) or vector alone (pcDNA3.1+), as indicated, to a total of 30 μg plasmid were co-transfected using 293FectinTM transfection reagent. Transfected cells were harvested 1 day post-transfection and lysed using 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris at pH 6.0-7.5, supplemented with 50uM PR619, Benzonase® nuclease (Novagen) and CompleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were precleared with protein G Sepharose (GE Healthcare), and FLAG-tagged Clec9A immunoprecipitated using anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma Aldrich). Immunoprecipitated proteins for LC-MS/MS analysis were eluted with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5 and neutralized with 1 M Tris pH 8.0. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich), and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Samples were acidified to 1% formic acid and purified with Bond-Elut OMIX C18 tips (Agilent) prior to mass spectrometry. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler, the samples were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN / 0.1% FA at a flow of 250 nl/min for 128 min and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each cycle was set to a fixed cycle time of 2 sec consisting of an Orbitrap full ms1 scan (resolution: 120.000; AGC target: 1e6; maximum IT: 54 ms; scan range: 375-1800 m/z) followed by several Orbitrap ms2 scans (resolution: 30.000; AGC target: 2e5; maximum IT: 54 ms; isolation window: 1.4 m/z; HCD Collision Energy: 32%). To minimize repeated sequencing of the same peptides, the dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec and the ‘exclude isotopes’ option was activated.

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were searched against the human UniProtKB/SwissProt database (v2017_07) appended with the mouse Clec9A sequence using either MaxQuant or Byonic (Protein Metrics) considering a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy approach. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the Gly-Gly ubiquitination footprint motif on lysine residues were set as variable modifications. N-linked glycan modifications were identified in Byonic (Protein Metrics) using the implemented glycan databases. Trypsin was used as the enzymatic protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Data visualization and mining was performed in Perseus or Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The dendritic cell receptor Clec9A facilitates processing of dead cell-derived antigens for cross-presentation and the induction of effective CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell immune responses. Here, we show that this process is regulated by E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF41 and define a new ubiquitin-mediated mechanism for regulation of Clec9A, reflecting the unique properties of Clec9A as a receptor specialized for delivery of antigens for cross-presentation. We reveal RNF41 is a negative regulator of Clec9A and the cross-presentation of dead cell-derived antigens by mouse dendritic cells. Intriguingly, RNF41 regulates the downstream fate of Clec9A by directly binding and ubiquitinating the extracellular domains of Clec9A. At steady-state, RNF41 ubiquitination of Clec9A facilitates interactions with ER-associated proteins and degradation machinery to control Clec9A levels. However, Clec9A interactions are altered following dead cell uptake to favor antigen presentation. These findings provide important insights into antigen cross-presentation and have implications for development of approaches to modulate immune responses.

### Keywords
Rnf41, Ubiquitination, Clec9a, E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Mireille Lahoud
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Australia


