### Accession
PXD028570

### Title
Proteomics analysis of urine pre and post surgery from patients undergoing total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation

### Description
Total pancreatectomy with islet cell autotransplantation (TPIAT) is a surgical treatment modality used for the management of painful chronic pancreatitis when medical and endoscopic therapies fail. Total pancreatectomy (TP) results in a number of clinical implications. However, the glucose-responsive insulin secretion can be preserved by combining TP with islet cell autotransplant (IAT). Despite the known clinical implications of TPIAT, the systemic molecular effects of TPIAT remains poorly investigated. Therefore, we performed the first hypothesis-generating study of the urinary proteome before and after TPIAT. The RAW- and processed data from the analysis can be found in this repository. Twenty-two chronic pancreatitis patients eligible for TPIAT were prospectively enrolled in the study at the University of Minnesota Medical Center between September 2011 and February 2014. Urine was collected within the week pre-TPIAT and 12-18 months post-TPIAT, resulting in 44 paired samples. The paired experimental design allowed us to subtract interpersonal differences. The unique set of urine samples were prepared for bottom-up label-free quantitative proteomics using the in-house developed ‘MStern’ protocol for the 96-well plate compatible processing of the urine samples. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and 2477 proteins were identified (FDR<0.01%). Five samples were found to have less than 30% of the cumulated list of proteins (<743 proteins) and so these samples and their respective matching sample were thus removed from the analysis. This resulted in a complete dataset with 17 matched pre- and post-TPIAT sample pairs. The final list of recommended included pairs for future analysis are indicated in the PX_TPIAT_Metadata.csv file. Note that extended clinical information only was available for the included samples. Furthermore, the information is only listed for the pre-TPIAT sample but applies to both the pre- and post-TPIAT participant sample. The data allows for studying the systemic molecular impact of the TPIAT procedure.

### Sample Protocol
The unique set of urine samples were prepared for bottom-up label-free quantitative proteomics using the in-house developed ‘MStern’ protocol for the 96-well plate compatible processing of the urine samples.  STUDY COHORT AND DEFINITIONS OF CLINICAL FEATURES At the University of Minnesota Medical Center, samples were collected from 22 patients with CP prospectively enrolled in a TPIAT follow up study between September 2011 and February 2014.  The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (IRB) (protocol #0609M91887) and patient consent or parental consent and patient assent was obtained as age appropriate for all participants. Urine samples were collected within the week prior to TPIAT, and 12-18 months post-surgery, yielding a total of 44 samples. Clinical information for each participant was obtained, including baseline demographics, pre- and post-operative kidney function, any history of diagnosed renal disease including chronic kidney disease or renal stones, islet cell yield, and islet cell graft function at 1-year post-TPIAT. Graft functions were defined as: 1) full graft (insulin independent at 1-year post-TPIAT), 2) partial graft (insulin dependence at 1-year post-TPIAT with C-peptide >0.6ng/dl), and 3) failed graft (insulin dependence at 1-year post-TPIAT with C-peptide < 0.6ng/dl). In addition, creatinine samples were obtained at time of morning fasting metabolic blood work before and after TPIAT. Using this creatinine measurement, we retrospectively defined chronic kidney disease (CKD) as eGFR < 90 mL/min/1.73m2. The data has been included in the PX_TPIAT_Metadata.csv file. Urine samples and clinical history were collected under an IRB approved study at the University of Minnesota (IRB# 0609M91887). Patient consent or parental consent as age appropriate was obtained from all participants.  Deidentified data and urine samples were then analyzed at Harvard Medical School under an Institutional Review Board (IRB) exempt protocol (#2018H0429).   SAMPLE PREPARATION FOR PROTEOMICS The urine samples were prepared for proteome analysis using the in-house developed MStern blotting approach as previously described. Briefly explained, 150 µL urine (nominally ~15 µg protein) was mixed with dry urea and ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to a final concentration of 8 M urea, 50 mM ABC pH 8.5 in a 96-well plate. Protein cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 10 mM in 50 mM ABC and incubation for 20 min. Reduced disulfide bonds were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 20 min. From each sample, a volume corresponding to nominally 15 µg reduced and alkylated protein was transferred to a 96-well hydrophobic PVDF membrane plate (MSIPS4510, Millipore), which had been primed with 70% ethanol and conditioned with 8 M urea in 50 mM ABC pH 8.5. A 96-well plate adaptable vacuum manifold (Millipore) was used to apply a vacuum and facilitate liquid transfer through the PVDF membrane plate. After adsorption of the proteins onto the membrane, the membranes were washed with 50 mM ABC. Protein digestion was performed by adding 100 µg of 10 µg/mL sequencing grade modified trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI) diluted in 5% acetonitrile, 50 mM ABC (nominal trypsin to protein ratio 1:15) and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C in a humidified incubator. The peptides were eluted from the PVDF membrane plate with 40% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Subsequently, the elution solutions were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dry urine product was stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS The samples were analyzed using a microfluidic LC chip system coupled online to a high resolution/high accuracy Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were resuspended in 50 µL 5% ACN, 5% FA, and 3 µL was loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 analytical column (PicoChip 150 µm x 15 cm (New Objective)) with 2 µL solvent A (0.1% FA). The peptides were eluted from the column by increasing the ratio of solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) on a 70 min linear gradient from 7% buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 25% buffer B, at a flow rate of 1000 nL/min a flowrate. The PicoChip with an integrated emitter was kept at 50°C and mounted directly in front of the inlet of the heated capillary of the Q Exactive mass spectrometer, which was operated in positive mode. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent TOP10 (DDA) mode with the following settings: mass range 400–1000 Th; resolution for MS1 scan 70 000 @ 200 Th; lock mass: 445.120025 Th; resolution for MS2 scan 17 500 @ 200 Th; isolation width 1.6 Th; NCE 27; underfill ratio 1%; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, >6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
DATA ANALYSIS The urine raw files were searched with MaxQuant v1.5.5.1 against a database containing the reviewed UniProt human reference proteome (downloaded: 2016-08-21; # of protein entries: 20,209). Standard settings were employed in MaxQuant, with the match-between-runs feature enabled. A maximum of three tryptic missed cleavages were allowed, as recommended for the MStern protocol. Additionally, the following modifications were found to be abundant with the applied protocol and were included in the search: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of proteins N-terminals (variable), oxidation of methionine (variable), and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (variable). Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the forward/reverse database search strategy in MaxQuant. The resulting txt-folder can be found in the repository.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Lc-msms, Tpiat, Paired, Pancreatectomy, Autotransplantation

### Affiliations
Departments of Pathology Director of Proteomics, Associate Professor Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Tue Bjerg Bennike

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Departments of Pathology Director of Proteomics, Associate Professor Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School


