### Accession
PXD024422

### Title
Identification of Altered Proteins in the Plasma of Rats with Chronic Prostatic Inflammation Induced by Estradiol Benzoate and Sex Hormones

### Description
The cause of non-bacterial chronic prostatitis is unknown, yet its prevalence accounts for more than 90% of all prostatitis cases. Whole blood, plasma, and serum have been used to identify prostate cancer biomarkers; however, few studies have performed protein profiling to identify prostatitis biomarkers.  The purpose of this study was to identify protein biomarkers altered by chronic prostatitis. To perform the study, we chemically induced chronic prostate inflammation in Sprague Dawley rats using estradiol benzoate (EB), testosterone (T), and estradiol (E), then examined protein levels in their plasma. Plasma was collected on postnatal days (PNDs) 90, 100, 145, and 200; plasma proteins were profiled using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Chronic inflammation was observed in rat prostate induced with EB on PNDs 1, 3, and 5. Rats then were dosed with T+E during PND 90-200 via subcutaneous implants.  We identified time-specific expression for several proteins (i.e., CFB, MYH9, AZGP1). Some altered proteins that were expressed in the prostate (i.e., SERPINF1, CTR9) also were identified in rat plasma in the EB+T+E group on PNDs 145 and 200. These findings suggest that the identified proteins could be used as biomarkers of chronic prostatitis. Further studies are needed to verify the results in human samples.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma was thawed on ice, and 25 μL was removed for processing. Abundant proteins were depleted using affinity chromatography (Seppro Rat, Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s directions.The samples were added to a final concentration of 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and then were heated to 95 °C for 10 min. Next, samples were cooled, probe-sonicated, and clarified via centrifugation at 20,000 g for 2 min. The final concentration of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) were added to the lysate and incubated at RT for 30 min in the dark. Hence, samples were quenched by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Then, samples were digested with trypsin using the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) paramagnetic bead method previously described.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer RAW data files were converted to mzML format using msconvert. MGF files were generated from the mzML files using OpenMS. All searches were performed on Amazon Web Services-based cluster compute instances using the Proteome Cluster interface.

### Publication Abstract
The cause of nonbacterial chronic prostatitis is unknown, yet its prevalence accounts for more than 90% of all prostatitis cases. Whole blood, plasma, and serum have been used to identify prostate cancer biomarkers; however, few studies have performed protein profiling to identify prostatitis biomarkers. The purpose of this study was to identify protein biomarkers altered by chronic prostatitis. To perform the study, we chemically induced chronic prostate inflammation in Sprague Dawley rats using estradiol benzoate (EB), testosterone (T), and estradiol (E) and then examined protein levels in their plasma. Plasma was collected on postnatal days (PNDs) 90, 100, 145, and 200; plasma proteins were profiled using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Chronic inflammation was observed in the rat prostate induced with EB on PNDs 1, 3, and 5. Rats then were dosed with T+E during PNDs 90-200 via subcutaneous implants. We identified time-specific expression for several proteins (i.e., CFB, MYH9, AZGP1). Some altered proteins that were expressed in the prostate (i.e., SERPINF1, CTR9) also were identified in the rat plasma in the EB+T+E group on PNDs 145 and 200. These findings suggest that the identified proteins could be used as biomarkers of chronic prostatitis. Further studies are needed to verify the results in human samples.

### Keywords
Plasma, Testosterone, Estradiol benzoate, Chronic inflammation, Proteomics, Rats, Estradiol, Prostate

### Affiliations
Division of Systems Biology, National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA
NCTR/FDA

### Submitter
Noriko Nakamura

### Lab Head
Dr Noriko Nakamura
Division of Systems Biology, National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA


