### Accession
PXD021230

### Title
Defining blood-induced microglia functions in neurodegeneration through multiomic profiling

### Description
Blood protein extravasation through a disrupted blood–brain barrier and innate immune activation are hallmarks of neurological diseases and emerging therapeutic targets. However, how blood proteins polarize innate immune cells remains largely unknown. Here, we established an unbiased blood-innate immunity multiomic and genetic loss-of-function pipeline to define the transcriptome and global phosphoproteome of blood-induced innate immune polarization and its role in microglia neurotoxicity. Blood induced widespread microglial transcriptional changes, including changes involving oxidative stress and neurodegenerative genes. Comparative functional multiomics showed that blood proteins induce distinct receptor-mediated transcriptional programs in microglia and macrophages, such as redox, type 1 interferon and lymphocyte recruitment. Deletion of the blood coagulation factor fibrinogen largely reversed blood-induced microglia neurodegenerative signatures. Genetic elimination of the fibrinogen-binding motif to CD11b in Alzheimer’s disease mice reduced microglial lipid metabolism and neurodegenerative signatures that were shared with autoimmune-driven neuroinflammation in multiple sclerosis mice. Our data provide an interactive resource for investigation of the immunology of blood proteins that could support therapeutic targeting of microglia activation by immune and vascular signals.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NH4HCO3, and protease inhibitors. Lysates were sonicated, reduced with TCEP, cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin overnight. Digested samples were desalted by C18 solid phase extraction and phosphopeptides were enriched by Fe3+-IMAC. Samples were desalted again by C18 SPC after Fe3+-IMAC enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by MaxQuant to identify peptides/proteins and to localization phosphorylation positions. The data were subsequently analyzed by MSstats to fit a mixed/fixed effects model of variation at all levels, and to apply a statistical test to compare different conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Blood protein extravasation through a disrupted blood-brain barrier and innate immune activation are hallmarks of neurological diseases and emerging therapeutic targets. However, how blood proteins polarize innate immune cells remains largely unknown. Here, we established an unbiased blood-innate immunity multiomic and genetic loss-of-function pipeline to define the transcriptome and global phosphoproteome of blood-induced innate immune polarization and its role in microglia neurotoxicity. Blood induced widespread microglial transcriptional changes, including changes involving oxidative stress and neurodegenerative genes. Comparative functional multiomics showed that blood proteins induce distinct receptor-mediated transcriptional programs in microglia and macrophages, such as redox, type I interferon and lymphocyte recruitment. Deletion of the blood coagulation factor fibrinogen largely reversed blood-induced microglia neurodegenerative signatures. Genetic elimination of the fibrinogen-binding motif to CD11b in Alzheimer's disease mice reduced microglial lipid metabolism and neurodegenerative signatures that were shared with autoimmune-driven neuroinflammation in multiple sclerosis mice. Our data provide an interactive resource for investigation of the immunology of blood proteins that could support therapeutic targeting of microglia activation by immune and vascular signals.

### Keywords
Itaconate, Oxidative stress, Transcriptomics, Fibrinogen, Ros, Neuroinflammation, Complement, Macrophages, Microglia

### Affiliations
Gladstone Institutes
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Katerina Akassoglou
Gladstone Institutes


### SDRF
- IsotopeLabelType: L

