### Accession
PXD003290

### Title
The proteomics analysis of Crassostrea gigas under Zn and Cd contamination

### Description
Understanding organisms’ environmental adaptation mechanisms is a fundamental question in ecology and evolution. The oyster Crassostrea gigas is able to accumulate high levels of zinc (Zn) and cadmium (Cd) without self-poisoning, and is thus widely used for pollution detection. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying such stress adaptation are largely unknown. Therefore, this study aimed to provide fundamental insights into the complex Zn/Cd-response regulatory networks.

### Sample Protocol
Oysters were kept in Zn (1 mg/L) and Cd (100µg/L) solutions for 12 h and 9 days treatment. The gills were collected and used for protein extraction. Total proteins (100 μg) within each sample solution were digested with Trypsin Gold. SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5 μm particles (Phenomenex, CA, USA). Ten μL of supernatant were loaded by the auto-sampler in a 2 cm C18 trap column on a LC-20AD Nanohigh performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into mascot generic format (MGF) files, and protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (www.matrixscience.com) against the oyster protein database (http://www.oysterdb.com). To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significant scores at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater or equal to “20 identity” were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Marine molluscs, including oysters, can concentrate high levels of cadmium (Cd) in their soft tissues, but the molecular mechanisms of Cd toxicity remain speculative. In this study, Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) were exposed to Cd for 9 days and their gills were subjected to proteomic analysis, which were further confirmed with transcriptomic analysis. A total of 4,964 proteins was quantified and 515 differentially expressed proteins were identified in response to Cd exposure. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis revealed that excess Cd affected the DNA and protein metabolism. Specifically, Cd toxicity resulted in the inhibition of DNA glycosylase and gap-filling and ligation enzymes expressions in base excision repair pathway, which may have decreased DNA repair capacity. At the protein level, Cd induced the heat shock protein response, initiation of protein refolding as well as degradation by ubiquitin proteasome pathway, among other effects. Excess Cd also induced antioxidant responses, particularly glutathione metabolism, which play important roles in Cd chelation and anti-oxidation. This study provided the first molecular mechanisms of Cd toxicity on DNA and protein metabolism at protein levels, and identified molecular biomarkers for Cd toxicity in oysters.

### Keywords
Heavy-metal, Ecotoxicology, Crassostrea, Proteomics

### Affiliations
IOCAS
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, Shandong, China

### Submitter
Jie Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Jie Meng
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, Shandong, China


