### Accession
PXD021076

### Title
Proteomics profiling of pediatric choroid plexus tumors

### Description
Aggresome is a para nuclear inclusion body that functions as a storage compartment for misfolded proteins. Our previous work revealed the presence of aggresomes in pediatric choroid plexus tumors (CPT). CPTs are rare neoplasms comprised of three pathological subgroups; choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC), a grade III tumor, atypical choroid plexus papilloma (ACPP), a grade II tumor, and choroid plexus papilloma (CPP), a grade I tumor. In the current study, we aimed to investigate the prognostic value of aggresomes-positivity and its correlation to the pathological and molecular subtypes. The proteomics profiling of 21 CPT pediatric samples was investigated using ABSciex Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-one CPTs frozen samples were collected for protein extraction. The optimal cutting temperature compound (OCT) was used to embed tissue samples before frozen sectioning on a microtome-cryostat. 10 sections with 20mm thickness were collected from all samples. Sections were then homogenized in urea extraction buffer (8M urea, 500mM Tris-HCl pH8.5, and protease inhibitor) using Dounce homogenizer. Lysates were incubated at room temperature for 1 hour before centrifugation at 10,000 RPM for 30 minutes. Supernatants containing extracted proteins were collected and proteins were quantified using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (23225, Thermo Fisher).  Forty micrograms of proteins from each sample were separated in 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were fixed in the gel by adding a fixing solution (50% methanol and 12% acetic acid) and incubated overnight at 4°C. Gel pieces were washed using gel-wash buffer (50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) and then after which they were dried using speed vacuuming. Reduction buffer (10mM dithiothreitol in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to dried gel pieces and incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes. Alkylation buffer (55mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was then added to gel pieces and incubated in a dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Gel pieces were washed using 25mM ammonium bicarbonate before adding acetonitrile for 15 minutes with occasional pipetting to dehydrate gel pieces. Further drying was achieved using speed vacuuming. Digestion solution (10ng/ul trypsin in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to gel pieces until hydration and incubated overnight at 37°C. Extraction buffer (66 acetonitrile: 33 milliQ water: 1 formic acid) was added to gel pieces to extract digested peptides. Extraction was done twice for 15 minutes each, collecting the extraction buffer and adding it to the collected digestion solution. To further increase the efficiency of peptide extraction from gel pieces, acetonitrile was added and incubated for 15 minutes with continuous agitation until gel pieces shrunk and turned white. Acetonitrile was collected and added to the previously collected solution containing extracted peptides. The solution was dried using speed vacuuming and digested peptides were reconstituted in 10μl of 0.2% formic acid. The nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography (LC) followed by mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis was carried out using a Triple TOF 5600 + (AB SCIEX, Canada) interfaced at the front end with an Eksigent nano-LC 400 auto-sampler with an Ekspert nano-LC 425 pumps. Samples were automatically injected into a peptide trap column Chrome XP; C18-CL, 5µm (Chrome XP; C18-CL, 0.5mm I.D. × 10 mm, 5-μm particle size, 120-Å pore size; SCIEX). The MS and MS/MS ranges were 400-1250 m/z and 170-1500 m/z, respectively. A 55-min linear gradient of 3-40% solution B (80% acetonitrile “ACN", 0.2% formic acid) was applied. For each cycle, survey full scan MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolutions of 35,000 and 15,000, respectively. For high precision, external calibration was programmed and run during sample batches to correct for possible TOF deviation.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into mascot generic format (mgf) using AB-SCIEX MS data converter v.1.3 and searched using X Tandem in Peptide shaker v. 1.16.38 against human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2018 release; 173361 proteins).  Data were was searched with an initial mass tolerance of 20ppm and 10ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as a static modification whileand oxidation at methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, and K and pyrrolidone from carbamidomethylated C were considered as variable modifications. During the search, the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database was randomized, and the false detection rate was set to 1% at the peptide and protein levels. Data were was analyzed using “label-free quantification (LFQ)”. Proteins identified with a minimum of one unique peptide and a minimum of two confident spectra were selected for further statistical analyses. “LFQ Intensity” columns corresponding to the extracted ion current value of each protein were used for further statistical analyses to determine overexpressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Choroid plexus, Tissue, Carcinoma, Pappiloma, Tumor, Atypical, Pediatric, Cancer

### Affiliations
Children's Cancer Hospital Egypt 57357
Tumor Biology Research Program, Basic Research Unit, Research Department, Children's Cancer Hospital Egypt 57357

### Submitter
Nouran Al-Shehaby

### Lab Head
Dr Shahenda Mahmoud El-Naggar
Tumor Biology Research Program, Basic Research Unit, Research Department, Children's Cancer Hospital Egypt 57357


