### Accession
PXD015780

### Title
Immune modulation by complement receptor 3 (CD18/CD11b) dependent human monocyte TGF-β1-transporting vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles play an important role in human cellular communication. Here, we show that human and mouse monocytes release TGF-β1-transporting vesicles in response to the pathogenic fungus Candida albicans. Soluble beta-glucan from Candida albicans binds to complement receptor 3 (CR3, CD11b/CD18) on monocytes and induces the release of TGF-β1-transporting vesicles. CR3-dependence is demonstrated using CR3-deficient (CD11b knockout) monocytes generated by CRISPR-CAS9 genome editing and isolated from CR3-deficient (CD11b knockout) mice. Isolated vesicles dampen the pro-inflammatory response in human M1-macrophages as well as in whole blood. Binding of the vesicle-transported TGF-β1 to the TGF-β receptor inhibits IL-1β gene transcription via the SMAD7 pathway in whole blood and induces TGF-β1 transcription in endothelial cells. Inhibition of TGF-β1 relieved the suppression of such proinflammatory effect. Notably, human opsonized apoptotic bodies induce similar TGF-β1-transporting vesicles in monocytes, suggesting that the early immune response is suppressed through this newly identified CR3-dependent anti-inflammatory vesicle pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Human monocytes were isolated from sterile buffy coats (JENA University Hospital, Germany) or from fresh blood collected in Na-heparin tubes (BD Biosciences) from healthy volunteers after informed consent. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from blood or buffy coats using Biocoll (Density 1.077 g/ml) (Biochrom) gradient centrifugation. Contaminant platelets were removed by low speed centrifugation of 160 x g. The lymphocyte population from PBMCs was decreased by using 46% Percoll (Density 1.135 g/ml) (GE healthcare) gradient centrifugation. Monocytes were then isolated by negative selection procedure using the pan monocyte isolation kit, (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Vesicles were generated from human monocytes, after 1 h of induction or from untreated control cells in Minduction medium (RPMI 1640 medium supplemented 2mM ultra glutamine) at 370C, 95% humidity and 5% CO2. Cells were incubated with opsonized C. albicans (MOI 1:1) to isolate infection derived vesicles. In absence of C. albicans, cells were induced 10 µl/106 cells of C. albicans derived sβG. In all cases Vesicles were isolated from 1×107 human monocytes cells isolated from three different blood donors. EVs were isolated from 1×107 human monocytes―control (MVs), C. albicans infected (OCMVs), C. albicans derived sβG induced (CA-sβGMV), and collected in a final volume of 100 µL DPBS and stored frozen until use. Frozen EVs were thawed with 400 µL chilled methanol (MeOH). Forced precipitation and phase separation was performed with 100 µL chilled chloroform 300 µL pure ice cold water, followed by chilling and centrifugation at 18000 × g. The aqueous layer was discarded and 400 µL of MeOH was added followed by centrifugation at 18000 × g. After centrifugation, MeOH was removed samples were almost dried. Samples were resolubilized in 100 µL denaturation buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50/50 trifluoroethanol (TFE)/H2O (v/v)) by pipetting and ultrasonication. After solubilization, samples were incubated at 550C for 1 hr with 2 µL of reduction buffer (500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) in 100 mM TEAB) followed by incubation at RT for 30 min with 2 µL alkylation buffer (625 mM CAA (2-chloroacetamide) in 100 mM TEAB). After alkylation, the precipitation, phase separation, and drying steps were repeated as mentioned before. Samples were then resolubilized in 100 µl 100 mM TEAB by sonication. C-terminal of lysine of sample proteins was cleaved with 2 µL of rLys C (1 µg/µL) (Promega) by incubating for 2 hr at 370C. Samples are then subjected to trypsinization using 2 µL of Trypsin Gold protease (2 µg/µl) (Promega) by mixing and incubating for 16 h at 370C. The reaction was stopped with 10 µl of 10% HCOOH. Samples were dried and solubilized in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water by pipetting, vortexing and ultrasonication. Samples were filtered through 0.2 µm spin filter, transferred to HPLC vials and stored at -800C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65 %B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2e5) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s and the underfill ratio was set to 1.0%. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt databases of Homo sapiens (2018/02/02; http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) and using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0, and Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK). Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and protein N-term acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. Data normalization was deliberately not used in order to display differences on the protein level in the course of the host-pathogen interaction. P-values were calculated based on the 2s t-test using the abundance values of all biological replicates. P-values< 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles have an important function in cellular communication. Here, we show that human and mouse monocytes release TGF-&#x3b2;1-transporting vesicles in response to the pathogenic fungus Candida albicans. Soluble &#x3b2;-glucan from C. albicans binds to complement receptor 3 (CR3, also known as CD11b/CD18) on monocytes and induces the release of TGF-&#x3b2;1-transporting vesicles. CR3-dependence is demonstrated using CR3-deficient (CD11b knockout) monocytes generated by CRISPR-CAS9 genome editing and isolated from CR3-deficient (CD11b knockout) mice. These vesicles reduce the pro-inflammatory response in human M1-macrophages as well as in whole blood. Binding of the vesicle-transported TGF-&#x3b2;1 to the TGF-&#x3b2; receptor inhibits IL1B transcription via the SMAD7 pathway in whole blood and induces TGFB1 transcription in endothelial cells, which is resolved upon TGF-&#x3b2;1 inhibition. Notably, human complement-opsonized apoptotic bodies induce production of similar TGF-&#x3b2;1-transporting vesicles in monocytes, suggesting that the early immune response might be suppressed through this CR3-dependent anti-inflammatory vesicle pathway.

### Keywords
Monocytes, Complement receptor 3, Extracellular vesicles, Tgf-β1, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745 Jena, Germany


