### Accession
PXD019445

### Title
The hTERT-RPE1 secretome after TLR3 stimulation

### Description
RPE cells perform a number of support functions in the inner eye including the secretion of signalling molecules and the maintenance of the immune privileged environment through communication with the immune system (Detrick and Hooks, 2010). Previous reports have demonstrated that RPE cells express a number of TLRs including the viral RNA receptor TLR3.  To determine the complete secretory response of RPE cells downstream of poly(I:C) stimulation, we analysed conditioned medium from unstimulated or poly(I:C)-stimulated RPE cells using quantitative SILAC mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
RPE cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented 10% dialysed FBS (Gibco) and the ‘heavy’ amino acids L-arginine 13C6 15N4 (147.5 mg/l) and L-lysine 13C6 15N2 (91.25 mg/l; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), or equal amounts of ‘light’ arginine and lysine (Sigma). Cells were taken through three passages to ensure complete labelling and plated onto 100 mm dishes. At ∼80% confluency, cells were incubated for 18 h in the presence or absence of 10 μg/ml poly(I:C). Subsequently, cells were washed thoroughly with PBS and serum-free medium and incubated for 6 h in 10 ml serum-free medium containing poly(I:C) or vehicle. Conditioned medium was harvested and clarified at 4000 g at 4°C. Cell counts were used to normalise loading, and equivalent volumes of heavy and light medium were pooled. The volume of the medium was reduced using low molecular mass spin concentrators (Sartorius)and the samples were resolved ∼1.5 cm into a pre-cast 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel. The lanes were excised, cut into chunks and the proteins reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel. The resulting tryptic peptides were analysed by LC-MSMS using a Q Exactive coupled to an RSLCnano3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved on a 50 cm EASY-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with MSMS data acquired in a DDA fashion.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens Uniprot reference database in the MaxQuant proteomics software package (Cox and Mann, 2008). Cysteine carbamidomethlyation set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01, theminimum peptide length was set at seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were tolerated.

### Publication Abstract
Optineurin (OPTN) is a multifunctional protein involved in autophagy and secretion, as well as nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) and IRF3 signalling, and <i>OPTN</i> mutations are associated with several human diseases. Here, we show that, in response to viral RNA, OPTN translocates to foci in the perinuclear region, where it negatively regulates NF-&#x3ba;B and IRF3 signalling pathways and downstream pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. These OPTN foci consist of a tight cluster of small membrane vesicles, which are positive for ATG9A. Disease mutations in OPTN linked to primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) cause aberrant foci formation in the absence of stimuli, which correlates with the ability of OPTN to inhibit signalling. By using proximity labelling proteomics, we identify the linear ubiquitin assembly complex (LUBAC), CYLD and TBK1 as part of the OPTN interactome and show that these proteins are recruited to this OPTN-positive perinuclear compartment. Our work uncovers a crucial role for OPTN in dampening NF-&#x3ba;B and IRF3 signalling through the sequestration of LUBAC and other positive regulators in this viral RNA-induced compartment, leading to altered pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion.

### Keywords
Human, Htert-rpe1, Poly(i:c), Secretome

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Thomas O'Loughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Folma Buss
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK


