### Accession
PXD009105

### Title
Metaproteome analysis of hydrothermal vent chimney biofilms

### Description
At hydrothermal vent sites, chimneys consisting of sulfides, sulfates, and oxides are formed upon contact of reduced hydrothermal fluids with oxygenated seawater. The walls and surfaces of these chimneys are an important habitat for vent-associated microorganisms. We used community proteogenomics to investigate and compare the composition and in situ protein expression of microbial communities colonizing two actively venting hydrothermal chimneys from the Manus Basin back-arc spreading center (Papua New Guinea).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed from 7 g of chimney material according to a Tri Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and chloroform-based extraction protocol published in Stokke et al. (2012). Extracted protein was re-suspended in 40 µl of SDS-containing sample buffer (0.1 M Tris HCl pH 6.8, 10% SDS, 20% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol; see Teeling et al., 2012) and denaturated for 10 min at 90°C. After addition of 1 µl bromophenol blue, the denaturated protein extract was loaded on two separate lanes (i.e. technical duplicates) of a precast 4-20% gradient polyacrylamide SDS mini gel and separated at 150 V for 1 h. The gel was Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB)-stained, entire gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 equal pieces each, washed three times (200 mM NH4HCO3, 30% acetonitrile) and vacuum-dried before subsequent protein digestion with 2 µg ml-1 trypsin solution (Promega, USA) at 37°C overnight (Eymann et al., 2004). After purification of digested protein with µ-C18 ZipTips (Millipore, USA), the peptide mix was separated by Nano HPLC (Easy-nLCII HPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and subjected to MS/MS analysis in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) as described in detail by Elsholz et al. (2012).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted and analyzed using the Sorcerer-Sequest software (Sorcerer v3.5, Sage-N Research; Sequest version v.27, rev. 11, Thermo-Finnigan, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). A combined target-decoy database containing the metagenomic information of both samples (322.541 coding sequences), 42 common laboratory contaminants, and reversed amino acid sequences of all protein-coding genes (322.583 decoys) was searched for protein identification (total number of ORFs: 645.166). Search parameters: peptide tolerance: 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions: 1 amu; band y-ion series; variable modification: oxidation of methionine, 15.99 Da, max. three modifications per peptide). Evaluation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed with Scaffold version 4.0.4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com). The following filter settings were applied: Parent mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Xcorr for doubly charged peptides 2.2, for triply charged peptides 3.3 and for quadruply charged peptides 3.75; Cn score 0.1. Using these settings, peptide false discovery rates (peptide FDRs, based on the number of decoy identifications) were between 0.0 and 0.1 %, and protein FDRs were between 0.3 and 0.5 % throughout all experiments. Only proteins or protein groups that had at least two unique peptides assigned were considered identified. For semi-quantitative analysis and comparison of relative protein abundances in both metagenome samples, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) were calculated (Zybailov et al., 2006) using total spectrum counts. For each protein or protein group, spectral count values were normalized to protein size (molecular weight in kDa) and to the sum of all spectral counts in the same sample.

### Publication Abstract
At hydrothermal vent sites, chimneys consisting of sulfides, sulfates, and oxides are formed upon contact of reduced hydrothermal fluids with oxygenated seawater. The walls and surfaces of these chimneys are an important habitat for vent-associated microorganisms. We used community proteogenomics to investigate and compare the composition, metabolic potential and relative <i>in situ</i> protein abundance of microbial communities colonizing two actively venting hydrothermal chimneys from the Manus Basin back-arc spreading center (Papua New Guinea). We identified overlaps in the <i>in situ</i> functional profiles of both chimneys, despite differences in microbial community composition and venting regime. Carbon fixation on both chimneys seems to have been primarily mediated through the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle and fueled by sulfur-oxidation, while the abundant metabolic potential for hydrogen oxidation and carbon fixation via the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle was hardly utilized. Notably, the highly diverse microbial community colonizing the analyzed black smoker chimney had a highly redundant metabolic potential. In contrast, the considerably less diverse community colonizing the diffusely venting chimney displayed a higher metabolic versatility. An increased diversity on the phylogenetic level is thus not directly linked to an increased metabolic diversity in microbial communities that colonize hydrothermal chimneys.

### Keywords
Hydrothermal vents, Lc-msms, Metaproteome, Chimneys

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


