### Accession
PXD012001

### Title
Systems level analysis of epithelial to mesenchymal transition reveals more alteration in phosphoproteome than proteome and identifies DNAJB4 and CD81 as EMT regulators

### Description
We quantified protein expression changes between epithelial and mesechymal stages in immortalized human mammary epithelial cells (HMLE). Epithelial–mesenchymal transition is induced by expressing an EMT-TF, Twist.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion was performed as described in Polat et. al., 2015. On-column dimethyl labeling was performed as described in Boersema et. al., 2009. Labeling reagents consisted of 4% (v/v) proper combinations of formaldehyde (CH2O, CD2O, 13CD2O), 0.6 M of proper sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN and NaBD3CN) (Sigma) in 50 mM NaH2PO4 (Fisher), and 50 mM Na2HPO4 (Fisher). The labeled peptides were combined in equal ratios based on their average peptide intensities. The epithelial sample was labeled with the light dimethyl label and the mesenchymal sample with the heavy label. We swapped the labels for the second biological replicate.  Labeled peptide mixes were fractionated using a PolySULFOETHYL A 200×2.1mm (PolyLC Inc.) column using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Germany) into 40 fractions. Then, pooled fractions were phospho-enriched using either Ti4+-IMAC or Titanium dioxide (TiO2) (Sachtleben, Germany) beads packaged into micro-columns as described previously in de Graaf et. al., 2014, and in Thingholm et. al., 2006. Briefly, the samples resuspended in loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% TFA) were loaded onto micro-columns pre-equilibrated with loading buffer. Ti4+-IMAC columns were sequentially washed with washing buffer 1 (50% ACN, 0.5% TFA containing 200 mM NaCl) and washing buffer 2 (50% ACN/0.1% TFA) whereas TiO2 columns were sequentially washed with loading buffer and washing buffer 2 (50% ACN/0.1% TFA). In both cases, the bound peptides were eluted by 10% ammonia into 10% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  The peptides were subjected to a reversed phase nanoLC-MS/MS (EASY-nLC, Thermo) connected to a Q Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) for a 120 min analysis run. The peptides were directly loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 17 cm C18 column (Reprosil-Gold C18, 5 μm, 200Å, Dr. Maisch) and separated at 300 nL/min with 120 min linear gradients, starting from 5 to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometric analysis and spectra acquisition were performed with the following settings: Orbitrap analysis: Polarity at positive mode; resolution: 35,000; mass range: 350−1,500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target: 3e6; maximum injection time: 250 ms. Up to 10 of the most intense ions per cycle were fragmented and analyzed in the Orbitrap. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)) (Resolution: 17,500; AGC: 5e5; maximum injection time: 120 ms; normalized collision energy (NCE): 25; charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8; dynamic exclusion: 20 s). The isolation window for MS/MS was 1.5 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed and quantified with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Peak lists containing HCD fragmentation were generated with Proteome Discoverer with a signal-to-noise threshold of 1.0. Produced data was searched against a Swissprot database version 2014_08 with taxonomy Homo sapiens (546,238 sequences) using the Mascot software (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). Settings for PD search were as following: The enzyme was specified as Trypsin and the fragment ion type was specified as electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-flight. A mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses and ±0.05 Da for fragment ions was used; two missed cleavages were allowed; and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Light and heavy dimethylation of peptide N termini and lysine residues; methionine oxidation; phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Each peptide spectral match (PSM) (Mascot peptide score >25) of a phosphorylated peptide was isolated from the data in Proteome Discoverer. The identification of the phosphopeptide site localization was done by phosphoRS algorithm 3.0, implemented in Proteome Discoverer. A threshold of at least 0.70 probability was used for the phospho-residue localization. The 2plex dimethyl-based quantitation method was chosen in Proteome Discoverer, with a mass precision requirement of 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass measurements. We applied 0.2 min of retention time tolerance for isotope pattern multiplets and allowed spectra with a maximum of 1 missing channel to be quantified with the integrated Percolator-based filter using a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Emt

### Affiliations
Koc University
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey

### Submitter
Erdem Sanal

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey


