### Accession
PXD029266

### Title
MATN2 knock-down human immortalized podocytes LC-MS/MS

### Description
Basement membranes (BMs) are ubiquitous extracellular matrices whose composition remains elusive, limiting our understanding of BM regulation and function. By developing a bioinformatic and in vivo discovery pipeline, we define a network of over 220 human proteins localized to BMs. More than 100 BM-network genes associate with human phenotypes and by screening over 63,000 germline genomic sequences from families with rare disorders, we discovered novel predicted loss-of-function variants in MATN2. Biochemical analyses suggest that MATN2 interacts with many BM proteins, and we found that depletion of MATN2 affected levels of core BM components in human podocyte-derived extracellular matrix.

### Sample Protocol
MATN2 knock-down: A human immortalised podocyte MATN2 knock-down line was generated by CRISPR-Cas9. Cas9 expressing podocytes were established by transduction with pLentiCas9_v2 (addgene plasmid 52961) followed by puromycin selection. These Cas9-podocytes were transfected twice with two sgRNA targeting MATN2 (5’-GTCACGATCATTATGACCCG-3’; 5’-CTTGACCTTTGCATAGTCAT-3’; Merck) using RNAiMAX in a 6-well plate, and depletion of MATN2 confirmed by western blot. Three clones were generated from a pool of the MATN2-KD human podocytes. The cells were then diluted and plated up in 96-wells plate to obtain colonies from a single cell (= pure population of cells with the same phenotype, i.e., MATN2-KD).  Sample acquisition and preparation for mass spectrometry: Human immortalized podocytes (wild-type and the 3 MATN2-KD clones) were cultured for 14 days at 37°C in monoculture on uncoated 10-cm dishes using RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Life Technologies), 1% insulin, transferrin, and selenium (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin), and then enriched for extracellular matrix proteins (Lennon et al., 2014) for mass spectrometry analysis. Briefly, cells and matrix were scraped into lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 25mM EDTA, protease inhibitor) and incubated for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 14,000×g for 10 min. The supernatant (fraction 1) was kept and added with 5% SDS with 50 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The pellet was resuspended in alkaline detergent buffer (20 mM NH4OH and 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) for 30 min to disrupt cell-matrix bonds. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was collected (Fraction 2) and the remaining pellet enriched for ECM proteins was resuspended in 5% SDS with 50 mM TEAB (Fraction 3 or ECM). The cell lysates (Fractions 1 and 2) and the ECM-rich fraction were processed for in-solution digestion. To extract proteins, samples were lysed using a Covaris LE220+ Focused Ultrasonicator (Covaris). The protein samples were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 10 minutes at 60°C and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Protein concentration was quantified using a Direct Detect Spectrometer (Millipore), and 40 mg of proteins/sample was loaded onto S-trap columns (Protifi) and digested overnight with 1 mg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. Peptides were eluted from the column with 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, and collected by centrifugation at 4,000×g for 2 min. After desalting, the peptide samples were dried to completeness by vacuum centrifugation and submitted to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw spectra data were searched against human SwissProt and TrEBML databases (v.2017-10-25) using the SEQUEST HT search tool. Tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites, and mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions were set for the search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, and oxidation of proline, lysine and methionine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Protein false discovery rate was set to 1%, and protein validation was performed using Target/Decoy strategy. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification based on precursor ion intensity. Results were filtered for significant FDR (>0.1) master proteins identified with > 1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Basement membranes (BMs) are ubiquitous extracellular matrices whose composition remains elusive, limiting our understanding of BM regulation and function. By developing a bioinformatic and in vivo discovery pipeline, we define a network of 222 human proteins and their animal orthologs localized to BMs. Network analysis and screening in <i>C. elegans</i> and zebrafish uncovered BM regulators, including ADAMTS, ROBO, and TGF&#x3b2;. More than 100 BM network genes associate with human phenotypes, and by screening 63,039 genomes from families with rare disorders, we found loss-of-function variants in <i>LAMA5</i>, <i>MPZL2</i>, and <i>MATN2</i> and show that they regulate BM composition and function. This cross-disciplinary study establishes the immense complexity of BMs and their impact on in human health.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Human, Q exactive hf, Shotgun mass spectrometry, Matn2

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mychel Morais

### Lab Head
Dr Racehl Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom


