### Accession
PXD010972

### Title
rat cecal microbiota LC-MSMS

### Description
Pu-erh tea has attracted increasing attention worldwide because of its special flavor and health effects, but its impact on composition and function of the gut microbiota remains unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate effects of aqueous extracts of fermented (ripe) and non-fermented (raw) Pu-erh teas on the composition and function of intestinal microbiota of rats with diet-induced obesity. We conducted a comparative metagenomic and metaproteomic investigation of the microbial communities in cecal samples taken from obese rats administrated with or without extracts of raw and ripe Pu-erh tea. By analyzing the composition and diversity of 16S rRNA amplicons and expression profiles of 814 distinct proteins, we found that, despite differences in the chemical compositions of the raw and ripe Pu-erh tea, administration of either at two different doses (0.15 and 0.40 g/Kg body weight), significantly (P<0.05) increased community diversity, and changed the composition of the cecal microbiota by increasing the relative abundances of Firmicutes and decreasing those of Bacteroidetes. Community metabolic processes including sucrose metabolism, glycolysis, syntheses of proteins, rRNA and antibiotics were significantly (P<0.05), or had a tendency (0.10<P<0.05) to be, promoted by enriching relevant enzymes. Furthermore, evidences from population, molecular and metabolic levels have shown that polyphenols of raw Pu-erh tea and their metabolites can promote potentially the growth of Akkermansia municiphila by stimulating the type II and III secretion system protein, elongation factor Tu, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. This study has provided new evidences for the prebiotic effects of Pu-erh tea.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Cecal samples from two of the rats randomly chosen from each of the control group, the group with high dose raw PET and that with high dose ripe PET, were thawed on ice and aliquots (c.a. 0.5 g) of thawed samples were suspended with PBS containing PMSF (Beyotime) and rotated on a Thermo shaker (Abson) at 4 °C overnight. The solutions were centrifuged at low speed (300 g) at 8 °C for 10 min. Supernatants were collected and centrifuged (14,000 g) again at 4 °C for 20 min to precipitate cecal bacteria. Precipitates were collected and washed twice with PBS before suspension in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 8 M urea, PMSF) and disruption by sonication for 2 min on ice followed by 30 minutes’ incubation on ice. The precipitates were collected by centrifugation (14,000 g, 8℃, 8 min) and re-suspended in 90% precooled acetone and then left at −20 °C overnight for further protein precipitation. Extracts were then centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 g to remove cell debris and intact cells. Supernatants were carefully transferred to fresh tubes, and proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Dry pellets obtained from six cecal samples were stored at -80°C until analyzed.  Protein digestion and LC-MS/MS measurements  Cecal protein samples were thawed on ice and digested according to the procedure described by Yin et al. (2015) with modification. Protein aliquots (180 μg) in lysis buffer (260 μl) were reduced in 10 mM TCEP (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37 °C for 60 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma), added at a final concentration of 40 mM, at room temperature for 40 min. Then cold acetone was added (6:1 v/v) and the mixture was precipitated at −20 °C for 4 h before centrifugation (10,000 g) for 20 min, and the pellets were collected. These were dissolved in 200 μl 100 mM TEAB before adding 1:50 (enzyme/protein) trypsin (Promega), and digested at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were vacuum dried, re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak (Waters, Cat. WAT023590) before being vacuum dried. Peptide concentrations were determined with the peptide quantification kit (Thermo, Cat. 23275). Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid method (Beyotime). Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with Easy-nLC 1200. The peptides was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo USA) and eluted with a 2-80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1300) were acquired with a mass resolution of 70K, followed by twenty sequential high energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17.5K. In all cases, one microscan was recorded using a dynamic exclusion of 18 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Taxonomic analysis of peptides and identification of proteins MS/MS spectra were searched using Peaks Studio 8 software (Zhang et al. 2012) against a bacteria database (44,716,473 sequences, downloaded on October 6, 2017) derived from uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/) and the decoy database. The highest score for a given peptide mass (best match to that predicted in the database) was used to identify parent proteins with the following settings: tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches were validated based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate. A minimum of 2 unique peptides was required for protein identification. Protein quantification was carried out in Peaks Studio 8 software based on peak intensity (area) on MS1.  Functional and enrichment analyses  Functional analyses of identified proteins were performed using gene ontology (GO) annotations (http://www.geneontology.org/), and the proteins were classified according to their biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components. Proteins were further assigned to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (https://www.kegg.jp/). GO enrichment and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were performed using Goatools (https://github.com/tanghaibao/GOatools) and KOBAS (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do) respectively. The list of proteins present in the cecal samples of control rats without administration of PETex was compared to each of those with administration of PETex to perform enrichment tests of GO terms or KECG pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Pu-erh tea is attracting increased attention worldwide because of its unique flavor and health effects, but its impact on the composition and function of the gut microbiota remains unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of aqueous extracts of fermented (ripe) and non-fermented (raw) Pu-erh teas on the composition and function of the intestinal microbiota of rats with diet-induced obesity. We conducted a comparative metagenomic and meta-proteomic investigation of the microbial communities in cecal samples taken from obese rats treated with or without extracts of raw or ripe Pu-erh teas. By analyzing the composition and diversity of 16S rRNA amplicons and expression profiles of 814 distinct proteins, we found that despite differences in the chemical compositions of raw and ripe Pu-erh teas, administration of either tea at two doses (0.15- and 0.40-g/kg body weight) significantly (P&#xa0;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) increased microbial diversity and changed the composition of cecal microbiota by increasing the relative abundances of Firmicutes and decreasing those of Bacteroidetes. Community metabolic processes, including sucrose metabolism, glycolysis, and syntheses of proteins, rRNAs, and antibiotics were significantly (P&#xa0;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) promoted or had a tendency (0.10&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;P&#xa0;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) to be promoted due to the enrichment of relevant enzymes. Furthermore, evidence at population, molecular, and metabolic levels indicated that polyphenols of raw Pu-erh tea and their metabolites potentially promote Akkermansia muciniphila growth by stimulating a type II and III secretion system protein, the elongation factor Tu, and a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. This study provides new evidence for the prebiotic effects of Pu-erh tea.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pu-erh tea, Cecal microbiota, Wista rats

### Affiliations
Department of Biology and Technology
Department of Biology and Technology, Kunming University, Kunming, China

### Submitter
Yunhong Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Yunhong Kong
Department of Biology and Technology, Kunming University, Kunming, China


