### Accession
PXD003877

### Title
phosphoproteome in mitotic chromosomes

### Description
Identification and characterization of mitosis-specific phosphorylation in mitotic chromosome-associated proteins

### Sample Protocol
Mitotic chromosome isolation DT40 cells were incubated with 4-amino-1-tert-butyl-3-(1′-naphthylmethyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine (1-NMPP1; sc-203214A, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) for 20 h, resulting in a mitotic index of > 90%. Mitotic chromosomes were isolated using polyamine-EDTA buffer optimized for chicken DT40 cells (7, 24); cells from three independent preparations were pooled together (1.0 ×109 cells; OD260 = 5) and solubilized in phase-transfer surfactant (PTS) buffer (25).  Isolation of nuclei Nuclear fractions were prepared as previously described (26). Cells were washed with PBS twice, resuspended in cell lysis buffer [10 mM HEPES; pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich)], and allowed to swell on ice for 15 min; then, NP-40 was added up to 0.5%. Cells are vortexed for 10 s to disrupt cell membranes and then centrifuged at 500 × g for 3 min at 4°C. The pellet containing cell nuclei was washed three times with lysis buffer and resuspended in PTS buffer.  Trypsin digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment Proteins associated with mitotic chromosomes were extracted by PTS (25), and 100-µg aliquots were digested by 1 µg endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) and 0.4 µg trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) in 2 mM DTT, 10 mM IAA for 16 h. Digestion was stopped with 1% TFA followed by desalting using the SCD-XC stage tip (28). Digested phospho-peptides were enriched by TiO2-based hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) (29) followed by desalting with the SCD-XC tip.

### Data Protocol
The enriched phospho-peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to HPLC via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Ten most intense peaks of full MS scans acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer were fragmented and resolved by the linear ion trap.

### Publication Abstract
During mitosis, phosphorylation of chromosome-associated proteins is a key regulatory mechanism. Mass spectrometry has been successfully applied to determine the complete protein composition of mitotic chromosomes, but not to identify post-translational modifications. Here, we quantitatively compared the phosphoproteome of isolated mitotic chromosomes with that of chromosomes in nonsynchronized cells. We identified 4274 total phosphorylation sites and 350 mitosis-specific phosphorylation sites in mitotic chromosome-associated proteins. Significant mitosis-specific phosphorylation in centromere/kinetochore proteins was detected, although the chromosomal association of these proteins did not change throughout the cell cycle. This mitosis-specific phosphorylation might play a key role in regulation of mitosis. Further analysis revealed strong dependency of phosphorylation dynamics on kinase consensus patterns, thus linking the identified phosphorylation sites to known key mitotic kinases. Remarkably, chromosomal axial proteins such as non-SMC subunits of condensin, TopoII&#x3b1;, and Kif4A, together with the chromosomal periphery protein Ki67 involved in the establishment of the mitotic chromosomal structure, demonstrated high phosphorylation during mitosis. These findings suggest a novel mechanism for regulation of chromosome restructuring in mitosis via protein phosphorylation. Our study generated a large quantitative database on protein phosphorylation in mitotic and nonmitotic chromosomes, thus providing insights into the dynamics of chromatin protein phosphorylation at mitosis onset.

### Keywords
Mitosischromatin phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Kochi university
medical school, Kochi university

### Submitter
Shinya Ohta

### Lab Head
Dr Shinya Ohta
medical school, Kochi university


