### Accession
PXD012714

### Title
Embryonic cortical extract mass spectrometry to identify EML1 interactors

### Description
The cerebral cortex is a highly organized structure whose development depends on different progenitor cell types. These give rise to post-mitotic neurons that migrate across the developing cortical wall to their final positions in the cortical plate. Apical radial glia cells (aRGs) are the main progenitor type in early corticogenesis, responsible for the production of other progenitors, and regulating the final neuronal output. Abnormal behavior of aRG can severely impact corticogenesis resulting in cortical malformations.  Mutations in the microtubule associated protein Eml1 lead to severe subcortical heterotopia, characterized by the presence of aberrantly located neurons beneath the normotopic cortex. Mutations in EML1/Eml1 have been reported in three families presenting severe atypical heterotopia, as well as in the Heterotopic cortex ‘HeCo’ spontaneous mouse mutant. In the latter, ectopically cycling aRGs were found cycling outside their normal proliferative ventricular zone (VZ) from early stages of corticogenesis (Croquelois et al., 2009, Kielar et al., 2014, Shaheen et al., 2017). Ectopic aRGs are likely to be responsible for the formation of the heterotopia. It is thus crucial to understand the role of Eml1 in aRGs to elucidate the physiological and pathological mechanisms causing aRGs to leave the VZ.  The role of Eml1 in aRGs remains vastly unexplored. We have thus performed mass spectrometry with embryonic cortex lysates (E13.5) to shed light on the intracellular pathways and molecular mechanisms in which Eml1 could be involved. This data combined with other cell biology and biochemistry approaches will contribute to understand the role of this heterotopia protein at early stages of development.

### Sample Protocol
293F cells were cultured in FreeStyle 293 Expression Medium (ThermoFisher), under constant agitation, at 37 °C and 8 % CO2. They were transfected (Strep-YFP and Strep-YFP-EML1 constructs, pMAX vector) with a 1:2 ratio of DNA with Polyethylenimine and 72 h later the cells were recovered and washed with 1X PBS and lysed with 750 µl of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8) supplemented 1 % with NP-40 and protease inhibitors 1X (Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets EDTA-Free, Roche). After 30 minutes of rotation at 4°C, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min, 14.000 rcf, at 4°C. The supernatant was kept and protein content was measured with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher) and the ELISA microplate reader BertholdTech Mithras, in order to ensure similar protein concentrations across the different conditions. For protein purification from 293F transfected cells lysats, Strep-Tactin beads Superflow Plus (30002, Qiagen) were used. 40 µl of beads previously washed with lysis buffer were used for each purified protein sample. They were incubated with 2 mg of protein lysate (in a 100 µl volume) for 1 h at 4 °C under rotation.  The samples were then centrifuged (3 min, 200 rcf, 4 °C), and the supernatant was kept as the ‘unbound’ fraction. The beads were washed (3x) with a more stringent lysis buffer containing 500 mM NaCl, in order to elim.inate possible proteins binding to the beads in a non-specific fashion The Strep-Tactin beads already bound to the protein of interest (Strep-YFP or Strep-YFP-EML1) were incubated with 15 µg of murine cortex lysate O/N, at 4°C, under rotation.  Briefly, for cortex lysate preparation E13.5 timed-pregnant Swiss mice (Janvier Labs, France) were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Embryos were dissected and both brain hemispheres collected in ice cold L-15 medium, and explants immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into a powder. Hemispheres coming from different embryos were pooled. The powder was re-suspended in 10 μl/mg lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8) supplemented with 1 % NP-40 and protease inhibitors 1x (Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets EDTA-Free, Roche). The lysate was homogenized by rotation during 45 min at 4 °C, then centrifuged for 30 min at 15000 rcf and 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and used for pull down experiments with Strep-Tactin StrepYFP/StrepYFP EML1 beads.  After incubation O/N at 4°C the samples were centrifuged (3 min, 200 rcf, 4°C), and the ‘unbound cortex’ recovered. The beads containing the purified protein of interest and its interacting partners were extensively washed with lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl). They were stored at 4°C for mass spectrometry analyses.  Strep-Tactin beads containing the purified protein of interest and its interacting partners were washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and an on-beads digestion was performed with 0.2 μg of trypsin/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL 25 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Samples were chromatographically separated using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 45 °C with a linear gradient of 5 % to 25 % buffer B (100 % MeCN in 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the mouse SwissProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer version 2.1. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Apical radial glia (aRGs) are predominant progenitors during corticogenesis. Perturbing their function leads to cortical malformations, including subcortical heterotopia (SH), characterized by the presence of neurons below the cortex. EML1/Eml1 mutations lead to SH in patients, as well as to heterotopic cortex (HeCo) mutant mice. In HeCo mice, some aRGs are abnormally positioned away from the ventricular zone (VZ). Thus, unraveling EML1/Eml1 function will clarify mechanisms maintaining aRGs in the VZ. We pinpoint an unknown EML1/Eml1 function in primary cilium formation. In HeCo aRGs, cilia are shorter, less numerous, and often found aberrantly oriented within vesicles. Patient fibroblasts and human cortical progenitors show similar defects. EML1 interacts with RPGRIP1L, a ciliary protein, and RPGRIP1L mutations were revealed in a heterotopia patient. We also identify Golgi apparatus abnormalities in EML1/Eml1 mutant cells, potentially upstream of the cilia phenotype. We thus reveal primary cilia mechanisms impacting aRG dynamics in physiological and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Development, Neocortex, Eml1, Mass spectrometry, Murine

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


