### Accession
PXD041348

### Title
Mechanistic insights into the biological activity of S-Sulfocysteine in CHO cells using a multi-omics approach

### Description
S-Sulfocysteine (SSC), a bioavailable L-cysteine derivative (Cys), is known to be taken up and metabolized in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells used to produce novel therapeutic biological entities. To gain a deeper mechanistic insight into the SSC biological activity and metabolization, a comprehensive multi-omics study was performed on industrially relevant CHO-K1 GS cells throughout a fed-batch process, including metabolomic and proteomic profiling combined with multivariate data and pathway analyses. Multi-layered data and enzymatical assays revealed an intracellular SSC/glutathione mixed disulfide formation and glutaredoxin-mediated reduction, releasing Cys and sulfur species. Increased Cys availability was directed towards glutathione and taurine synthesis, while other Cys catabolic pathways were likewise affected, indicating the cells strive to maintain Cys homeostasis and cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: At least 1.10^7 cells were collected, washed two-times with ice-cold PBS, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until lysis. After thawing onice, the cell pellets were resuspended in the respective amount of harsh RIPA lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 1 % sodium deoxycholate and 1 % SDS, pH 7.6) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 89901) supplemented with 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (v/v) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78440) to reach a final lysis buffer-to-cell ratio of 500 µL/1.107 cells. Samples were incubated for 20 min on ice with vigorous vortexing every 5 min. To reduce the viscosity of the samples, QIAshredders (Qiagen, 79656) were used and subjected to centrifugation for 2 min at maximum speed. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 14000 g and 4 °C to remove cell debris, and clarified supernatants were transferred into fresh tubes. Protein concentrations were measured using the PierceTM Detergent Compatible Bradford Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23246). Reduction was conducted with 5 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A39255) at 37 °C for 30 min, and alkylation with 15mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A39271) at RT for 30 min in the dark. Finally, an automatic clean-up (removal of residual detergents) and on-bead digestion with trypsin (Roche, 11047841001) in a 1:5.75 trypsin-to-protein ratio (w/w) were carried out via the KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  TMT labeling: Samples were labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents using the TMTpro 16plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A44521). Briefly, TMT label reagents were equilibrated to RT and dissolved in 30 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile, of which 10 µL were added to 25 µL of the respective sample (pH 8.0 – 8.5). Labeled sampleswere incubated for 1 h at RT and 600 rpm. To quench the excess of reactive TMT labeling reagents, 4 µL of 1 M TRIS at pH 8.0 were added and incubated for 15 min at RT and 600 rpm. Samples were equally mixed, 5 % formic acid were added, dried inthe SpeedVac at RT and high vacuum for about 2.5 h and then stored at -20 °C until further use.  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis: Mixed samples were fractionated using the PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868) to reduce the sample complexity and then analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS. All nano LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using the nanoRSLC3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), directly coupled to the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) with a nanospray ion source. 1 µL of each sample (400 ng of digested proteins) were separated on the Aurora UHPLC Emitter Column with nanoZero and Captive Spray Insert (75 μm x 25 cm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks Pty Ltd, Victoria, Australia) at 50 °C. Buffer A (1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and buffer B (99 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) were used, applying a gradient as follows (minute/% B/µL/min): 0/2/0.15, 0.2/2/0.5, 6.5/2/0.15, 8/2/0.15, 9/2/0.2,159/25/0.2, 169/35/0.2, 179/80/0.2, 187/80/0.5, 192/80/0.5, 197/2/0.5, 211/2/0.5, 212/2/0.15. After nano LC separation, eluting peptides were ionized utilizing a CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in positive mode, setting the capillary voltage to 4.5 kV, the nebulizer to 0.4 bar, and the dry gas flowrate and temperature to 3 L/min and 180 °C, respectively. The timsTOF was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode employing the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF), providing an extreme improvement in speed and sensitivity and thereby extending the depth in the proteome coverage. The mass and ion mobility range were set to 100 – 1700 m/z and 0.6 – 1.6 V ∙ s/cm2, with an accumulation and ramp time of 100 ms. The MS-MS/MS cycle time was set to 2.21 s, consisting of a single MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans, whereby only ions with an intensity of 2500 and charge state of up to 5 were considered. The dynamic exclusion was activated with a defined time period of 0.4 min, enabling the acquisition of MS/MS spectra of less abundant ions. Excluded precursors were reconsidered, when exhibiting a 4-times higher intensity. The performance of the MS system was verified by running a PierceTM HeLa Protein Digest Standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 88328), leading to about > 5,200 protein groups.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/Protein identification and quantification: For the protein identification, the PEAKS Studio 10.6 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) was used. The generated peptide MS/MS spectra were searched against the reference proteome of Cricetulus griseus (Chinese hamster) from UniProt (proteome ID: UP000001075, downloaded on 27/07/2021) and an in-house contaminant database (human keratin, streptavidin, bovine trypsin). Database searching was carried out applying the following parameters: parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da and trypsin enzyme (specific) with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+ 57.02 Da) and TMT16plex (+ 304.2072 Da) were defined as fixed post-translational modifications (PTM). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was set, thus only peptides above the respective threshold and proteins exhibiting ≥ 1 unique peptide were considered and validated. For the TMT-based relative quantification, the TMT reporter ion intensities in the MS/MS spectrum were considered for the calculation of the ratios, with the normalization method being set to “auto normalization” (on total protein), the mass error tolerance to 40 ppm and the FDR threshold to 1.0 %. Thereafter, another normalization approach was conducted, enabling the comparison of the Cys and SSC conditions on the respective day and over time.

### Publication Abstract
S-Sulfocysteine (SSC), a bioavailable L-cysteine derivative (Cys), is known to be taken up and metabolized in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells used to produce novel therapeutic biological entities. To gain a deeper mechanistic insight into the SSC biological activity and metabolization, a multi-omics study was performed on industrially relevant CHO-K1 GS cells throughout a fed-batch process, including metabolomic and proteomic profiling combined with multivariate data and pathway analyses. Multi-layered data and enzymatical assays revealed an intracellular SSC/glutathione mixed disulfide formation and glutaredoxin-mediated reduction, releasing Cys and sulfur species. Increased Cys availability was directed towards glutathione and taurine synthesis, while other Cys catabolic pathways were likewise affected, indicating that cells strive to maintain Cys homeostasis and cellular functions.

### Keywords
Omics, S-sulfocysteine, Redox control, Cho, Biological activity

### Affiliations
Merck Life Science KGaA
Upstream R&D, Merck Life Science KGaA, Frankfurter Straße 250, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany

### Submitter
Melanie Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aline Zimmer
Upstream R&D, Merck Life Science KGaA, Frankfurter Straße 250, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany


