### Accession
PXD035811

### Title
Concentration and composition of the protein corona as a function of incubation time and serum concentration

### Description
We describe the concentration and composition of the protein corona as a function of incubation time (30 min and 1 day) and the concentration of fetal bovine serum (FBS) used to form the corona (5%, 10%, and 100%) on 200 nm carboxylate-modified magnetic NPs, using semi-automated processes.

### Sample Protocol
A protein corona was formed by incubating carboxylate magnetic NPs (3.2 mg/mL) in 5-100% solutions of FBS diluted in PBS. The incubations were performed at RT on a microplate shaker for times ranging from 30 minutes to 1 day, as specified in the text. To remove unbound proteins, the NPs were “washed” by the robot. Prior to proteomic analysis, samples were digested using a modified S-Trap mini column protocol. Proteins were removed from the NP surface by incubating with SDS buffer for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm assay. Samples were pooled to load a minimum of 25 µg of protein on each S-Trap. Samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS with ≤ 25 g of digested protein injected. MicroFlow LC was performed with an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, 1 mm x 100 mm, M-Class, Waters Corporation; 80 µL/min) column and a 17 minute total elution time. The column was run with an acetonitrile gradient (5-40%) with 0.1% formic acid. Peptide fragments were analyzed using in-line tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the LC-MS/MS data using MaxQuant (v2.1.0). The raw LC-MS/MS spectra were searched, using their integrated Andromeda search engine, against the Swiss-Prot Bos Taurus canonical protein database from UniProt, accessed on April 27, 2022. A custom contaminants file was used while searching, which contained a relevant subset of the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database. For protein and peptide quantification and identification, default MaxQuant parameters were used including a 0.01 false discovery rate, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a maximum peptide length of 25 amino acids, oxidation and acetyl groups as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification. The Top3 label-free protein quantification method was used.

### Publication Abstract
Nanoparticles in contact with proteins form a "corona" of proteins adsorbed on the nanoparticle surface. Subsequent biological responses are then mediated by the adsorbed proteins rather than the bare nanoparticles. The use of nanoparticles as nanomedicines and biosensors would be greatly improved if researchers were able to predict which specific proteins will adsorb on a nanoparticle surface. We use a recently developed automated workflow with a liquid handling robot and low-cost proteomics to determine the concentration and composition of the protein corona formed on carboxylate-modified iron oxide nanoparticles (200&#xa0;nm) as a function of incubation time and serum concentration. We measure the concentration of the resulting protein corona with a colorimetric assay and the composition of the corona with proteomics, reporting both abundance and enrichment relative to the fetal bovine serum (FBS) proteins used to form the corona. Incubation time was found to be an important parameter for corona concentration and composition at high (100% FBS) incubation concentrations, with only a slight effect at low (10%) FBS concentrations. In addition to these findings, we describe two methodological advances to help reduce the cost associated with protein corona experiments. We have automated the digest step necessary for proteomics and measured the variability between triplicate samples at each stage of the proteomics experiments. Overall, these results demonstrate the importance of understanding the multiple parameters that influence corona formation, provide new tools for corona characterization, and advance bioanalytical research in nanomaterials.

### Keywords
Bovine, Magnetic nanoparticles, Serum, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Duke University
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Payne Lab, Duke University.

### Submitter
Karsten Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Payne
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Payne Lab, Duke University.


