### Accession
PXD018214

### Title
Phospho-proteomic analysis of palmitate (PA)-treated L02 cells w/wo sorafenib treatment

### Description
Label-free based phospho-proteomic was used to analysis protein phosphorylation profile of L02 hepatocytes with or without 0.5 mM PA stimulate in condition of DMSO or 10 μM sorafenib for 18h

### Sample Protocol
L02 cells were treated with BSA or 0.5 mM PA and DMSO or sorafenib (10 µM) for 18 hours for label-free phospho-proteomic analysis. The cells were lysed with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Then, 400 µg of protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 2.5 hours. Subsequently, the samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM) for 30 min in the dark. The proteins were then digested in 1.5 M urea buffer containing trypsin (1 μg/100 μg protein) for 18 hours at 37 °C. The digests were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (WAT051910, Waters), dried in vacuo, and stored at −80 °C for further use. The phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads as previously described. The phosphopeptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark; in Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China). The peptides were first trapped (Thermo EASY column SC001 traps, 150 μm×20 mm [RP-C18], Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) before being separated on the analytical column (EASY column SC200, 150 μm×100 mm [RP-C18], Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were chromatographically separated with the following 120 min gradient program at a flow rate of 300 nL/min: 0–110 min, 0–55% solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile in water); 110–115 min, 55–100% solvent B; and 115–120 min, 100% solvent B. The eluents were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, Odense, Denmark) with scanning from m/z 300 to m/z 1800 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against an integrated human proteome in the UniProt database. The resulting files obtained by MaxQuant were analyzed using Perseus (version 1.3.0.4) (Cox and Mann, 2008). To compare the abundances of phosphopeptides between the control and treatment samples, label-free quantification was performed with a minimum fold change of 1.5 to determine the differentially expressed phosphopeptides. In addition, Student's t-test was employed to identify significant differences between the control and treatment samples. P values < 0.05 were considered to indicate significance.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is becoming one of the leading causes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Sorafenib is the only first-line therapy for advanced HCC despite its serious adverse effects. Here, we report that at an equivalent of approximately one-tenth the clinical dose for HCC, sorafenib treatment effectively prevents the progression of NASH in both mice and monkeys without any observed significant adverse events. Mechanistically, sorafenib's benefit in NASH is independent of its canonical kinase targets in HCC, but involves the induction of mild mitochondrial uncoupling and subsequent activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Collectively, our findings demonstrate a previously unappreciated therapeutic effect and signaling mechanism of low-dose sorafenib treatment in NASH. We envision that this new therapeutic strategy for NASH has the potential to translate into a beneficial anti-NASH therapy with fewer adverse events than is observed in the drug's current use in HCC.

### Keywords
Label-free, L02 cell line

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China

### Submitter
Xu Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Hongliang Li
Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China


