### Accession
PXD046778

### Title
Ablation of integrin-mediated cell–collagen communication alleviates fibrosis

### Description
Activation of fibroblasts is a hallmark of fibrotic processes. Besides cytokines and growth factors, fibroblasts are regulated by the extracellular matrix environment through receptors such as integrins, which transduce biochemical and mechanical signals enabling cells to mount appropriate responses according to biological demands. The aim of this work was to investigate the in vivo role of collagen–fibroblast interactions for regulating fibroblast functions and fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for mass spectrometry were prepared as previously described (13): Back skin of mice were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed using a mortar and pestle. Samples were further lysed, reduced and alkylated by resuspending in a buffer containing 6 M guanidinium chloride, 20 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 80 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, followed by boiling for 10 min and lysis using a FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals; 6 times for 30 s, with intermittent cooling on ice). Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) (15 cycles of 30 s) was used to sonicate the lysates, followed by dilution with 25 mM Tris, pH 8.5. Subsequently, volumes of lysates containing 200 µg of protein were taken and digested overnight with Lys-C (VA1170, Promega) and Trypsin-Gold (V5280, Promega) at a 1:50 ratio at 37°C, followed by sonication and digestion for 3 h with Lys-C and trypsin (1:100 ratio). Trypsinization was stopped by acidification and peptide cleaning was performed using C18-SD STAGE tips (14). Next, 4 µg of desalted peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex, 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent. The peptides were TMT labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the following changes: dried peptides were reconstituted in 9 µl 0.1 M TEAB followed by addition of 7 µl TMT reagent in acetonitrile (ACN) such that final concentration of ACN was 43.75%. After 60 min of incubation at RT, the reaction was quenched with 2 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and the labeled peptides were pooled, dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid followed by desalting using C18 STAGE tips (14). The samples were fractionated on a 150 mm, 300 µm, 2 µm C18, AcclaimPepMap (164537, Thermo Fisher Scientific) column using an Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 30°C. Buffer A was 5% acetonitrile 0.01 M ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B was 80% acetonitrile 0.01 M ammonium bicarbonate. Separation was performed using a segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B, for 90 min and 50% to 95% for 20 min with a flow rate of 4 µl min−1 . Fractions were collected every 150 s and combined into nine fractions by pooling every ninth fraction. Pooled fractions were dried using the Concentrator plus (Eppendorf), resuspended in 2 µl 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (164942, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 120 min linear, 6% to 31% buffer B; buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, buffer B was 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN. The column was maintained at 50 °C. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Synchronous precursor selection-based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were analysed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8) (15). Differential expression analysis was performed using limma (v.3.34.9) (16) in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrin, Fibrisis, Tmt

### Affiliations
Translational Matrix Biology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Thomas Krieg
Translational Matrix Biology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


