### Accession
PXD023875

### Title
Human-Soybean Allergies: Elucidation of the Seed Proteome & Comprehensive PPI Prediction

### Description
In this work, a total of eight proteins have been identified (six specific to the human proteome and two specific to the soybean proteome) that are supported by literature to be involved in human health, specifically related to immunological and neurological pathways. Our approach involved the use of the Protein-protein Interaction Prediction Engine (PIPE4) algorithm which was specifically developed for complex inter- and cross-species prediction schemas to generate the comprehensive interactome between H. sapiens and G. max. A literature-curated list of human proteins known to be associated with the Human Allergy Response and a second literature-curated list of soybean proteins known to be associated with Soybean Allergens were used to identify candidate proteins whose interactions may be consequential to human health. This study, beyond generating the most comprehensive human-soybean interactome to date, elucidated a soybean seed interactome and identified several proteins putatively consequential to human health.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean field grown seeds harvested at R8 maturity stage (Ottawa) and dry seeds being used for seed protein extraction of MS run. Proteins were extracted from the soybean seeds with acetone precipitation method.

### Data Protocol
To build a Glycine max interaction network, the MS/MS spectra from each replicate chromatographic fractions was searched against reference Glycine max protein sequences using the SEQUEST/ STATQUEST algorithm (Kislinger et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
The soybean crop, <i>Glycine max</i> (L.) Merr., is consumed by humans, <i>Homo sapiens</i>, worldwide. While the respective bodies of literature and -<i>omics</i> data for each of these organisms are extensive, comparatively few studies investigate the molecular biological processes occurring between the two. We are interested in elucidating the network of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) involved in human-soybean allergies. To this end, we leverage state-of-the-art sequence-based PPI predictors amenable to predicting the enormous comprehensive interactome between human and soybean. A network-based analytical approach is proposed, leveraging <i>similar interaction profiles</i> to identify candidate allergens and proteins involved in the allergy response. Interestingly, the predicted interactome can be explored from two complementary perspectives: <i>which soybean proteins are predicted to interact with specific human proteins</i> and <i>which human proteins are predicted to interact with specific soybean proteins</i>. A total of eight proteins (six specific to the human proteome and two to the soy proteome) have been identified and supported by the literature to be involved in human health, specifically related to immunological and neurological pathways. This study, beyond generating the most comprehensive human-soybean interactome to date, elucidated a soybean seed interactome and identified several proteins putatively consequential to human health.

### Keywords
Human, Allergy, Ms/ms spectra, Seed protein, Ppi, Pipe, Soybean, Glycine max, Computational biology

### Affiliations
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa Research and Development Centre
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Bahram Samanfar
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa Research and Development Centre


