### Accession
PXD025594

### Title
Cancer tissue classification using supervised machine learning applied to MALDI mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
With the current clinical available technologies, not all cancers are staged accurately. Because of this a large percentage of patients are misclassified before treatment, leading to under or over treatment. Therefore, a classification system based on the molecular feature is required to deter-mine the tumour behavior and metastatic potential. Here, we have shown the diagnostic potential of MALDI MSI using supervised machine learning approach in distinguishing cancerous colorectal tissue from normal with an overall accuracy of 98%. Also, shown is the capability of the technique in predicting the presence of metastasis in endometrial cancer with an overall accuracy of 80%. The development of such a model can help in determining the optimum treatment for cancerous pa-tients, reduce morbidity and better patient outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Here, we have developed a machine learning model to compare the proteomic changes between the tumour and normal tissues (or the dierent FIGO stages of CRC). 15 TMAs were analysed by MALDI MSI consisting of 564 tissue groups (286 normal, 278 tumour) from 302 unique patients in total.

### Data Protocol
The imaging dataset was uploaded and pre-processed into the SCiLS lab v2016b (Bruker Daltonik), baseline subtraction by TopHat and normalisation based on total ion count was performed. Based on the pathological annota- tions, region(s) of interest were dened and grouped together in three dierent classes, normal, with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and without LNM. MSI dataset was then exported as vendor-neutral data format imzML.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI) can determine the spatial distribution of analytes such as protein distributions in a tissue section according to their mass-to-charge ratio. Here, we explored the clinical potential of machine learning (ML) applied to MALDI MSI data for cancer diagnostic classification using tissue microarrays (TMAs) on 302 colorectal (CRC) and 257 endometrial cancer (EC)) patients. ML based on deep neural networks discriminated colorectal tumour from normal tissue with an overall accuracy of 98% in balanced cross-validation (98.2% sensitivity and 98.6% specificity). Moreover, our machine learning approach predicted the presence of lymph node metastasis (LNM) for primary tumours of EC with an accuracy of 80% (90% sensitivity and 69% specificity). Our results demonstrate the capability of MALDI MSI for complementing classic histopathological examination for cancer diagnostic applications.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis (lnm), Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (maldi msi), Machine learning (ml), Endometrial cancer (ec), Colorectal cancer (crc)

### Affiliations
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471  University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5001 t: +61 8 830 25563 | m: +61 434 079 108 f: +61 8 830 25639
Research associate

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter Hoffmann
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471  University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5001 t: +61 8 830 25563 | m: +61 434 079 108 f: +61 8 830 25639


