### Accession
PXD027617

### Title
Targeted Protein Acetylation in Cells Using Heterobifunctional Molecules

### Description
Protein acetylation is a central event in orchestrating diverse cellular processes. However, current strategies to investigate protein acetylation in cells are often non-specific or lack temporal and magnitude control. Here, we developed an acetylation tagging system, AceTAG, to induce acetylation of targeted proteins. The AceTAG system utilizes bifunctional molecules to direct the lysine acetyltransferase p300/CBP to proteins fused with the small protein tag FKBP12F36V, resulting in their induced acetylation. Using AceTAG, we induced targeted acetylation of a diverse array of proteins in cells, specifically histone H3.3, the NF-B subunit p65/RelA, and the tumor suppressor p53. We demonstrate that targeted acetylation with the AceTAG system is rapid, selective, reversible, and can be controlled in a dose-dependent fashion. AceTAG represents a useful strategy to modulate protein acetylation and will enable the exploration of targeted acetylation in basic biological and therapeutic contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for quantitative protemics of H3.3 acetylation. The pelleted cells were lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer, containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 30 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) NP40, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 20 mM Nicotinamide, and 1X Halt Protease Inhibitor, followed by centrifuging for 5 min at 1,000 g at 4°C. The pellets were treated with benzonase and subjected for HA-tag protein enrichment. Supernatant was collected for in-gel digestion for mass-spectrometry sample preparation. HA-tag protein enriched samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel and the desire protein bands were excised out. The gels were washed with 100 mM TEAB for 2 times, reduced in 10 mM TCEP solution at 60°C for 30 min and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature while protected from light. A solution of 1:1 acetonitrile and 100 mM TEAB was added to wash the gels bands, followed by 100% acetonitrile to completely dry the gels. Protein was digested with trypsin and the peptides within the gels were extracted with 25%acetonitrile/5% formic acid (MS-grade) for one time, 75% acetonitrile (MS-grade) for two times, and 100% acetonitrile (MS-grade) for two times. The peptide samples were dried under vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB containing 30 % acetonitrile (MS-grade) and labeled with respective TMT 10 plex isotope (8 μL, 20 μg/ μL) for 1 h with occasional vortexing at RT. To quench the reaction, hydroxylamine (6 μL, 5% v/v) was added to each sample, vortexed, and incubated for 15 min at RT. Formic acid (4 μL) was added to each tube to acidify and the samples were dried under vacuum centrifugation. Multiplexed samples were fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to manufacturer Instructions. Combined fractions were lyophilized prior to resuspension for MS analysis. TMT labeled samples were redissolved in MS buffer A (20 μL, 0.1% formic acid in water). 3μL of each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 μm x 2 mm) and eluted on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm) using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in MeCN) were used in a 200 min gradient (flow rate 0.3 mL/min, 35 °C) of 2 % buffer B for 10 min, followed by an incremental increase to 25 % buffer B over 155 min, 25%-45% buffer B for 10 min, 45%-95 % buffer B for 5 min, hold at 95 % buffer B for 2 min, followed by descent to 2% buffer B for 1 min and re-equilibration at 2% for 6 min. The elutions were analyzed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with a cycle time of 3 s and nano-LC electrospray ionization source applied voltage of 2.0 kV. MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1x106 ions, maximum injection time of 50 ms (dynamic exclusion enabled, repeat count 1, duration 20 s). The scan range was specified from 375 to 1,500 m/z. Peptide fragmentation MS2 spectra was recorded via collisioninduced diffusion (CID) and quadrupole ion trap analysis (AGC 1.8x104, 30 % collision energy, maximum inject time 120 ms, isolation window 0.7). MS3 spectra were generated by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with collision energy of 65 %. Precursor selection included up to 10 MS2 ions for the MS3 spectrum. Sample preparation for acetylproteomics. Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5),150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 10mM nicotinamide and 1X Pierce™ protease inhibitor cocktail. Cells were sonicated to ensure complete lysis, mixed with 5 M NaCl at a ratio of 1:10 with sample volume and incubated on ice for 15 min to release chromatin-bound proteins and to shear genomic DNA. Cellular debris was cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. ~10mg of proteins were denatured with 8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at RT. Following alkylation, proteins were precipitated using chloroform-methanol, and protein pellets were dried at 56°C for 15 min. Proteins pellets were resuspended in 1 M urea in 50 mM HEPES and digested in a two-step process with LysC and trypsin as previously described. Digested peptides were desalted using Phenomenex Strata-X polymeric reverse phase extraction cartridges using the following protocol. Digested peptides were quantified using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay and 25 µg was aliquoted from each for total protein analysis while the remaining peptide was lyophilized and retained for acetylpeptide enrichment. Acetyl-peptides were enriched using the PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit according to manufacturer instructions. TMT Labeling, fractionation, and MS analysis were performed as above.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed with the processing software Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide sequences were identified by matching proteome databases with experimental fragmentation patterns via the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Fragment tolerances were set to 0.6 Da, and precursor mass tolerances set to 10 ppm with four missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C, +57.02146) and TMT-tag (N-terminal, +229.163) were specified in the static modifications. Oxidation (M, +15.995), TMT-tag (K, +229.163), and Acetylation (K, +42.001) were defined as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched against the Homo Sapiens proteome database (42,358 sequences) using a false discovery rate of 1 % (Percolator). MS3 peptide quantitation was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Peptide abundance of TMT ratios obtained by Proteome Discoverer were normalized to total protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation is a central event in orchestrating diverse cellular processes. However, current strategies to investigate protein acetylation in cells are often nonspecific or lack temporal and magnitude control. Here, we developed an acetylation tagging system, AceTAG, to induce acetylation of targeted proteins. The AceTAG system utilizes bifunctional molecules to direct the lysine acetyltransferase p300/CBP to proteins fused with the small protein tag FKBP12<sup>F36V</sup>, resulting in their induced acetylation. Using AceTAG, we induced targeted acetylation of a diverse array of proteins in cells, specifically histone H3.3, the NF-&#x3ba;B subunit p65/RelA, and the tumor suppressor p53. We demonstrate that targeted acetylation with the AceTAG system is rapid, selective, reversible and can be controlled in a dose-dependent fashion. AceTAG represents a useful strategy to modulate protein acetylation and should enable the exploration of targeted acetylation in basic biological and therapeutic contexts.

### Keywords
Targeted acetylation, Heterobifunctional molecules, P300/cbp, Acetylproteomics

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry, The ScrippsResearch Institute

### Submitter
Li Yun Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher G. Parker
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry, The ScrippsResearch Institute


