### Accession
PXD023039

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus responds to physiologically relevant temperature changes by altering its global transcript and protein profile

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is an opportunistic pathogen that colonizes the anterior nares of 30-50% of the population. Colonization is most often asymptomatic, however, self-inoculation can give rise to potentially fatal infections of the deeper tissues and blood. Like all bacteria, S. aureus is able to sense and respond to environmental cues and modify gene expression to adapt to specific environmental conditions. The transition of S. aureus from the nares to the deeper tissues and blood is accompanied by changes in environmental conditions, such as nutrient availability, pH, and temperature. On average, the human anterior nares are 34°C while a healthy individual maintains a core body temperature of 37°C. In this study we investigate the response of S. aureus to changing temperature.  Transcriptomics and proteomics were performed on S. aureus cultures growing at three physiologically relevant temperatures, 34°C (nares), 37°C (body), and 40°C (pyrexia), to determine if small scale, biologically meaningful alterations in temperature have an impact on S. aureus gene expression. Results show that small but definite temperature changes elicit a large-scale restructuring of the S. aureus transcriptome and proteome. We demonstrate that these changes have physiological relevance through phenotypic analyses. Finally, we investigate the impact of temperature dependent alterations in gene expression on S. aureus pathogenesis and demonstrate decreased intracellular invasion of S. aureus grown at 34°C. Collectively, our results demonstrate that small but biologically meaningful alterations in temperature influence  S. aureus gene expression, a process that is likely a major contributor to the transition from a commensal to pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus was grown in TSB medium with shaking to an OD600 of approx 6.5 at three temperatures (34 C, 37 C and 40 C). Supernatants were harvested and filter sterilized through a 0.45 μm filter disk to ensure all bacterial cells were removed from the sample. The remaining cell pellets were washed with ice-cold PBS and stored at -80°C for intracellular proteome analysis. Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the culture supernatants (for a final concentration of 10%) and samples were incubated at 4°C overnight. The following day, samples were centrifuged at 11,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was removed. The resulting pellets, containing precipitated proteins, were washed with ice-cold acetone. To prepare samples for intracellular proteome analysis, pelleted bacteria were washed, resuspended in 1 ml phosophate buffered saline (PBS) containing 30 µl of lysostaphin and incubated statically, at 37°C for 15 min. Samples were removed and homogenized for 30 seconds, followed by another 15 min incubation period at 37˚C. This process was repeated 4 times. Samples were spun by centrifugation to pellet cell debris. Cytoplasmic protein supernatants (100 μl) were diluted to 200 μl with water and precipitated and washed 3 times using the ProteoExtract® Protein Precipitation Kit (EMD Millipore). Both secreted and supernatant pellets were redissolved in a solution of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM DTT, 0.1 M Tris, pH 8 and 1 x PhosStop by gentle shaking for 1.5 h at 24°C. After reduction the samples were alkylated for 30 min using a 3-fold molar excess of iodoacetamide. The protein concentration was determined using the CB-X protein assay kit. 100 μg of protein in 10 μl of the urea solution was diluted and digested with 1 μg trypsin (1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio) for 16 h overnight, then an additional 1 μg of trypsin was added and digestion continued for a further 3 h. 500 ng of each of the 9 secreted protein samples and 1 μg of each of the cytoplasmic protein samples was run by nanoLC-MS/MS using a 2 h gradient on a 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 Waters CSH column feeding into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo) linked to the Mascot Server MSMS search software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1). Mascot was set up to search the common contaminants database cRAP_20150130.fasta (117 entries) and the uniprot-S_aureus database (2607 entries). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.06 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term protein, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, carbamydomethyl of cysteine were specified as a variable modification. The data was searched using a decoy database to set the false discovery rate to 1 % (high confidence).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus temperature

### Affiliations
Ohio University

### Submitter
Erin Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Erin R Murphy
Ohio University


