### Accession
PXD032767

### Title
Characterization of plasma circulating small extracellular vesicles in patients with metastatic solid tumors and newly diagnosed brain metastasis

### Description
Brain metastases are critical for outcomes and quality of life in almost 50% of oncological patients, generally associated with a poor short-term prognosis. Early or preventive diagnosis of this complication represents an unmet need. There is a necessity of discovering new biomarkers that could aid to predict disease outcome.  In this study, we analyzed plasma circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) from a cohort of 92 patients with different solid tumors (lung, breast, kidney cancer and melanoma) and found that newly diagnosed patients with brain metastases presented lower number of circulating particles and a higher protein concentration in small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) compared to patients without brain metastases and healthy controls. Out of all groups analyzed, melanoma patients with brain metastases presented decreased STAT3 activation and increased PD-L1 levels in circulating sEVs compared to patients without central nervous system metastases.  The data presented in this work suggest that circulating sEVs may represent the immunosuppressive status of newly diagnosed brain metastases characterized by the reduced phospho-STAT3 (pSTAT3) and increased PD-L1, although the origin of these molecules found in circulating sEVs remains to be uncovered.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  Plasma samples were diluted 1:10 with 50 mM Tris-HCl and the protein content of plasma-derived exosomes was resuspended in Laemli buffer. Proteins (10 µg) were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA) 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Then, samples were digested following the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (1) with some modifications. Briefly, ethanol was added to the samples to a final concentration of 70% and proteins were incubated for 15 minutes with the beads at a bead:protein ratio 10:1 (wt/wt). Beads were washed using 70% EtOH (twice) and 100% ACN. Proteins were digested with trypsin in 50 mM TEAB (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, overnight at 37 °C; Promega). Resulting peptides were acidified, vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.1%FA.  Mass spectrometry For the proteomic analysis, LC-MS/MS was carried out by coupling an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, ThermoScientific) over 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoScientific) and separated using a 60 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-3 min 2% B, 3-5 min 6% B, 5-36 min 17.5% B, 36-60 min 25% B, 60-63 min 33% B, 63-65 min 45% B, 65-70 min 98% B, 70-80 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.5 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 320 °C and a S-Lens RF level of 50%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between the MS and MS/MS  scans using a top 15 method (minimum AGC target 3E3) and a dynamic exclusion time of 25 sec. MS (350-1400 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (45 ms maximum injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, January 2022, 20,387 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation were variable protein modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level. The human Exocarta database (http://exocarta.org) was considered the reference set list to evaluate the protein content in exosomal markers.

### Publication Abstract
Nearly 40% of the advanced cancer patients will present brain metastases during the course of their disease, with a 2-year life expectancy of less than 10%. Immune system impairment, including the modulation of both STAT3 and PD-L1, is one of the hallmarks of brain metastases. Liquid biopsy could offer several advantages in brain metastases management, such as the possibility of noninvasive dynamic monitoring. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been recently proposed as novel biomarkers especially useful in liquid biopsy due to their secretion in biofluids and their role in cell communication during tumor progression. The main aim of this work was to characterize the size and protein cargo of plasma circulating EVs in patients with solid tumors and their correlation with newly diagnosed brain metastases, in addition to their association with other relevant clinical variables. We analyzed circulating EVs in the plasma of 123 patients: 42 patients with brain metastases, 50 without brain metastases and 31 healthy controls. Patients with newly diagnosed brain metastases had a lower number of circulating EVs in the plasma and a higher protein concentration in small EVs (sEVs) compared to patients without brain metastases and healthy controls. Interestingly, melanoma patients with brain metastases presented decreased STAT3 activation and increased PD-L1 levels in circulating sEVs compared to patients without central nervous system metastases. Decreased STAT3 activation and increased PD-L1 in plasma circulating sEVs identify melanoma patients with brain metastasis.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Brain metastasis, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) ProteoRed-ISCIII Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3 28029 Madrid. SPAIN
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Pilar Ximénez-Embún
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) ProteoRed-ISCIII Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3 28029 Madrid. SPAIN


