### Accession
PXD032278

### Title
Complete metabolic reconstruction of the microbiome of the model sponge Ianthella basta

### Description
Marine sponges are essential for coral reefs to thrive and harbour a diverse microbiome that is thought to contribute to host health. Although the overall function of sponge symbionts has been increasingly described, in-depth characterisation of each taxa remains challenging, with many sponge species hosting up to 3,000 distinct microbial species. Recently, the sponge Ianthella basta has emerged as a model organism for symbiosis research, hosting only three dominant symbionts: a Thaumarchaeotum, a Gammaproteobacterium, and an Alphaproteobacterium and a range of other minor taxa. Here, we retrieved metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) for >90% of I. basta’s microbial community which allowed us to make a complete metabolic reconstruction of the sponge’s microbiome, identifying metabolic complementarity between microbes, as well as the importance of symbionts present in low abundance. We also mined the metagenomes for putative viral sequences, highlighting the contribution of viruses to the overall metabolism of the sponge, and complement this data with metaproteomic sequencing to identify active metabolic pathways in both prokaryotes and viruses. This data now allows us to use I. basta as a model organism for studying host-microbe interactions and provides a basis for future (genomic) manipulative experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Three Ianthella basta individuals were collected in November 2019 from Orpheus Island, central Great Barrier Reef (18°37’S, 146°30’E) between 11-15m depth using scuba.  Sponge tissue was disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Sanra Ana, CA, USA; 5.5 ms, 1 min, 3 cycles) followed by ultra-sonication (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany; cycle 0.5, amplitude 60%) and centrifugation (10,000 x g, 10 min). The protein lysate was loaded on an SDS-gel and run for 10 min. The gel piece was cut, washed, and incubated with 25 mM 1,4 dithiothreitol (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 1 h and 100 mM iodoacetamide (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min, and destained, dehydrated, and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega). The digested peptides were extracted and desalted using ZipTip μC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The peptide lysates were re-suspended in 15 µL 0.1% formic acid and analysed by nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric analyses of eluted peptide lysates were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK). Peptide lysates were injected on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 5 μL/min by using 98% water/2% ACN 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 80 % ACN/0.08 % formic acid in water (B). Full MS spectra (350–1,550 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106 ions.

### Data Protocol
Data resulting from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using SEQUEST HT. Protein identification was performed using a custom protein database, which consisted of proteins identified by Prodigal v2.6.3 in all metagenomic assemblies and MAGs from the three I. basta individuals from this study and the one from Moeller et al. All protein sequences were functionally annotated with the KO and PFAM databases using EnrichM v0.6.3 (https://github.com/geronimp/enrichM). To avoid arbitrary mapping, only non-redundant protein sequences were used for protein identification (clustered at an identity threshold of 100%). Searches were conducted with the following parameters: Trypsin as enzyme specificity and two missed cleavages allowed. A peptide ion tolerance of 10 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da were used. As modifications, oxidation (methionine) and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) were selected. Peptides that scored a q-value >1% based on a decoy database and with a peptide rank of 1, were considered identified. Redundant proteins were grouped in protein groups by applying the strict parsimony principle. Only the protein groups that explain at least one unique identified peptide were reported through the Top3 approach implemented in the Proteome Discoverer v2.4.

### Publication Abstract
Many marine sponges host highly diverse microbiomes that contribute to various aspects of host health. Although the putative function of individual groups of sponge symbionts has been increasingly described, the extreme diversity has generally precluded in-depth characterization of entire microbiomes, including identification of syntrophic partnerships. The Indo-Pacific sponge Ianthella basta is emerging as a model organism for symbiosis research, hosting only three dominant symbionts: a Thaumarchaeotum, a Gammaproteobacterium, and an Alphaproteobacterium and a range of other low abundance or transitory taxa. Here, we retrieved metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) representing &gt;90% of I. basta's microbial community, facilitating the metabolic reconstruction of the sponge's near complete microbiome. Through this analysis, we identified metabolic complementarity between microbes, including vitamin sharing, described the importance of low abundance symbionts, and characterized a novel microbe-host attachment mechanism in the Alphaproteobacterium. We further identified putative viral sequences, highlighting the role viruses can play in maintaining symbioses in I. basta through the horizontal transfer of eukaryotic-like proteins, and complemented this data with metaproteomics to identify active metabolic pathways in bacteria, archaea, and viruses. This data provide the framework to adopt I. basta as a model organism for studying host-microbe interactions and provide a basis for in-depth physiological experiments.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Marine sponge, Host-microbe interaction

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


