### Accession
PXD008568

### Title
Human plasma LC-MSMS -  Altered plasma proteins released from platelets and endothelial cells are associated with human patent ductus arteriosus

### Description
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the third most common congenital heart disease and resulted from the persistence of ductal patency after birth. Ductus arteriosus closure involves functional and structural remodeling, controlled by many factors. The closure-related human plasma proteins are unknown. Here we for the first time demonstrate six key differential plasma proteins in the human PDA patients using proteomic technology and present a model to illustrate the constriction and closure of ductus arteriosus. We found that permanent closure might be regulated by the proteins related to platelet activation and coagulation cascades, complement mannan-binding-lectin, and other systemic signaling pathways. Our findings indicate that the differential proteins involved in these pathways may play key roles in the non-closure of the ductus arteriosus and may be developed as biomarkers for diagnosis. All those findings may be served as the basis of understanding the etiology and pathogenesis of PDA.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Blood samples were taken from patients before surgery.  From each sample, 2 ml blood was harvested in collection tubes with ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid and then centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 min, the plasma was separated from the blood cells.  Plasma was then collected, divided into aliquots, and stored frozen at -80°C until the analysis was carried out. Plasma High-Abundance Protein Depletion The plasma samples from PDA patients and normal controls were processes to deplete the top-two (albumin, IgG) high abundance proteins using the ProteoExtractTM Albumin/IgG Removal Kit (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA). Samples were processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Solution Digestion and iTRAQ Labeling The eluted samples were mixed in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer with 1 mM phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride and 0.1% SDS, followed by sonication for 5 min and centrifugation at 20 000 g for 30 min.  The supernatant was transferred to another tube, 0.5 M TEAB buffer was added to the pellet to repeat the protein extraction, and the sample was again centrifuged at 20 000 g for 30 min.  Proteins in the combined supernatant were reduced (10 mM DTT, 56℃ for 60 min), alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature for 60 min), precipitated by precooled acetone at 220℃ for 30 min, and then centrifuged at 20 000 g for 30 min.  The pellet was washed twice with acetone, and the final pellet was dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB buffer with 0.1% SDS, sonicated for 5 min, and centrifuged at 20 000 g for 30 min.  The supernatant was used for liquid digestion, and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. For the iTRAQ/Shotgun experiment, 3.3 ug of trypsin was added to 100 ug of the protein solution for protein digestion at 37℃ for 24 h.  Then, 1 ug of trypsin was added again, and the sample was digested for 12 more hours.  The digests were dried in a Speedvac. Each precipitate was dissolved in 30 ul of 0.5 M TEAB and mixed with 70 ul of isopropanol.  The protein digests obtained from 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 DAP were labeled with iTRAQ reagent (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) 113, 114，115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121, respectively.  The labeling reaction was conducted for 2 h at room temperature, and then the eight labeled peptides were pooled together. SCX and RP nanoLC-MS/MS Analysis of Labeled Peptide The peptides were dried in a Speedvac and dissolved in 1 ml of buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% ACN at pH 2.8). After adjusting the pH to 3 with H3PO4, the sample was fractionated using strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX) on an HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a silica-based SCX column (250 mm*4.6 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA).  A total of 28 fractions were collected at a rate of 1 ml/min with a buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4 and 2 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.8) gradient as following: 0% for 50 min, 5% for 51 min, 30% for 71 min, 50% for 76 min, 50% for 81 min, 100% for 86 min, and 100% for 96 min.  The fractions were desalted with a strata-X 33 mm PolyRevStage SPE (Phenomenex) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a Speedvac.  Then, 30 ul of 0.1% FA was added to each dried fraction tube, and 1 ul of the re-dissolved solution was spotted on the target well of an Anchor-chip plate for MALDI-TOF testing.  After the MALDI-TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) testing, the peptides in the tubes with few peaks were pooled, resulting in 16 pooled SCX-separated fractions.  Each SCX fraction was loaded on a Prominence Nano HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Germering, Germany) mounted with a 10 cm reversed phase C18 column (ID 75 mm, 5μm particles, 300 A aperture) and separated over a 40 min acetonitrile gradient from 5 to 35% in 0.1% FA combined with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).  The data were acquired using a data-dependent data acquisition mode in which, for each cycle, the 20 most abundant multiply charged peptides (2+ to 4+) with an m/z between 350 and 2000 were selected for MS/MS with the 15-s dynamic exclusion setting.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.0) against Uniprot-Human Database containing 216686 sequences.  Proteins identified as showing expression changes were tested for conformity to the following conditions: 1) a false discovery rate < 1% (false discovery rate was estimated by ‘decoy database searching’ using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3); and 2) protein confidence > 99% (‘unused ProtScore’ > 2).  Unused ProtScore is defined as -log (1-% confidence/100).  Proteins fulfilling these criteria were considered to have ‘statistical significance’.  Blast2GO software was used to get the proteins GO annotation.  The expect value < 0.001 was used to cut off the Blast result.  And the GO term with Blast2GO’s score ＞ 30 to be consider.  KEGG was used to identify pathway analysis.  The Fisher exact test was used for the Pathway enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Patent ductus arteriosus is the third most common congenital heart disease and resulted from the persistence of ductal patency after birth. Ductus arteriosus closure involves functional and structural remodeling, controlled by many factors. The changes in plasma protein levels associated with PDA closure are not known. Here we for the first time demonstrate six key differential plasma proteins in human patent ductus arteriosus patients using proteomic technology and present a model to illustrate the constriction and closure of ductus arteriosus. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification and validated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in new samples. The proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD008568. We found 74 upregulated and 98 downregulated proteins in the plasma of patients with PDA. Five decreased proteins (platelet factor 4, fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, collagen, and mannose binding lectin-associated serine protease-2) and one increased protein (fibronectin) may increase the risk of patent ductus arteriosus. Those proteins are closely related to platelet activation and coagulation cascades, complement mannan-binding-lectin, and other systemic signaling pathways. Our findings for the first time indicate that the differential proteins involved in different pathways may play key roles in the nonclosure of the ductus arteriosus in humans and may be developed as biomarkers for diagnosis. All those findings may be served as the basis of understanding the etiology and pathogenesis of patent ductus arteriosus.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Patent ductus arteriosus, Lc-msms, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Teda International Cardiovascular Hospital
Department of basic research center,TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China.

### Submitter
Hai-Tao Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-Tao Hou
Department of basic research center,TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China.


