### Accession
PXD040930

### Title
Human Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC), LC-MS/MS

### Description
The aim of the study was to characterize a common molecular mechanism for paclitaxel resistance in Patu-T and Suit-2.028 PDAC cell lines. Despite the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) trasnsporters were already shown to be involved in various chemo-resistant forms of cancers but not in PDAC, the most likely impact of ABCB1 overexpression in PDAC cell models was taken into account in this dataset.

### Sample Protocol
PDAC cell lines (Patu-T and Suit-2.028) were lysed and protein extracts were reduced and alkylated prior loading onto Micro S-trap (promega) columns. Trypsin was used as endoprotease to perform in column protein digestion. After elution, digested proteins were evaporated to dry and then dissolved in formic acid for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were injected and trapped onto a PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated along a PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly interfaced with a nanoEASY spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Tribrid Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific), over a gradient of 120 min. Data were acquired with a resolving power of 120000 over a m/z scan range between 375-1200 with a max injection time of 50 ms. Most abundant precursor ions were selected over a time period of 3 sec and subjected to HCD activation with a NCE of 27%. Fragment ion spectra were detected in a dual pressure linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 300 ms and a maximum ion set to 2000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were directly uploaded into Proteome Discoverer software (v2.1) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and queried against the human UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot TrEMBL database (202160 sequences, September 2021) using the SEQUEST searching algorithm. A mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively were used for peptide sequence matching.  Trypsin/Lys-C was selected as endoproteases with up to two missed cleavages allowed for digestion efficiency. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as variable modification while methionine oxidation and n-Term acetylation were both set as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were determined using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), using the Percolator. Protein abundances were exported from Proteome Discoverer and normalized over the sum within each cell line dataset. The equality of variances was assessed, and selected proteins were tested for significance using a Student’s two-tailed t-test accordingly. Protein abundances were considered significant with a p-value below 0.05 and with an absolute fold change of |FC| > 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pdac cell models, Lc-ms/ms, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS
Cancer Pharmacology Lab, Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza, San Giuliano, Pisa, Italy

### Submitter
Francesco Finamore

### Lab Head
Dr Elisa Giovannetti
Cancer Pharmacology Lab, Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza, San Giuliano, Pisa, Italy


