### Accession
PXD030037

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites of transcription factor after reaction with protein kinase

### Description
In previous study, we reported that MdERF17 contributes to Chl degradation in apple fruit peels. Here, we demonstrated that MdERF17 and MdMPK4 interact with each other in vitro and in vivo and raised the possibility that MdMPK4 may contribute to fruit degreening via post-transcriptional regulation of MdERF17. So an in vitro kinase assay was conducted and LC-MS/MS was used to examine the phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
After the in vitro kinase assays，reaction products were subjected to electrophoresis on 10% SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) staining prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. After chymotryptic digestion, surfactants were removed by adding extraction solution (5% trifluoroacetic acid, 50% acetonitrile, 45% ddH2O). The extracted peptides were lyophilized to near dryness and then resuspended in 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, which was performed using a nanoflow UPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) for HPLC, and a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) as a mass analyzer. Peptides were separated on a 150 μm × 150 mm in-house made column (1.9 μm, 100 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min while running a 6-95% acetonitrile gradient and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Up to top 20 most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were acquired.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed and searched against target protein database based on the species of the samples using MaxQuant（1.6.2.10）. The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable), Phospho (STY) (variable), the enzyme specificity was set to chymotrypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 3; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
As apple fruits (Malus domestica) mature, they accumulate anthocyanins concomitantly with losing chlorophyll (Chl); however, the molecular pathways and events that coordinate Chl degradation and fruit coloration have not been elucidated. We showed previously that the transcription factor ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR17 (MdERF17) modulates Chl degradation in apple fruit peels and that variation in the pattern of MdERF17 serine (Ser) residues is responsible for differences in its transcriptional regulatory activity. Here, we report that MdERF17 interacts with and is phosphorylated by MAP KINASE4 (MdMPK4-14G). Phosphorylation of MdERF17 at residue Thr67 by MdMPK4-14G is necessary for its transcriptional regulatory activity and its regulation of Chl degradation. We also show that MdERF17 mutants with different numbers of Ser repeat insertions exhibit altered phosphorylation profiles, with more repeats increasing its interaction with MdMPK4. MdMPK4-14G can be activated by exposure to darkness and is involved in the dark-induced degreening of fruit peels. We also demonstrate that greater phosphorylation of MdERF17 by MdMPK4-14G is responsible for the regulation of Chl degradation during light/dark transitions. Overall, our findings reveal the mechanism by which MdMPK4 controls fruit peel coloration.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation，in vitro kinase assay，lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Luping Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Shuai Wang
China Agricultural University


