### Accession
PXD025052

### Title
Proteomic analysis of primary tumor and lymph metastatic  tissues as well as  lung cancer cells

### Description
4 pairs of matched primary versus metastatic tumor tissues from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue bank,and two frozen lung tumor tissues from patients with primary orlymph metastasis. Then performed tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. A549 Cells we used was overexpressed luceiferase and designated as L0,underwent 3rounds selection in vivo to form L2, L6 that were metastatic to the spinal. We cultured L0 cells in "light" medium, L2,L6 in "medium heavy" and "heavy" respectively. Harvesting of cells and combined in 1:1:1 ratio, peptides were seperated using high-PH RPLC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissues were dewaxed by heptane with vortex for 10 min, and centrifuged at 10000 × g for 2 min. The supernatant was removed and the process was repeated once. The tissues were then incubated in dewaxing buffer overnight. The tissues were suspended in lysis buffer, homogenized and incubated at 95°C for 60 min, then sonicated on ice for 2 min followed by centrifugation. The supernatant was quantitated  and then proteins were reduced with 100 mM of DTT in 95°C for 10 min. Equal volume of urea buffer was added to each sample, and the samples were transferred to 30-kDa micron filters and were centrifuged at 14000 × g for 15 min. Proteins were then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer for 20 min, and the buffer was changed to 0.1 M TEAB by centrifugation at 14000 × g for 15 min with 4 repetitions. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin, desalted and labeled by a 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling reagent, following the manufacturer’s instructions.  FOR cells,the NSCLC cell line A549 (L0) and derived metastasis clone (L2, L6) were obtained from Dr. Luo Jian (East China Normal University, China). A549 L2 cells were metabolically labeled with “medium” heavy 13C6-arginine and D4-lysine, while L6 cells were labeled with heavy 13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2-lysine. L0 cells were cultured with “light” amino acid, cells were lysed in Urea buffer and proteins were extracted and combined in 1:1:1 ratio. Tryptic peptides were separated into 60 fractions using high-pH RPLC, combined into 12 components in zigzag fashion. Peptides were concentrated in a speed Vac, desalted in C18 STAGE-tips and primed for LC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) software was used to analyze the MS/MS raw data. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniportKB/Swiss-Prot human database. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, and trypsin was set as the protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level. For TMT data, TMT 10-plex (+229.1629 Da) on lysine and N-terminus was added as static modifications.For SILAC quantification, multiplicity was set to triple SILAC labelling (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+4/Arg+6, Lys+8/Arg+10). Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, and carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) of cysteine were set as static modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the major cause of high mortality in lung cancer. Exploring the underlying mechanisms of metastasis thus holds promise for identifying new therapeutic strategies that may enhance survival. <b>Methods:</b> We applied quantitative mass spectrometry to compare protein expression profiles between primary and metastatic lung cancer cells whilst investigating metastasis-related molecular features. <b>Results:</b> We discovered that BCAT1, the key enzyme in branched-chain amino acid metabolism, is overexpressed at the protein level in metastatic lung cancer cells, as well as in metastatic tissues from lung cancer patients. Analysis of transcriptomic data available in the TCGA database revealed that increased BCAT1 transcription is associated with poor overall survival of lung cancer patients. In accord with a critical role in metastasis, shRNA-mediated knockdown of BCAT1 expression reduced migration of metastatic cells <i>in vitro</i> and the metastasis of these cells to distal organs in nude mice. Mechanistically, high levels of BCAT1 depleted &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate (&#x3b1;-KG) and promoted expression of SOX2, a transcription factor regulating cancer cell stemness and metastasis. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our findings suggest that BCAT1 plays an important role in promoting lung cancer cell metastasis, and may define a novel pathway to target as an anti-metastatic therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, A549, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Lymph

### Affiliations
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China.
School of life science, East China Normal University

### Submitter
Lin Mao

### Lab Head
Dr Lujian Liao
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China.


