### Accession
PXD034835

### Title
Regulation of membrane fluidity by RNF145-triggered degradation of the lipid hydrolase ADIPOR2

### Description
The regulation of membrane lipid composition is critical for cellular homeostasis. Cells are particularly sensitive to phospholipid saturation, with increased saturation causing membrane rigidification and lipotoxicity. How mammalian cells sense membrane lipid composition and reverse fatty acid (FA)-induced membrane rigidification is poorly understood. Here we systematically identify proteins that differ between mammalian cells fed saturated versus unsaturated FAs. The most differentially expressed proteins were two ER-resident polytopic membrane proteins: the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF145 and the lipid hydrolase ADIPOR2. In unsaturated lipid membranes, RNF145 is stable, promoting its lipid-sensitive interaction, ubiquitination and degradation of ADIPOR2. When membranes become enriched in saturated FAs, RNF145 is rapidly auto-ubiquitinated and degraded, stabilising ADIPOR2, whose hydrolase activity restores lipid homeostasis and prevents lipotoxicity. We therefore identify RNF145 as a FA-responsive ubiquitin ligase which, together with ADIPOR2, define an autoregulatory pathway that controls cellular membrane lipid homeostasis and prevents acute lipotoxic stress.

### Sample Protocol
To each sample a 10% volume of 12% phosphoric acid is added to acidify samples to ~pH 2, completing denaturation. 6x volumes of wash buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.1, 90% Methanol) was added and the resulting solution was loaded onto a µS-trap (Protifi) using a positive pressure manifold ((PPM), Tecan M10), not more than 150 µL of sample at a time (~80 PSI). In-house fabricated adaptors were used to permit the use of S-traps with the manifold. Samples were then washed 4x with 150 µL wash buffer. To remove any remaining wash buffer S-traps were centrifuged at 4000 xg for 2 minutes. To each S-trap, 30 ul of digestion solution (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 0.1% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC)) containing 1.25 µg Trypsin/lysC mix (Promega) was added. S-Traps were then loosely capped and placed in low adhesion 1.5 mL microfuge tubes in a ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf) with a heated lid and incubated at 37°C for 6 hours. Where digestion was carried out overnight the thermomixer was set to 4°C after 6 hours. Peptides were recovered by adding 40µl digestion buffer to each trap an incubating at RT for 15 minutes before slowly eluting with positive pressure (2-3 PSI). Traps were subsequently eluted with 40 µL 0.2% formic acid (FA) and 40 uL 0.2% FA, 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) in the same manner. Eluted samples were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge equipped with a cold trap. For AP-MS experiments sample preparation differed as follows: Eluates were either eluted with 5 % SDS or adjusted to 5 % SDS after elution, prior to loading onto S-Traps and washing. SDC was omitted from the digestion buffer and 250 ng of typsin/LysC mix was used.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with PeaksX+, v10.5 (Bioinfor). Briefly, .raw files were searched iteratively in three rounds, with unmatched DeNovo spectra (at 0.1% PSM FDR) from the previous search used as the input for the next. The three iterations were as follows 1) Swissprot Human (27/03/2020) + common contaminants 2) The same databases as search 1 but permitting semi-specific cleavage 3) trEMBL Human (27/03/2020), with specific cleavage rules. Identified proteins and their abundances were output to .csv, imported to R and submitted to statistical analysis using LIMMA, a moderated t-test available through the Bioconductor package (Bioconductor.org). LIMMA p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to generate an FDR (q-value) for each comparison.

### Publication Abstract
The regulation of membrane lipid composition is critical for cellular homeostasis. Cells are particularly sensitive to phospholipid saturation, with increased saturation causing membrane rigidification and lipotoxicity. How mammalian cells sense membrane lipid composition and reverse fatty acid (FA)-induced membrane rigidification is poorly understood. Here we systematically identify proteins that differ between mammalian cells fed saturated versus unsaturated FAs. The most differentially expressed proteins were two ER-resident polytopic membrane proteins: the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF145 and the lipid hydrolase ADIPOR2. In unsaturated lipid membranes, RNF145 is stable, promoting its lipid-sensitive interaction, ubiquitination and degradation of ADIPOR2. When membranes become enriched in saturated FAs, RNF145 is rapidly auto-ubiquitinated and degraded, stabilising ADIPOR2, whose hydrolase activity restores lipid homeostasis and prevents lipotoxicity. We therefore identify RNF145 as a FA-responsive ubiquitin ligase which, together with ADIPOR2, defines an autoregulatory pathway that controls cellular membrane lipid homeostasis and prevents acute lipotoxic stress.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Tmt, Oritrap fusion

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow Honorary Consultant Infectious Diseases Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Univeristy of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow Honorary Consultant Infectious Diseases Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Univeristy of Cambridge


