### Accession
PXD026577

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus USA300 LAC and XdrA mutant strain, secretome, Exponential phase, Stationary phase, LC-MS/MS, Orbitrap

### Description
The success of Staphylococcus aureus as a pathogen results from the production of a wealth of virulence determinants that aid in immune evasion, host cell invasion and dissemination of infection. Given the niche specific roles of these factors in infection, their production is controlled by a complex network of regulatory factors. In a continued effort to understand this network, the present study is aimed at characterizing the role of the transcriptional regulator XdrA and its effects on S. aureus gene expression. Using an unbiased global analysis, we find that XdrA has a broad impact on gene expression, influencing the transcription of several important virulence determinants, and factors involved in gene regulation. When assessing the role of XdrA in virulence, we find that an xdrA mutant has an increased ability to survive in whole human blood, mediated in part by increased survival within neutrophils, and an upregulation in expression of several factors involved in immune evasion, including sbi, fnbpA and efb. Furthermore, the increased survival within neutrophils appears to result from an upregulation in expression of sodM, recA, and sae, all of which assist bacterial cells in combating the effects of oxidative stress. In addition to these changes, we find that the xdrA mutant has a decreased abundance of cytolytic toxins, likely resulting from changes in agr and sae activity. We suggest that the broad impact of XdrA on the expression of genes involved in immune evasion, DNA damage, and oxidative stress tolerance, collectively result in a survival advantage allowing for the increased ability to causes disease in vivo, when xdrA is disrupted. In sum, our findings shed new light on the role of XdrA and its seemingly novel influence on S. aureus survival during infection.  The dataset contained herein was used to elucidate the whole shotgun secreted proteome (secretome) obtained from 5 hour (mid exponential phase) and 15 hour (stationary phase) planktonic cultures of Staphylococcus aureus USA300 LAC strain, and a derivative of this strain deficient in the gene encoding XdrA.

### Sample Protocol
Processing of S. aureus secreted proteome: Liquid cultures of WT and XdrA strains were synchronized for 3 hours at 37 °C, 200 rpm in TSB, then standardized at an OD600 of 0.05 and cultured at 37°C, 200 rpm, for 5 and 15 hours in 100 ml TSB. Cultures were centrifuged at 3500 g for 15 minutes to pellet cells. Culture supernatant was removed and precipitated by overnight (18 h) incubation with 10 % trichloroacetic acid at 4 °C and centrifugation at 3500 g (secreted fraction). The secreted fractions were stored at -80 °C for no more than 1 month before further processing. Secreted fractions were resuspended with 4 % (w/v) SDS, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris (pH 7.4), incubated for 5 minutes at 95 °C, and concentration quantified by use of a commercially available assay (Pierce 660 nm assay with IDCR detergent compatibility reagents, ThermoFisher Scientific) 20 or 100 µg (for 5 and 15 hour cultures) of protein in all fractions underwent filter aided sample preparation (FASP) using 30 kDa Amicon centrifugal filters, all centrifugation below was performed at 14000 g for 5-10 minutes until the filter was mostly cleared. Cellular protein was added to filters, and 8 M urea in 20 mM Tris Base pH 8.8 (urea buffer) was added and centrifuged, then incubated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (~25) °C for 30 minutes in the dark. Urea buffer was added and centrifuged, three times. 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) was added, and centrifuged, three times. Mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a ratio of 1:100 cellular protein:trypsin (w/w), and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C.  Peptides were removed from the filter by centrifugation, and rinsing the filter with ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were desalted using commercially available Sep-Pak C18 desalt columns (Waters), according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Mass-Spectrometry: Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and separated on a 50cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 180 min gradient (2 to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). 5 µl of peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current UniprotKB USA300 pan proteome (UP000001939).  Search parameters included fixed modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modifications methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation.  Proteins were identified using the default filtering criteria of 1 % protein and peptide false discovery rate, peptide spectrum matching between runs was selected. Raw files for each time point were searched independently from each other. The MaxQuant protein groups file was then analyzed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). For each time point, protein LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed and filtered to exclude reverse decoy matches, only identified by site, and to include proteins with LFQ intensity values present in at least 3 repeats (a total of 6 repeats were performed at each time point, 3 for WT and 3 for XdrA). Missing values in the filtered datasets were replaced using the imputation function in Perseus with default parameters. At this point contaminants were manually excluded since otherwise SspA is excluded from the analysis. LFQ intensity values for a given protein were used to establish fold changes between WT and XdrA strains. Statistical significance in protein abundance between the two conditions was established through unpaired T-tests comparing the Log2 LFQ intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xdra, Mid exponential growth phase, Pathogenesis, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Orbitrap, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
niversity of South Florida, Dept. of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, 4202 East Fowler Avenue, Tampa, Florida 33620, United States
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Andrew Frey

### Lab Head
Dr Lindsey Shaw
niversity of South Florida, Dept. of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, 4202 East Fowler Avenue, Tampa, Florida 33620, United States


