### Accession
PXD047378

### Title
Human LD proteome identified by APEX2-mediated proximity labeling

### Description
Adipocyte lipid droplets (LDs) play a crucial role in systemic lipid metabolism by storing and releasing lipids to meet the organism's energy needs. Hormonal signals such as catecholamines and insulin act on adipocyte LDs, and impaired responsiveness to these signals can lead to uncontrolled lipolysis, lipotoxicity, and metabolic disease. To investigate the mechanisms that control LD function in human adipocytes, we applied proximity labeling mediated by enhanced ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2) to identify the interactome of PLIN1 in adipocytes differentiated from human mesenchymal progenitor cells. We identified 70 proteins that interact specifically with PLIN1, including PNPLA2 and LIPE, which are the primary effectors of regulated triglyceride hydrolysis, and four members of the 14-3-3 protein family (YWHAB, YWHAE, YWHAZ, and YWHAG), which are known to regulate diverse signaling pathways. Functional studies showed that YWHAB is required for maximum cAMP-stimulated lipolysis, as its CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout mitigates lipolysis through a mechanism independent of insulin signaling. These findings reveal a new regulatory mechanism operating in human adipocytes that can impact lipolysis and potentially systemic metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Human adipocytes expressing PLIN1-APEX2-V5 or Cyto-APEX2-V5 were treated with 10 µM forskolin (Fsk) without or with insulin (5 µg/ml) for 6 hours. To initiate APEX2 labeling, cells were incubated with 3 ml of 500 µM biotin-phenol in complete DMEM (containing the corresponding amounts of vehicle, Fsk or Fsk+Ins) for 30 min at 37°C. H2O2 was then added to a final concentration of 1 mM for exactly 1 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. The reaction was stopped by washing cells three times with PBS containing 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 10 mM sodium azide. The negative controls which are cells expressing PLIN1-APEX2-V5 were treated identically, but without 1 min H2O2 addition step. To enrich biotinylated proteins, 1800 µg of protein samples in 2% SDS solution were diluted 1:10 with RIPA lysis butter without SDS (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% TritonX-100 in distilled water). 200 µl of Cytiva SpeedBeads magnetic neutravidin coated particles were washed 2X with RIPA lysis buffer ((50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% TritonX-100 in distilled water) and added to the diluted protein samples, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with rotating. Next day, beads were washed 4X with RIPA buffer to remove nonspecific binding and were resuspended in 170 µl of RIPA buffer. 150 µl of beads suspensions were sent to the Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility at University of Georgia for LC-MS/MS analysis. The beads were washed with 200 µl of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, vortexed and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 minutes. The solvent was removed and replaced with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. This wash step was repeated for another 5 times. The proteins on the beads were then digested with 0.2 µg of sequencing grade trypsin in about 40 µl of bicarbonate buffer overnight at room temperature. Next day, 100 µl of water was added to quench trypsin digestion and then the tryptic peptides in the supernatant were collected. The peptides were dried down in a vacufuge and resuspended in 10 µl of 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on a Thermo-Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC system. Briefly, 1 µl of enzymatic peptides were loaded into a reversed-phase column (self-packed 100 µm ID column with 200 Å 5 µM Bruker MagicAQ C18 resin, ~15 cm long), then directly eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. The two-buffer gradient elution (0.1% formic acid as buffer A and 99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as buffer B) starts with 2% B, holds at 0%B for 2 minutes, then increases to 30% B in 60 minutes, to 50% B in 10 minutes and to 95% B in 10 minutes. The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was used to acquire MS data. A survey MS scan was acquired first, and then the top 10 ions in the MS scan were selected for following CID MS/MS analysis. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired by Orbitrap at the resolutions of 120,000 and 15,000, respectively

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, MaxQuant algorithm (version 1.6.5.0) was used for the identification and quantification of proteins and peptides. The raw data files were searched against the UniProt human proteome database (protein count: 78,120, Proteome ID: UP000005640) with an additional laboratory contaminant provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. The trypsin specificity was set to allow cleavages N-terminal to proline and a maximum of two missed cleavages. First search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm, and for the main search, 6 ppm. The FTMS MS/MS match tolerance was 20 ppm and the top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da was set to 12. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. Protein quantification was based on unmodified, N-terminally acetylated peptides and peptides with oxidized methionine.

### Publication Abstract
Adipocyte lipid droplets (LDs) play a crucial role in systemic lipid metabolism by storing and releasing lipids to meet the organism's energy needs. Hormonal signals such as catecholamines and insulin act on adipocyte LDs, and impaired responsiveness to these signals can lead to uncontrolled lipolysis, lipotoxicity, and metabolic disease. To investigate the mechanisms that control LD function in human adipocytes, we applied proximity labeling mediated by enhanced ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2) to identify the interactome of PLIN1 in adipocytes differentiated from human mesenchymal progenitor cells. We identified 70 proteins that interact specifically with PLIN1, including PNPLA2 and LIPE, which are the primary effectors of regulated triglyceride hydrolysis, and 4 members of the 14-3-3 protein family (YWHAB, YWHAE, YWHAZ, and YWHAG), which are known to regulate diverse signaling pathways. Functional studies showed that YWHAB is required for maximum cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-stimulated lipolysis, as its CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout mitigates lipolysis through a mechanism independent of insulin signaling. These findings reveal a new regulatory mechanism operating in human adipocytes that can impact lipolysis and potentially systemic metabolism.

### Keywords
Human adipocyte, Lipid droplet, Lc-ms/ms, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Masschusetts Chan Medical School
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA

### Submitter
Qin Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Corvera
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: adipose tissue
- cell type: differentiated progenitor cells
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Elite

