### Accession
PXD006993

### Title
Quantitative proteomics after spinal cord injury in a regenerative and a non-regenerative stage in Xenopus laevis

### Description
The capacity to regenerate the spinal cord after an injury is a coveted trait that only a limited group of non-mammalian organisms can achieve. In Xenopus laevis, this capacity is only present during larval or tadpole stages, but is absent during postmetamorphic frog stages. This provides an excellent model for comparative studies between a regenerative and a non-regenerative stage to identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that explain the difference in regenerative potential. Here, we used iTRAQ chemistry to obtain a quantitative proteome of the spinal cord 1 day after a transection injury, and used sham operated animals as controls. We quantified a total of 6,384 proteins, with 172 showing significant differential expression in the regenerative stage and 240 in the non-regenerative stage, with an overlap of only 14 proteins. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that while the regenerative stage downregulated synapse/vesicle and mitochondrial proteins, the non-regenerative stage upregulated lipid metabolism proteins, and downregulated ribosomal and translation control proteins. Furthermore, STRING network analysis showed that proteins belonging to these groups are highly interconnected, providing interesting candidates for future functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
The spinal cord samples from regenerative and non-regenerative stage Xenopus laevis were prepared as follows. Each spinal cord sample was suspended in a lysis buffer containing 2% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris-HCl, complete protease inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), pH 7.6. 100 µL of lysis buffer was used for each regenerative-stage spinal cord sample and 150 µL of lysis buffer for each non-regenerative-stage spinal cord sample. All the samples were homogenized for 1 min on ice, followed by sonication with a Branson Sonifier 250 (VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) for 10 min on ice. After kept on ice for 1 hour, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min. The supernatants were collected for further experiments. A small portion of each sample was used for BCA assay to determine the protein concentration.  Based on the protein concentration, we took 20 µg of protein materials from each regenerative-stage spinal cord sample, and 100 µg of protein materials from each non-regenerative-stage spinal cord sample for further preparation. All the samples were denatured at 90 ˚C for 15 min, followed by protein reduction with dithiothreitol at 60 ˚C for 1 hour and alkylation with iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Each sample was then mixed with 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium biocarbonate (pH 8) and loaded onto a filter membrane (regenerated cellulose membrane, molecular weight cut-off as 30,000 Da) integrated in the Microcon® -30 centrifugal filter unit (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for protein sample clean-up and tryptic digestion based on the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol 33. Basically, the protein materials on the membrane were washed with 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium biocarbonate for five times to remove the SDS. Then, the proteins on the membrane were washed with 100 mM ammonium biocarbonate twice to remove urea. After centrifugation, 50 µL of 100 mM ammonium biocarbonate (pH 8) was added onto the membrane to suspend the protein materials on the membrane via gentle vortex. Then, L-(tosylamido-2-phenyl) ethyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK )-treated trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added into the protein solution for protein digestion for overnight at 37 ˚C with protein-to-trypsin ratio as 30/1 (w/w). After protein digestion, each filter unit was centrifuged at 18,000 g for 15 min to collect the flow-through peptides. In order to get better peptide recovery, another 50 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) was added onto the membrane, followed by centrifugation. The collected peptides from the two steps were combined. The peptide sample was then acidified with formic acid (FA) with final FA concentration as 0.5% (v/v).  All the peptide samples from regenerative and non-regenerative stages (16 in total) were desalted with C18 SPE columns and lyophilized, followed by iTRAQ 8-plex labelling based on the procedure from the manufacture (AB Sciex, Foster City)24. Basically, for regenerative stage samples (8 samples, 20 µg peptides/sample), each sample was re-dissolved in 10 µL of dissolution buffer and 20 µL of iTRAQ reagent was added into each sample for labelling at room temperature for 2 hours. The 8 samples were labelled with the different channels of iTRAQ 8-plex reagents. For the non-regenerative stage samples (8 samples, 100 µg peptides/sample), each sample was re-dissolved in 30 µL of dissolution buffer and one whole tube of iTRAQ reagent (for labelling of 100 µg of peptides) was added into each sample for labelling at room temperature for 2 hours. The 8 samples were labelled with the different channels of iTRAQ 8-plex reagents. For both regenerative and non-regenerative stage samples, iTRAQ channels 113 and 114 were used to label uncut samples (biological duplicate); iTRAQ channels 115, 116 and 117 were used to label sham-operated samples (biological triplicate); iTRAQ channels 118, 119 and 121 were used to label transected samples (biological triplicate). After blocking the excess iTRAQ reagent with 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6), we combined the eight regenerative stage samples into one sample and combined the eight non-regenerative-stage samples into another sample. After lyophilization, we re-dissolved the two samples in 0.5% (v/v) FA, followed by peptide desalting with C18 SPE column and lyophilization. Finally, we dissolved the regenerative-stage sample (160 µg of iTRAQ labelled peptides) and the non-regenerative-stage sample (800 µg of iTRAQ labelled peptides) in 250 µL and 900 µL of 0.1% (v/v) FA containing 2% acetonitrile, respectively, followed by strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.834. The protein reference database from X. laevis genome v7.1 was used for database searching16. Variable modifications were acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin with specific digestion was applied. For the iTRAQ quantification, the “Reporter ion MS2” function was chosen. iTRAQ 8plex-Lys 113-121 and iTRAQ 8plex-Nterm 113-121 were used. Other iTRAQ related parameters were as follows: reporter mass tolerance as 0.01 Da, filter by precursor intensity fraction (PIF) with minimal reporter PIF as 0.75. Other parameters were default settings. The database searching results were filtered with false discovery rates (FDRs) less than 1% on both peptide and protein levels. During the database search, all the protein identification and quantification information from raw files of the regenerative stage were merged; the information from raw files of non-regenerative stage were merged. Finally, we got one file containing the protein identification and quantification information for both stages. In the file, MaxQuant reported the reporter ion intensity of each iTRAQ channel for each protein, representing the abundance of proteins in different conditions. We further processed the data with Perseus software 35 to normalize the data and to perform statistical analysis.  The export file of MaxQuant software was loaded into the Perseus software. Firstly, we filtered the data to remove the proteins identified from reverse database and contaminant proteins. Secondly, we averaged the reporter ion intensity of the biological duplicate of uncut samples for both regenerative and non-regenerative stages. Thirdly, we normalized the reporter ion intensity of transected and sham-operated samples to the averaged uncut samples for both stages to get the protein expression ratios compared to uncut samples. Then, we performed bias correction for protein quantitation results in Perseus with the “divide” function. Basically, the median protein ratio in each biological condition (biological triplicates of transected and sham-operated) was corrected to unity, and then this factor was applied to all quantitation results in each corresponding biological condition. Finally, we performed differential expression analyses in Perseus to compare the protein expression in transected and sham-operated samples. We used the ‘Two-sample tests’ function, which allowed performing a modified t-test to determine whether the means of biological triplicates of transected and sham-operated samples were significantly different (p-value < 0.05). The ‘first group (right)’ was assigned to transected samples, and the second group was assigned to sham-operated samples  using the ‘specify individual groups’ option. Welch’s T-test was selected in ‘Test’, using S0 = 0; Side = Both, and ‘p-value’ was selected in the ‘Use for truncation’ option, with a 0.05 threshold. The remaining parameters were left as default. These results were then additionally filtered by fold-change: log2(transected/sham) ≥ 0.10 or ≤ -0.10.

### Publication Abstract
The capacity to regenerate the spinal cord after an injury is a coveted trait that only a limited group of nonmammalian organisms can achieve. In <i>Xenopus laevis</i>, this capacity is only present during larval or tadpole stages, but is absent during postmetamorphic frog stages. This provides an excellent model for comparative studies between a regenerative and a nonregenerative stage to identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that explain this difference in regenerative potential. Here, we used iTRAQ chemistry to obtain a quantitative proteome of the spinal cord 1 day after a transection injury in regenerative and nonregenerative stage animals, and used sham operated animals as controls. We quantified a total of 6,384 proteins, with 172 showing significant differential expression in the regenerative stage and 240 in the nonregenerative stage, with an overlap of only 14 proteins. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that although the regenerative stage downregulated synapse/vesicle and mitochondrial proteins, the nonregenerative stage upregulated lipid metabolism proteins, and downregulated ribosomal and translation control proteins. Furthermore, STRING network analysis showed that proteins belonging to these groups are highly interconnected, providing interesting candidates for future functional studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006993.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Xenopus laevis, Regenerative and a non-regenerative stage, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


