### Accession
PXD033470

### Title
Tryptophan C-mannosylation is critical for Plasmodium falciparum transmission Dataset1

### Description
C-mannosylation stabilizes proteins bearing a thrombospondin repeat (TSR) domain in metazoans. Here we show that Plasmodium falciparum expresses a DPY19 C-mannosyltransferase in the endoplasmic reticulum and that DPY19-deficiency abolishes C-glycosylation, destabilizes members of the TRAP adhesin family and inhibits transmission to mosquitoes. P. falciparum gametogenesis was imaged in its entirety in four dimensions using lattice light-sheet microscopy. This revealed defects in egress and exflagellation for DPY19 microgametes. While exflagellation was diminished, DPY19 microgametes still fertilized macrogametes, forming ookinetes but these were abrogated for mosquito infection. The gametogenesis defects corresponded with destabilization of MTRAP, which we show is C-mannosylated in P. falciparum, and the ookinete defect was concordant with defective CTRP secretion on the DPY19 background. Genetic complementation of DPY19 restored ookinete infectivity, sporozoite production and C-mannosylation activity. Therefore, tryptophan C-mannosylation by DPY19 in the early secretory pathway ensures TSR protein quality control at two lifecycle stages for successful transmission of the human malaria parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purified samples were adjusted to 4% SDS, 100mM TEAB pH 7.1, 10mM DTT in a volume of 50μl and then boiled for 10minutes at 95 °C. Samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (50mM final concentration) for 1hr in the dark at room temperature. Reduced/alkylated samples were then cleaned up using S-trap micro columns (ProtiFi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions followed by digestion with 3μg of SOLu-trypsin in 100mM TEAB pH 8.5 (Sigma, 1:30 protease/protein ratio) for 4 hours at 47 °C. Digested samples were collected from the S-traps according to the manufactures instructions and dried down by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Identification of C-glycosylated peptides was undertaken using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0). The predicted amino acid sequences for rMTRAP and rSPATR were combined into a database and searched, allowing carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and the variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and C-glycosylation (C6H10O5; 162.052824 Da on tryptophan, allowing the neutral loss of C4H8O4; 120.04225Da). Searches were performed with either Trypsin cleavage specificity allowing 2 miscleavage events with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0 % set for protein and peptide identifications. The resulting MS2 scans corresponding to glycosylation events of interest were manually extracted using the Freestyle Viewer (1.7 SP1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then visualized to conf ocalizationtion of the C-glycosylation events using the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator http://www.interactivepeptidespectralannotator.com/PeptideAnnotator.html. To quantify the relative level of C-glycosylation within samples extracted ion chromatograms of the most abundant, as determined by the observed ion intensity, charge states for a given peptide sequence were extracted, ±10 ppm, using the Freestyle Viewer. Peaks were processed with a 11-point Gaussian smooth and the area under the curve calculated. The resulting areas were used to compare relative occupation rates of peptide sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Gamete, Ookinete, Dpy19, Transmission, Sporozoite, Glycosylation, Gametocyte

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
-The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.  -Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Justin A. Boddey
-The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.  -Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.


