### Accession
PXD012679

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of E-cadherin Function in Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells Using iTRAQ and LC-MS/MS

### Description
This project identifies all the proteomic changes that take place in mouse embryonic stem cells after the knockout of the cell-cell adhesion protein E-cadherin. It identifies several putative pathways and sheds the light on the role of E-cadherin in controlling metabolsim of these pluripotent stem cells. The downregulation of E-cadherin resulted in the inhibiton of mitochondrial complex III and the upregulation of HIF-alpha-1 targets

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ reagents were used to label wildtype and knockouts. Protein changes were then separated using Liquid Chromatography and quantified using mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
After acqusition of fractioned peptides (using QSATR) raw data file was uploaded to ProteinPilot Version 4.0 Proteins were searched based on Uniprot Database.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibition of E-cad in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) leads to a switch from LIF-BMP to Activin/Nodal-dependent pluripotency, consistent with transition from a na&#xef;ve to primed pluripotent phenotype. We have used both genetic ablation and steric inhibition of E-cad function in mESCs to assess alterations to phenotype using quantitative mass spectrometry analysis, network models, and functional assays. Proteomic analyses revealed that one third of detected proteins were altered in E-cad null mESCs (Ecad<sup>-/-</sup> mESCs) compared to wild type (624 proteins were downregulated and 705 were proteins upregulated). Network pathway analysis and subsequent cellular flux assays confirmed a metabolic shift from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to aerobic glycolysis, specifically through mitochondrial complex III downregulation and hypoxia inducible factor 1a target upregulation. Central to this was the transcriptional coactivator EP300. E-cad is a well-known tumor suppressor, its downregulation during cancer initiation and metastasis can be linked to the metabolic switch known as Warburg effect. This study highlights a phenomena found in both primed pluripotent state and cancer stemness and links it to loss of E-cad. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012679.

### Keywords
Mescs, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolism, Itraq, E-cadherin

### Affiliations
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences-School of Medical Sciences-  University of Manchester
PhD Student

### Submitter
Aseel Sharaireh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Unwin
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences-School of Medical Sciences-  University of Manchester


