### Accession
PXD006900

### Title
Bacterial pore-forming toxins remodel the host epithelial cell proteome

### Description
Bacterial pathogens use various strategies to interfere with host cell functions. Among these strategies, bacteria induce transcriptional changes, in order to modify the set of proteins synthetized by the host cell, or target pre-existing proteins by modulating their post-translational modifications or by triggering their degradation. Protein levels variations in host cells during infection integrates both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations induced by pathogens. Here, we focused on host proteome alterations induced by the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, and more specifically the Listeria toxin Listeriolysin O (LLO).  In order to characterize host proteome alterations induced by LLO, we performed a shotgun proteomics analysis on HeLa cells treated or not with the LLO toxin. To this end, we used SILAC labelling (stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture) to compared in a quantitative manner the protein content from two differentially treated cell populations: one control population and one population incubated with a sublytic dose of LLO (3 nM). We decided to expose cells to LLO during only 20 min to limit protein level changes resulting from transcriptional changes. We performed two independent experiments (experiment #1 and experiment #2) with swapped SILAC labelling to rule out putative labelling-dependent effects. A total of 2009 and 1684 proteins was quantified in each independent experiment, respectively, and 1360 proteins were quantified in both experiments. Among these 1360 proteins, we identified a total of 91 proteins for which protein levels were consistently decreased in cells treated with LLO (i.e. with a log2 control/LLO ratio >0.5 in both experiments). To assess whether the host proteasome was involved in the decrease of these 91 proteins, we repeated our proteomics analysis on SILAC-labelled HeLa cells pre-treated with proteasome inhibitors before exposure to LLO. Two independent experiments were similarly performed with swapped SILAC labelling (experiment #3 and experiment #4). Interestingly, we observed that the vast majority of host proteins identified as strongly downregulated in response to LLO also displayed significant decreased levels in the presence of proteasome inhibitors, indicating that the majority of observed decreases in host protein levels induced by LLO are not due to proteasome-mediated degradation. In follow-up experiments, we identified that LLO decreases in particular the protein level of two E2 ubiquitin enzymes, UBE2K and UBE2N, leading to major changes in the host ubiquitylome. This toxin-induced proteome remodeling involves post-transcriptional regulations, as no modification in the transcription levels of the corresponding genes was observed. These decreases in host protein levels were observed in different epithelial cell lines but not in macrophages. In addition, we could show that Perfringolysin O, another bacterial pore-forming toxin similar to LLO, also induces host proteome changes. Taken together, our data show that different bacterial pore-forming toxins induce deep proteome remodeling, that may impair host epithelial cell functions.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa (American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) CCL-2) cells were cultivated at 37°C in a 10% CO2 atmosphere in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) (Invitrogen). Culture media for HeLa was supplemented with 2 mM Glutamax (Invitrogen), 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), MEM non-essential amino acids (Invitrogen) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. For stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), HeLa cells were cultivated in DMEM without L-lysine, L-arginine, or L-glutamine (Silantes Gmbh) and supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Life Technologies vitrogen), 2 mM GlutaMAX (Life Technologies), and either natural L-lysine HCl (Lys0) and L-arginine HCl (Arg0) (light labelling; Sigma-Aldrich), or D4 L-lysine HCl (Lys4) and 13C6 L-arginine HCl (Arg6) (heavy labelling; Silantes Gmbh). L-Lysine HCl was added at its normal concentration in DMEM (146 mg/L), but the concentration of L-arginine HCl was reduced to 25 mg/L (30% of the normal concentration in DMEM) to prevent metabolic conversion of arginine to proline. Cells were kept for at least six population doublings to ensure complete incorporation of the labelled lysine and arginine. HeLa cells were cultivated in light or heavy SILAC media (1.2x107 cells per SILAC condition). Cells were serum-starved for 2 hours and then incubated with 3 nM of purified toxin for 20 min or left untreated. For the first experiment (experiment #1), cells grown in light medium (Lys0, Arg0) were left untreated, while cells grown in heavy medium (Lys4, Arg6) were incubated with LLO. Labeling was swapped for the second experiment (experiment #2) with cells grown in light medium (Lys0, Arg0) incubated with LLO, and cells grown in heavy medium (Lys4, Arg6) left untreated. For inhibition of the proteasome, cells were pre-incubated for 7 h with 10 µM Lactacystin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 µM MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) before LLO treatment (experiment #3 and experiment #4). Upon treatment, cells were harvested by scraping on ice in CHAPS lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS, complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)) and lysates from differentially treated light and heavy labelled cells were mixed as described above. Mixed lysates were further subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles, sonicated and incubated with 2.5 U/mL of Micrococcal Nuclease I for 15 min at 37°C. Insoluble components were removed by centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000xg and guanidinium hydrochloride (Gu.HCl) was added dry to the soluble fraction to a final concentration of 2M. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubation with 15 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were desalted on disposable NAP-10 columns (GE Healthcare), boiled for 5 min, put on ice for 5 min and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, enzyme/substrate of 1/100 (w/w)) at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixture was dried completely in a vacuum concentrator, re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 0.5% H2O2, and incubated for 30 minutes at 30°C to oxidize methionine residues. Samples were snap-frozen, dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in peptide OFFGEL stock solution for fractionation into 24 fractions by isoelectric focusing using 24 cm Immobiline DryStrip pH 3-10 in an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL device, according to the instructions of the manufacturer.  Fractionated peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a PepMapTM C18 column (0.3 mm inner diameter × 5 mm (Thermo)), and following back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 150 mm , 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a linear increase from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 30 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1000,000. The ten most intense ions above a threshold value of 5000 were isolated for fragmentation by CID at a normalized collision energy of 35% in the linear ion trap (LTQ) after filling the trap at a target value of 5000 for maximum 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,172 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the sequence of listeriolysin O (RefSeq WP_003722731.1) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, during the main search. To enable the identification of SILAC labeled peptides the multiplicity was set to 2 with Lys4 and Arg6 settings in the heavy channel, allowing for a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini was set as variable modification, while carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were set as a fixed modifications. In total, 2009 and 1684 proteins were quantified in experiment #1 and #2, respectively, of which 1360 were quantified in both experiments. 91 proteins with log2 (control/LLO ratios) >0.5 in both experiments were considered as specific LLO targets that are downregulated upon treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial pathogens use various strategies to interfere with host cell functions. Among these strategies, bacteria modulate host gene transcription, thereby modifying the set of proteins synthetized by the infected cell. Bacteria can also target pre-existing host proteins and modulate their post-translational modifications or trigger their degradation. Analysis of protein levels variations in host cells during infection allows to integrate both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations induced by pathogens. Here, we focused on host proteome alterations induced by the toxin Listeriolysin O (LLO), secreted by the bacterial pathogen <i>Listeria monocytogenes.</i> We showed that a short-term treatment with LLO remodels the host cell proteome by specifically decreasing the abundance of 149 proteins. The same decrease in host protein levels was observed in different epithelial cell lines but not in macrophages. We show in particular that this proteome remodeling affects several ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like ligases and that LLO leads to major changes in the host ubiquitylome. Strikingly, this toxin-induced proteome remodeling involves only post-transcriptional regulations, as no modification in the transcription levels of the corresponding genes was observed. In addition, we could show that Perfringolysin O, another bacterial pore-forming toxin similar to LLO, also induces host proteome changes. Taken together, our data reveal that different bacterial pore-forming toxins induce important host proteome remodeling, that may impair epithelial cell functions.

### Keywords
Listeriolysin o, Silac, Pore-forming toxin, Listeria infection

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
Institut Pasteur Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux 75015 Paris France

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Pascale Cossart
Institut Pasteur Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux 75015 Paris France


