### Accession
PXD000467

### Title
Endogenous S-nitrosoproteome in colorectal cancer patients

### Description
Total lysate of tumorous and adjacent normal tissues from each colorectal cancer patient are followed by S-alkylating biotin switch strategy. All biotinylated peptides are analyzed by label-free quantitation and LC-MS/MS analysis. All peak lists from 66 raw MS/MS spectra were processed to mgf format by Mascot Distiller v2.1.1.0. The datasets were batch-searched and combined searched by Mascor v2.2 against the Swissprot v 57.8 human database. PEO-iodoacetyl-biotin (C, +414 Da), Caebamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) were specified as variable modifications. Peptides were considered to be identified if the Mascot individual ion score was higher than the Mascot identity score (p less than 0.05). To evaluate the false discovery rate in protein identification, a decoy database search against a randomized decoy database created by Mascot using identical search parameters and validation criteria were also performed. The search results in Mascot were exported in eXtensive Markup Language (XML) data format.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The abnormal S-nitrosylation induced by the overexpression and activation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) modulates many human diseases, such as inflammation and cancer. To delineate the pathophysiological S-nitrosoproteome in cancer patients, we report an individualized S-nitrosoproteomic strategy with a label-free method for the site-specific quantification of S-nitrosylation in paired tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 11 patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). This study provides not only the first endogenous human S-nitrosoproteomic atlas but also the first individualized human tissue analysis, identifying 174 S-nitrosylation sites in 94 proteins. Fourteen novel S-nitrosylation sites with a high frequency of elevated levels in 11 individual patients were identified. An individualized S-nitrosylation quantitation analysis revealed that the detected changes in S-nitrosylation were regulated by both the expression level and the more dramatic post-translational S-nitrosylation of the targeted proteins, such as thioredoxin, annexin A4, and peroxiredoxin-4. These endogenous S-nitrosylated proteins illustrate the network of inflammation/cancer-related and redox reactions mediated by various S-nitrosylation sources, including iNOS, transnitrosylase, or iron-sulfur centers. Given the demonstrated sensitivity of individualized tissue analysis, this label-free approach may facilitate the study of the vastly under-represented S-nitrosoproteome and enable a better understanding of the effect of endogenous S-nitrosylation in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, S-nitrosylation, Colorectal cancer, Biotin switch

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head


