### Accession
PXD029015

### Title
Human serum extracellular vesicle proteomic profile depends on the enrichment method employed

### Description
The proteomic profiling of serum samples supposes a challenge due to the large abundance of few blood proteins in comparison with other circulating proteins coming from different tissues and cells. Although the sensitivity of protein detection has increased enormously in the last years, to enrich less abundant proteins, getting rid of abundant proteins such as albumin, lipoproteins, and immunoglobulins, require specific strategies. One of the alternatives that has become more promising is to characterize circulating extracellular vesicles from serum samples. In the present work, we enriched the extracellular vesicles fraction from human serum by applying different techniques, including ultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, and two commercial precipitation methods based on different mechanism of action. To improve the performance of the techniques and promote purity of the preparations we have employed samples of 80 ul. The comparative proteomic profiling of the enriched preparations shows that ultracentrifugation procedure yields a larger and completely different set of proteins than other techniques, including mitochondrial and ribosome related proteins. Size exclusion chromatography carries over lipoprotein associated proteins, while a polymer-based precipitation kit had more affinity for proteins associated with granules of platelets. The precipitation kit that targets glycosylation molecules enriched differentially protein harboring glycosylation sites, including immunoglobulins and proteins of the membrane attack complex.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion was performed following the FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al. with minor variations [20], using Amicon Ultra 30K devices (Merck-Millipore). Proteins were quantified with Bradford assays (Bio-Rad) prior to the addition of trypsin, and then incubated overnight at 37ºC. The resulting peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA, and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis. Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). Sample (200ng) was directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nl/min with a 30 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified matching to a mouse (Uniprot/Swissprot Mus musculus) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least one peptide at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic profiling of serum samples supposes a challenge due to the large abundance of a few blood proteins in comparison with other circulating proteins coming from different tissues and cells. Although the sensitivity of protein detection has increased enormously in the last years, specific strategies are still required to enrich less abundant proteins and get rid of abundant proteins such as albumin, lipoproteins, and immunoglobulins. One of the alternatives that has become more promising is to characterize circulating extracellular vesicles from serum samples that have great interest in biomedicine. In the present work, we enriched the extracellular vesicles fraction from human serum by applying different techniques, including ultracentrifugation, size-exclusion chromatography, and two commercial precipitation methods based on different mechanisms of action. To improve the performance and efficacy of the techniques to promote purity of the preparations, we have employed a small volume of serum samples (&lt;100 mL). The comparative proteomic profiling of the enriched preparations shows that ultracentrifugation procedure yielded a larger and completely different set of proteins than other techniques, including mitochondrial and ribosome related proteins. The results showed that size exclusion chromatography carries over lipoprotein associated proteins, while a polymer-based precipitation kit has more affinity for proteins associated with granules of platelets. The precipitation kit that targets glycosylation molecules enriches differentially protein harboring glycosylation sites, including immunoglobulins and proteins of the membrane attack complex.

### Keywords
Precipitation kits, Size exclusion, Proteomic, Extracellular vesicles, Serum, Ultracentrifugation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)


