### Accession
PXD035325

### Title
Adaptation and resistance: How B. thetaiotaomicron copes with the bisphenol A substitute bisphenol F

### Description
Bisphenols are used in the process of polymerization of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins, which have numerous applications in a variety of consumer products. Due to their hydrophobic properties, bisphenols can easily migrate out of plastic products especially into fatty foods. They have been found in brain, liver, adipose tissue and body fluids, illustrating their environmental prevalence. By increasing colonic inflammation in mice, disrupting the intestinal bacterial community structure and altering the microbial membrane transport system in zebrafish, bisphenols seem to interfere with the gut microbiome. The highly abundant human commensal bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was exposed to bisphenols (Bisphenol A (BPA), Bisphenol F (BPF), Bisphenol S (BPS)), to examine the mode of action, in particular of BPF. All chemicals caused a concentration-dependent growth inhibition and the half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) corresponded to their individual logP values, a measure of their hydrophobicity. B. thetaiotaomicron exposed to BPF decreased membrane fluidity with increasing BPF concentrations. Physiological changes including an increase of acetate concentration were observed in cells treated with 0.57 mM BPF. On the proteome level, a higher abundance of several ATP synthase subunits and multidrug efflux pumps suggested an increased energy demand for adaptive mechanisms after BPF exposure. Defence mechanisms were also implicated by a pathway analysis, that identified a higher abundance of members of resistance pathways/strategies to cope with xenobiotics (i.e. antibiotics). Here, we present further insights into the mode of action of bisphenols in a human commensal gut bacterium regarding growth inhibition, and the physiological and functional state of the cell. These results, combined with microbiota-directed effects, could lead to a better understanding of host health disturbances and disease development based on xenobiotic uptake.

### Sample Protocol
Ten mL B. thetaiotaomicron culture was centrifuged (5000× g, 4 °C ,10 min) and the pellet was frozen at -20 °C. After three freeze thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen the pellet was solved in 1 mL lysis buffer (8M Urea, 1 mM Phenylmethyl-sulfonylfluorid). Bacterial envelopes were disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Sanra Ana, CA, USA; 5.5 ms, 1 min, 3 cycles) followed by ultra-sonication (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany; cycle 0.5, amplitude 60%) and centrifugation (10,000× g, 10 min). The supernatant was used for protein concentration determination using the PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  Vivacon 500 columns (10 kDA MWCO membrane, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) were equilibrated with lysis buffer and centrifuged (14,000× g, 20 °C, 20 min). All following centrifugation steps were performed applying the same condi-tions. Sixty micrograms of protein were loaded onto the column and centrifuged. Proteins adherent to the filter were incubated with 200 µL 10 mM DTT in lysis buffer in a thermoshaker for 1 min with 600 rpm and for 30 min without shaking at 37°C. After centrifugation proteins were further alkylated and proteolytically cleaved. Peptides were solved in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric measurement. For each LC-MS/MS run, 5 μL of total peptide lysate was injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 μm × 5 mm, particle size 3 μm (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 μm × 25 cm, particle size 3 μm, nanoViper (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric analyses of eluted peptid lysates were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.5, Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) with SequestHT search engine. Search settings were set to trypsin (full), max. missed cleavage sites 2, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined using Percolator. Proteins were considered as identified when at least one unique peptide was found, the overall protein FDR was ≤ 0.01, and a SequestHT Score of ≥ 2 was reached. The protein coding sequences from Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron DSM 2079 (BioprojectX Accession: PRJNA543750) were downloaded from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and accessions were converted to UniProt identifiers (http://www.uniprot.org/) and used as search database.

### Publication Abstract
Bisphenols are used in the process of polymerization of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins. Bisphenols can easily migrate out of plastic products and enter the gastrointestinal system. By increasing colonic inflammation in mice, disrupting the intestinal bacterial community structure and altering the microbial membrane transport system in zebrafish, bisphenols seem to interfere with the gut microbiome. The highly abundant human commensal bacterium <i>Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron</i> was exposed to bisphenols (Bisphenol A (BPA), Bisphenol F (BPF), Bisphenol S (BPS)), to examine the mode of action, in particular of BPF. All chemicals caused a concentration-dependent growth inhibition and the half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) corresponded to their individual logP values, a measure of their hydrophobicity. <i>B. thetaiotaomicron</i> exposed to BPF decreased membrane fluidity with increasing BPF concentrations. Physiological changes including an increase of acetate concentrations were observed. On the proteome level, a higher abundance of several ATP synthase subunits and multidrug efflux pumps suggested an increased energy demand for adaptive mechanisms after BPF exposure. Defense mechanisms were also implicated by a pathway analysis that identified a higher abundance of members of resistance pathways/strategies to cope with xenobiotics (i.e., antibiotics). Here, we present further insights into the mode of action of bisphenols in a human commensal gut bacterium regarding growth inhibition, and the physiological and functional state of the cell. These results, combined with microbiota-directed effects, could lead to a better understanding of host health disturbances and disease development based on xenobiotic uptake.

### Keywords
Short-chain fatty acids, Bisphenols, Xenobiotics, Fatty acid methyl ester, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


