### Accession
PXD004657

### Title
External and intrinsic mechanical stress restricts pheromone signaling by direct phosphorylation of the Ste5 scaffold by Pkc1

### Description
Ste5 and Far1 function as prototypical scaffold proteins activating a MAP-kinase cascade and polarizing yeast cells in response to pheromones. Here we show that Pkc1-dependent phosphorylation of conserved serine residues in their RING-H2 domains down-regulates pheromone induced signaling upon mechanical stress. Phosphorylation of Ste5 on serine 185 by Pkc1 interferes with its membrane-association in vivo by preventing binding to the receptor linked Gbg protein as determined by in vitro assays. Quantitative readouts of pheromone signaling show that Pkc1 induces rapid dispersal of Ste5 from mating projections upon mechanically-induced cell wall stress as well as during cell-cell fusion, leading to inhibition of MAPK activity and polarized growth. Cells expressing non-phosphorylatable Ste5 (Ste5S185A) undergo increased lysis during mechanical stress and cell-cell fusion compared to wild-type controls, and this effect is exacerbated by simultaneous expression of non-phosphorylatable Far1 (Far13A). Taken together, these results uncover a cross-talk mechanism explaining how mating cells inhibit pheromone signaling upon extrinsic or intrinsic mechanical stress to orchestrate polarized growth and cell-cell fusion.

### Sample Protocol
Histidine biotin tandem affinity purifications are based on methods described elsewhere(Reiter et al., 2012; DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201200185) with the following modifications. Cells either expressing Ste5 C-terminally tagged with a modified HTB tag (HTBn: 12xHis-tag and two additional TEV cleavage sites) or HTBeaq-tagged Far1 (Reiter et al., 2012) were grown to mid logarithmic phase (OD600=0.6 - 0.9), treated with 100nM alpha-factor for times indicated (see Supplemental Table), harvested by filtration and rapidly deep-frozen in liquid N2. All subsequent steps were performed as previously described. In case of in-gel digestion, HTB purified proteins bound to Streptavidine-Agarose resin (Thermo Scientific Pierce) were eluted by a 5 minutes incubation at 95°C in 1x Laemmli buffer. Proteins were separated on novex Bolt 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gels (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Protein bands were visualized using SimplyBlueTM SafeStain (Invitrogen) and further processed as described in (Reiter et al., 2013). In solution digestion with trypsin was performed as described in (Reiter et al., 2012). All tryptic peptides samples were subjected to a second reduction step, applying a 30 minute incubation with dithiothreitol (DTT, 160µg) at 56°C. Enrichment using TiO2 and MS analysis is based on methods described in (Reiter et al., 2012). We used a LTQ FT Ultra MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument for phosphorylation site mapping with settings as described. Gel purified protein samples were analyzed using a LTQ XL MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008); (Cox et al., 2011) software version 1.5.2.8 using standard settings, except the following modifications. Spectra were searched against the SGD database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/) containing 6717 entries (03-Feb-2011) and including a list of 248 common laboratory contaminants as well as reversed versions of all sequences. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine was searched as variable modification. For Silac labeled samples Lys6 and Arg6 were additionally selected. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Ste5, Scaffold, Mapk, Far1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohrgasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria
MAX F. PERUTZ LABORATORIES - University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Reiter
Department of Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohrgasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria


