### Accession
PXD032172

### Title
Zinc supply mediated by ZNT5-ZNT6 and ZNT7 is critical to glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein expression

### Description
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins play crucial roles in various enzyme activities, cell signaling and adhesion, and immune responses. ZNT type zinc transporter proteins mobilize cytosolic zinc to the extracellular space and intracellular compartments. Here, we report that the early secretory pathway ZNTs [ZNT5-ZNT6 heterodimers (ZNT5-6) and ZNT7 homodimers (ZNT7)], which supply zinc into the lumen of organelles, are essential for GPI-anchored protein expression on the cell surface. Loss of ZNT5-6 and ZNT7 zinc transport functions results in a significant reduction of GPI-anchored proteins similar to that of mutant cells lacking phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis (PIG) genes. Disrupted ZNT5 and ZNT7 genes in medaka fish show touch-insensitive phenotypes similar to those of zebrafish PIG mutants. These findings provide a previously unappreciated insight into the regulation of GPI-anchored protein expression and of protein quality control in the early secretory pathway.

### Sample Protocol
HAP1 cells (double knockout and wild type of ZNT5/ZNT7 genes) cultured on 4 × 10 cm dishes were collected, washed with cold PBS, and homogenized in homogenization buffer (225 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 30 mM Tris–HCl, and 100 μM EGTA, pH,7.4) using a Dounce homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged twice at 600 × g for 5 min at 4 °C to eliminate the pellet containing nuclei, 7,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove mitochondria, and the supernatant containing membrane fractions consisting of microsomes, plasma membranes, and lysosomes was centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 60 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, while the purified membrane fractions were stored at -80 °C. 50 µg protein of HAP1 membrane fractions (double knockout and wild type of ZNT5/ZNT7 genes) were solubilized in denaturing buffer (7 M guanidium hydrochloride, 0.5 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM EDTA). The solubilized proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol for 1 h at 25˚C, and, subsequently, S-carboxymethylated with iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25˚C. The alkylated proteins were precipitated with methanol-chloroform-water mixture. The precipitates were solubilized in 6 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and diluted 5-fold with 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing 0.05% ProteaseMax surfactant (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The dilutions were reacted with lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 for 3 h at 30˚C. Subsequently, Lys-C digested proteins were treated with TPCK-treated trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 for 16 h at 37˚C. After C18 clean up, the peptide samples were injected into a NanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled with an electrospray-ionization Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA), which was set up for a single direct injection and analyzed by SWATH-MS acquisition. The peptides were directly loaded onto a self-packed C18 analytical column, prepared by packing ProntoSIL 200-3-C18 AQ beads (3 μm, 120Å, BISCHOFF Chromatography, Germany) in a PicoFrit tip (ID 75 μm, PF360-75-10-N5, New Objective) of 20 cm length. After sample loading, the peptides were separated and eluted with a linear gradient; 98% A: 2% B to 65% A: 35% B (0-120 min), increase to 0% A: 100% B (120-121 min), maintained at 0% A: 100% B (121-125 min), reduced to 98% A: 2% B (125-126 min), and then maintained at 98% A: 2% B (126-155 min). Mobile phase A composition was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were positively ionized and measured in the SWATH mode. The measurement parameters are described as follows: SWATH window, 64 variable windows from 400 m/z to 1200 m/z; Product ion scan range, 50-2000 m/z; declustering potential, 100; rolling collision energy value, 0.0625 × [m/z of each SWATH window] - 3.5; collision energy spread, 15; accumulation time, 0.05 second for each SWATH window).

### Data Protocol
Spectral alignment and data extraction from SWATH data were performed with the SWATH Processing Micro App in Peakview version 2.2 (SCIEX) using two spectral libraries: an in-house spectral library and a publicly available pan human library (PHL) for increasing the identification number of expressed proteins. The parameters for peak data extraction by Peakview were described as follows: Number of Peptide per Protein, 999; Number of transitions per Peptide, 6; Peptide Confidence Threshold, 99%; False Discovery Rate (FDR) Threshold, 1.0%; XIC Extraction Window, ±4.0 min; XIC width (ppm), 50.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gpi anchor, Znt, Phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis, Er quality control, Ectoenzyme, Early secretory pathway, Transporter, Cell surface, Zinc

### Affiliations
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University

### Submitter
Risa Sato

### Lab Head
Dr Yasuo Uchida
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University


