### Accession
PXD019346

### Title
Smoothened Transduces Hedgehog Signals via Activity-Dependent Sequestration of PKA Subunits

### Description
The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for tissue homeostasis, and misregulation of this cascade drives several cancers. To control expression of pathway target genes, the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) Smoothened (SMO) activates glioma-associated (GLI) transcription factors via an unknown mechanism. Here we show that, rather than conforming to traditional GPCR signaling paradigms, SMO activates GLI by binding and sequestering protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunits at the membrane. This sequestration, triggered by GPCR kinase 2 (GRK2)-mediated phosphorylation of SMO intracellular domains, prevents PKA from phosphorylating soluble substrates, releasing GLI from PKA-mediated inhibition. Our work provides a mechanism directly linking vertebrate Hh signal transduction at the membrane to transcription factor activation in the nucleus.  In contrast to existing models, our work shows that this aspect of Hh signaling is fundamentally similar between species. The mechanism described here may apply broadly to other GPCR- and PKA-containing cascades.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-tagged SMO construct was coinfected with GRK2-GFP, and drugs were added for 4 hours prior to washing in PBS and harvesting. Cells were solubilized in 0.6 ml buffer C (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 1% DDM / 0.1% CHS, 0.1 mM TCEP, 1 mM CaCl2 + protease / phosphatase inhibitors), M1 FLAG affinity resin was washed three times in buffer D (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 0.1% DDM / 0.01% CHS, 0.1 mM TCEP, 1 mM CaCl2), and eluted in 100 ul of the same buffer + 5 mM EDTA and 0.2 mg/ml FLAG peptide. The purified protein extracts from different conditions were denatured and reduced in 1.7 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT at 37 degrees for 30 minutes, alkylated in the dark with 3 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min, and excessive iodoacetamide was quenched with 3 mM DTT for 10 min at room temperature. For digestion, proteins were incubated with (1) 0.5 ug trypsin at 37 °C overnight, (2) 1 ug chymotrypsin at 37 °C overnight or (3) consecutively with 1 ug chymotrypsin followed by 0.5 ug trypsin both at 37 °C overnight. To stop the digestion, samples were acidified with 0.5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Digested samples were desalted for mass spectrometry analysis using a BioPureSPE Mini 96-Well Plate (20mg PROTO 300 C18; The Nest Group, Inc.) according to standard protocols.

### Data Protocol
All proteomic data was searched against the human uniprot database (Uniprot reviewed sequences downloaded 07/2018) augmented with the sequence of the affinity tagged SMO. Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm (version 1.6.3.3). Variable modifications were allowed for methionine oxidation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine and protein N-terminus acetylation. A fixed modification was indicated for cysteine carbamidomethylation. Full trypsin and/or chymotrypsin specificity was required. The first search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 20 parts per million (ppm) and the main search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 4.5 parts per million. A maximum of 5 modifications were allowed per peptide. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The maximum charge allowed was 7+. Individual peptide mass tolerances were allowed. For MS/MS matching, a mass tolerance of +/- 20 ppm was allowed and the top 12 peaks per 100 Da were analyzed. MS/MS matching was allowed for higher charge states, water and ammonia loss events. The data were filtered to obtain a peptide, protein, and site-level false discovery rate of 0.01. The minimum peptide length was 8 amino acids. All peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate. Match between run was activated and identifications matched in a window of 0.7 min with an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for organ development, homeostasis, and regeneration. Dysfunction of this cascade drives several cancers. To control expression of pathway target genes, the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) Smoothened (SMO) activates glioma-associated (GLI) transcription factors via an unknown mechanism. Here, we show that, rather than conforming to traditional GPCR signaling paradigms, SMO activates GLI by binding and sequestering protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunits at the membrane. This sequestration, triggered by GPCR kinase (GRK)-mediated phosphorylation of SMO intracellular domains, prevents PKA from phosphorylating soluble substrates, releasing GLI from PKA-mediated inhibition. Our work provides a mechanism directly linking Hh signal transduction at the membrane to GLI transcription in the nucleus. This process is more fundamentally similar between species than prevailing hypotheses suggest. The mechanism described here may apply broadly to other GPCR- and PKA-containing cascades in diverse areas of biology.

### Keywords
Smoothened, Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Huttenhain
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


