### Accession
PXD007751

### Title
The small heat shock protein Alpha-Crystallin B shows neuroprotective properties in a glaucoma animal model

### Description
Aim of this study was the evaluation of Alpha-crystallin B and its potential neuroprotective properties in an experimentalanimal model of glaucoma with subsequent analysis of possible altered downstream markers in a complex mass  spectrometric approach.

### Sample Protocol
The retinal tissues were firstly disintegrated with a precooled mortar and subsequently lysed using 0.5% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (Sigma Aldrich, USA) in PBS for one hour at 4° C. Further breakdown of the retinal cells was facilitated using an ultrasonic bath for 30 minutes on ice and multiple impulses of an ultrasonic wand. The protein concentration for each sample was determined with a BCA Pierce Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher, USA) and 10 µg of the total protein mixture was transferred into 1x LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Fisher, USA) containing 0.1 M DTT. Each sample was subsequently boiled at 70° C for ten minutes and separated on a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris precast gel (Life Technologies, USA) for ten minutes at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer. The individual gel lanes were further cut into one piece per lane and destained with 50% ethanol and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). After dehydration with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), the gel pieces were digested using trypsin at 37° C overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 3% TFA and 30% ACN, concentrated with an Eppendorf concentrator and passed through a C18 Stage Tip.

### Data Protocol
The samples were injected through the autosampler unit into an uHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher, USA). The peptides were subsequently loaded on a 25-cm capillary (C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin, Dr. Maisch) for the reverse-phase chromatography. The HPLC system was directly mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA) with a 90 minutes optimized gradient from 2 to 40% ACN with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Chromatography stabilization, spray voltage range and MS mode were the same as previously described [51]. The MS full scans were obtained in the orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000, while the MS/MS scan resolution was set to 17,500. Obtained raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and search against the Swiss-Prot annotated protein database of Rattus norvegicus (10116). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while acetyl (N-term protein) and oxidation (Met) were considered as variable modifications. Only proteins with at least 2 ratio counts based on unmodified unique- or razor-peptides were quantified with an applied false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. LFQ quantification using at least two LFQ ratio counts was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disease that leads to irreversible retinal ganglion cell (RGC) loss and is one of the main causes of blindness worldwide. The pathogenesis of glaucoma remains unclear, and novel approaches for neuroprotective treatments are urgently needed. Previous studies have revealed significant down-regulation of &#x3b1;-crystallin B as an initial reaction to elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), followed by a clear but delayed up-regulation, suggesting that this small heat-shock protein plays a pathophysiological role in the disease. This study analyzed the neuroprotective effect of &#x3b1;-crystallin B in an experimental animal model of glaucoma. Significant IOP elevation induced by episcleral vein cauterization resulted in a considerable impairment of the RGCs and the retinal nerve fiber layer. An intravitreal injection of &#x3b1;-crystallin B at the time of the IOP increase was able to rescue the RGCs, as measured in a functional photopic electroretinogram, retinal nerve fiber layer thickness, and RGC counts. Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and antibody-microarray measurements indicated that a &#x3b1;-crystallin injection distinctly up-regulated all of the subclasses (&#x3b1;, &#x3b2;, and &#x3b3;) of the crystallin protein family. The creation of an interactive protein network revealed clear correlations between individual proteins, which showed a regulatory shift resulting from the crystallin injection. The neuroprotective properties of &#x3b1;-crystallin B further demonstrate the potential importance of crystallin proteins in developing therapeutic options for glaucoma.

### Keywords
Experimental glaucoma; alpha-crystallin b; neuroprotection; proteomics

### Affiliations
Experimental Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Mainz
Experimental Ophthalmology Mainz

### Submitter
Fabian Anders

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Verena Prokosch-Willing
Experimental Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Mainz


