### Accession
PXD000155

### Title
Proteomic analysis of integrin activation-state-dependent adhesion complexes

### Description
Proteomic analysis of integrin activation-state-dependent adhesion complexes. Adhesion complexes were isolated from K562 cells using activation-state-specific monoclonal antibodies coupled to magnetic beads.Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.2.2; Matrix Science). Peak list files were searched against the IPI Human database (version 3.70) modified to contain ten additional contaminants and reagent sequences of non-human origin. Searches were submitted to an in-house Mascot server (version 2.2.03; Matrix Science). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 0.4 Da and 0.5 Da, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Integrin activation, which is regulated by allosteric changes in receptor conformation, enables cellular responses to the chemical, mechanical and topological features of the extracellular microenvironment. A global view of how activation state converts the molecular composition of the region proximal to integrins into functional readouts is, however, lacking. Here, using conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies, we report the isolation of integrin activation state-dependent complexes and their characterization by mass spectrometry. Quantitative comparisons, integrating network, clustering, pathway and image analyses, define multiple functional protein modules enriched in a conformation-specific manner. Notably, active integrin complexes are specifically enriched for proteins associated with microtubule-based functions. Visualization of microtubules on micropatterned surfaces and live cell imaging demonstrate that active integrins establish an environment that stabilizes microtubules at the cell periphery. These data provide a resource for the interrogation of the global molecular connections that link integrin activation to adhesion signalling.

### Keywords
Human, Integrin, K562, Adhesion complex, Ms, Proteomics, Activation state

### Affiliations
Faculty of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head


