### Accession
PXD001237

### Title
Cyclin C-CDK3/8/19 kinases play a tumor-suppressive  role in vivo

### Description
Cyclin C was cloned as a growth-promoting G1 cyclin1,2, and several  studies postulated a role for cyclin C in driving cell proliferation3-8 .  Moreover, cyclin C, together with its kinase partner, the cyclin-dependent  kinase CDK8, is believed to represent an essential component of basal  transcriptional machinery where it globally represses gene expression9-13.  However, the function of cyclin C in vivo has never been addressed. Here  we show that in the living organism cyclin C acts as a haploinsufficient  tumor suppressor, through its function of controlling Notch1 oncogene  levels. Cyclin C activates an “orphan” CDK19 kinase14, as well as CDK8  and CDK3. These cyclin C-CDK complexes phosphorylate Notch1  intracellular domain (ICN1), which allows binding of ICN1 to Fbw7 and  triggers ICN1 polyubiquitination. Genetic ablation of cyclin C blocks ICN1  phosphorylation, disrupts Fbw7 binding, and decreases ICN1  ubiquitination in vivo, thereby strongly elevating ICN1 levels in several  compartments of cyclin C knockout mice. Cyclin C was cloned as a growth-promoting G1 cyclin1,2, and several  studies postulated a role for cyclin C in driving cell proliferation3-8 .  Moreover, cyclin C, together with its kinase partner, the cyclin-dependent  kinase CDK8, is believed to represent an essential component of basal  transcriptional machinery where it globally represses gene expression9-13.  However, the function of cyclin C in vivo has never been addressed. Here  we show that in the living organism cyclin C acts as a haploinsufficient  tumor suppressor, through its function of controlling Notch1 oncogene  levels. Cyclin C activates an “orphan” CDK19 kinase14, as well as CDK8  and CDK3. These cyclin C-CDK complexes phosphorylate Notch1  intracellular domain (ICN1), which allows binding of ICN1 to Fbw7 and  triggers ICN1 polyubiquitination. Genetic ablation of cyclin C blocks ICN1  phosphorylation, disrupts Fbw7 binding, and decreases ICN1  ubiquitination in vivo, thereby strongly elevating ICN1 levels in several  compartments of cyclin C knockout mice.

### Sample Protocol
To gauge cyclin C-CDK8 phosphorylation of T-ALL patient-derived Notch1 mutants, the following peptides were synthesized (from NeoBioLab), corresponding to amino acids 2507 to 2521of Notch1:  wild-type: N- EHPFLTPSPESPDQWFPK -C;  P2513A:  N- EHPFLTASPESPDQWFPK -C (mutated residue bold and underlined);  P2513L: N- EHPFLTLSPESPDQWFPK -C;  P2513S: N- EHPFLTSSPESPDQWFPK -C;  P2514F: N- EHPFLTPFPESPDQWFPK -C;  P2515R: N- EHPFLTPSRESPDQWFPK –C.   1ug of peptides were used for in vitro kinase reactions as above.   In in vitro and in vivo Notch1 phosphorylation analyses, samples were resuspended in 10 μl of 1% formic acid; subsequently 2 μl was used for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  For the synthesized Notch1 peptide experiments, samples were resuspended in 100μl and 2μl was used for LC-MS/MS. analysis    Samples were analysed using a Q-exactive. Once loaded, the peptides were separated using the Accela pump across a 70 min linear gradient of 15−30% buffer B (97% ACN, 0.125% FA) with an in-column flow rate of 0.5-1ul/minute.  Electrospray ionization was performed using a 1.8 kV through a PEEK junction inlet of the microcapillary column. Each data collection cycle was performed with one full MS scan (300-1500m/z) acquired using an AGC setting of 1 × 10^6, a resolution of 7 × 10^4 and an ion injection time of 60 milliseconds.  From this full scan, the top 20 most abundant ions were selected for isolation and fragmentation by high energy C-trap dissociation.  Each ms2 analyses were performed with an AGC setting of 1x10^6, an ion injection time of 200 ms and a resolution of 7x10^4.  Each cycle was performed using a dynamic exclusion where peptides were excluded from analysis for 60 seconds after prior analysis.

### Data Protocol
An in-house suite of software tools was used to convert mass spectrometric data from raw file to mzmxl format.  Erroneous peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z was corrected as described18.  MS/MS spectra assignments were made using the Sequest algorithm19 using the entire mouse Ensembl database (version 3.6).  Sequest searches were performed using a target-decoy strategy with the mouse Ensembl database in correct orientation (forward database) and the same database but with all sequences in reverse orientation (reverse database).  The mouse Ensembl database contained 109,972 entries.  The data was searched using a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ions tolerance of 0.8 Da, ASP-N specificity and allowing two missed cleavages.  A dynamic modification on methionine (+15.99492 Da) and phosphorylation (79.96633 Da) was considered in each search.  A peptide level false discovery (FDR) rate of less than 1% was used as a threshold for peptide identifications using the target decoy strategy.  Additional filtering was achieved using a linear discriminant analysis, which combined several parameters into a single probability for each peptide and these probabilities were used to achieve a less than 1% FDR.  The parameters used for linear discriminant analysis were Xcorr, DCn, peptide mass accuracy and charge state, and peptide length.  For synthesized Notch1 peptide experiments, data was processed the same as above except each file was searched only against the Notch1 protein containing each of the synthesized peptides.  For the searches to run correctly, the dataset was searched using trypsin as the protease.  Each raw file was searched using a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin C was cloned as a growth-promoting G1 cyclin, and was also shown to regulate gene transcription. Here we report that in vivo cyclin C acts as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor, by controlling Notch1 oncogene levels. Cyclin C activates an 'orphan' CDK19 kinase, as well as CDK8 and CDK3. These cyclin-C-CDK complexes phosphorylate the Notch1 intracellular domain (ICN1) and promote ICN1 degradation. Genetic ablation of cyclin C blocks ICN1 phosphorylation in vivo, thereby elevating ICN1 levels in cyclin-C-knockout mice. Cyclin C ablation or heterozygosity collaborates with other oncogenic lesions and accelerates development of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL). Furthermore, the cyclin C encoding gene CCNC is heterozygously deleted in a significant fraction of human T-ALLs, and these tumours express reduced cyclin C levels. We also describe point mutations in human T-ALL that render cyclin-C-CDK unable to phosphorylate ICN1. Hence, tumour cells may develop different strategies to evade inhibition by cyclin C.

### Keywords
Cyclin c, Notch1, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joel Chick

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA


