### Accession
PXD002743

### Title
DUSP2 dephosphorylates STAT3 at Y705 and S727 residues

### Description
In the related study, to determine whether DUSP2 definitively served as a phosphatase for STAT3, an in vitro phosphatase assay was used. Using S-tag beads, p-STAT3 was pulled down from IL-6 stimulated HEK293T cells transfected with STAT3-S-Tag. DUSP2 or control protein, which was purified from HEK293T cells transfected with DUSP2-FLAG or empty vector through extraction with anti-FLAG beads and elution with FLAG peptides, were incubated with p-STAT3-S-Tag-beads in phosphatase buffer. Then bound proteins were eluted and subjected to MS analysis. When compared with the control, incubation of STAT3 and DUSP2 led to dephosphorylation of two STAT3 residues that have been reported to promote its activity, namely tyrosine 705 and serine 727.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with control vector or DUSP2 with FLAG tag or STAT3 with S-tag. 24 h later, IL-6 was used to stimulate cells transfected with STAT3 for 1 h. All cells were then harvested with Co-IP lysis buffer. Pull down assays were performed to purify DUSP2 protein with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) and phosphorylated STAT3 protein with S-protein Agarose (Novagen). DUSP2 protein was eluted with FLAG peptide for 1 h at room temperature.   To analyze DUSP2 phosphatase activity, phosphorylated STAT3 protein with S-protein Agarose was added to the phosphatase reaction buffer containing DUSP2 protein or control at room temperature for 1 h. Beads were then washed with PBS, and the bound proteins were eluted by boiling and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Proteins on the gel were identified with the Pierce Silver Stain Kit per the manufacture’s instruction (Thermo) and the associated bands were excised for analysis via mass spectrometry.  After silver staining, excised gel segments were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100 μm × 10 cm fused silica emitter made in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm, 120 Å, Ammerbuch). Samples were then eluted with linear gradients of 5-32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 50 min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10ms) with a target value of 3000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the Uniprot protein sequence database. Parameters were set as follows: protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y)(variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of the TH17 subset of helper T cells is closely linked with immunological disorders and inflammatory diseases. However, the mechanism by which TH17 cells are regulated remains elusive. Here we found that the phosphatase DUSP2 (PAC1) negatively regulated the development of TH17 cells. DUSP2 was directly associated with the signal transducer and transcription activator STAT3 and attenuated its activity through dephosphorylation of STAT3 at Tyr705 and Ser727. DUSP2-deficient mice exhibited severe susceptibility to experimental colitis, with enhanced differentiation of TH17 cells and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. In clinical patients with ulcerative colitis, DUSP2 was downregulated by DNA methylation and was not induced during T cell activation. Our data demonstrate that DUSP2 is a true STAT3 phosphatase that modulates the development of TH17 cells in the autoimmune response and inflammation.

### Keywords
Dusp2, Phosphorylation, Stat3

### Affiliations
Peking University Health Science Center
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Dan Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxin Yin
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Peking University Health Science Center


