### Accession
PXD023677

### Title
Label-free quantification of proteins in wild type and CLPP-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
We studied consequences of genetic deletion of mitochondrial peptidase CLPP for global proteome profile in unstressed cells.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs deficient for CLPP versus wild-type cells from littermate controls were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium at 4.5% glucose (DMEM, Invitrogen), supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS, from Gibco), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), and 1% Glutamine (Invitrogen). The culture medium was replaced once every 2-3 days., the cells were passaged every 3-4 days. Cell lines were grown in a humidified incubator at 37 ℃ in the presence of 5% CO2, to 70% confluence. All cell lines were regularly tested for contamination with mycoplasm.  Proteins of cell pellets were extracted using 20% trichloroacetic acid and incubated on ice for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated by 22000xg in a table top centrifuge at 4°C. Protein pellets were washed once with ice-cold acetone and dried. The proteins were resolved in buffer EB (10% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Sonification for 5s facilitated resolubilization of proteins. Samples were centrifuged at 22000xg. Proteins were digested using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009) and peptides were acidified with TFA and fractionated by C18/SCX stage tips (Rabsilber et al., 2011. Liquid chromatography / masspectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase pre-column (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) in-house packed picofrit emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from 5% mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min followed by a second gradient until 60% B for 20 min with a flow rate 500 nl/min. The LC run was finished by washout with 99% B for 5 min and re-equilibration in 1% B. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30s following the fragmentation event.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 was used (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 79950 entries, released in 2/2016. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Lable free quantification (LFQ) values were recorded .  Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N & Mann M (2009) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysisNature Methods volume 6, 359–362 Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372 (2008).

### Publication Abstract
Biallelic pathogenic variants in <i>CLPP</i>, encoding mitochondrial matrix peptidase ClpP, cause a rare autosomal recessive condition, Perrault syndrome type 3 (PRLTS3). It is characterized by primary ovarian insufficiency and early sensorineural hearing loss, often associated with progressive neurological deficits. Mouse models showed that accumulations of (i) its main protein interactor, the substrate-selecting AAA+ ATPase ClpX, (ii) mitoribosomes, and (iii) mtDNA nucleoids are the main cellular consequences of ClpP absence. However, the sequence of these events and their validity in human remain unclear. Here, we studied global proteome profiles to define ClpP substrates among mitochondrial ClpX interactors, which accumulated consistently in ClpP-null mouse embryonal fibroblasts and brains. Validation work included novel ClpP-mutant patient fibroblast proteomics. ClpX co-accumulated in mitochondria with the nucleoid component POLDIP2, the mitochondrial poly(A) mRNA granule element LRPPRC, and tRNA processing factor GFM1 (in mouse, also GRSF1). Only in mouse did accumulated ClpX, GFM1, and GRSF1 appear in nuclear fractions. Mitoribosomal accumulation was minor. Consistent accumulations in murine and human fibroblasts also affected multimerizing factors not known as ClpX interactors, namely, OAT, ASS1, ACADVL, STOM, PRDX3, PC, MUT, ALDH2, PMPCB, UQCRC2, and ACADSB, but the impact on downstream metabolites was marginal. Our data demonstrate the primary impact of ClpXP on the assembly of proteins with nucleic acids and show nucleoid enlargement in human as a key consequence.

### Keywords
Antiviral state, Lc-msms, Basal innate immunity elevation, Cgas-sting-irf7-ifnb-stat1 activation, Vdac-dependent release, Mitochondrial accumulation of ribosomes and nucleoids

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Experimental Neurology, Medical Faculty, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Auburger
Experimental Neurology, Medical Faculty, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


