### Accession
PXD039534

### Title
BLM helicase protein negatively regulates stress granule formation through unwinding RNA G-quadruplex structures

### Description
Bloom’s syndrome (BLM) protein is a known nuclear helicase that is able to unwind DNA secondary structures such as G-quadruplexes. However, its role in the regulation of cytoplasmic processes that involve RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) has not been previously studied. Here, we demonstrate that BLM is recruited to stress granules (SGs), which are cytoplasmic biomolecular condensates composed of RNA-binding proteins and RNAs. BLM is enriched in SGs upon different stress conditions and in an rG4-dependent manner. We show that BLM unwinds rG4s efficiently, thus acting as a negative regulator of SG formation, potentially via its unwinding function. Altogether, our data expand the cellular activity of BLM and shed light on the function that helicases play in the dynamics of biomolecular condensates.

### Sample Protocol
APEX proximity labeling and pull-down. 16M Tetracycline-induced G3BP1-APEX or NES-APEX expressing U2OS cells were seeded per flask, in 180T flasks (90%-100% confluency) with a medium which was supplemented with tetracycline for 24 hr (50ng/ml for each of the APEX baits) for inducing the APEX-bait gene expression. On the day of the experiment, the cells were incubated for 3hr with 1uM QUMA-1, or an equivalent volume of DMSO prior to 150uM Sodium arsenate (Sigma-Aldrich, 71287) stress for 2.5hr. Labeling activity was induced by supplementing Biotin-phenol (BP, 500 μM, Iris Biotech GmbH, LS-3500) for the last 30min of the stress and then H2O2 30% (1 mM, J.T.Baker 7722-84-1) was added for 1 min. APEX activity extinguished with quenching solution (sodium azide (10mM, Mallinckrodt, 1953-57), sodium ascorbate (10mM, Sigma-Aldrich, A7631) and Trolox (5mM, Sigma-Aldrich, 238813) in PBSx1 twice for 1min each time. Then, the cells were washed two more times with PBSx1, 1min each time, and for the last wash with quencher solution as mentioned before. After the fifth wash, the cells were scraped in quencher solution, centrifuged at 800 × g for 10 min at 4°C, pelleted and lysed in ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, 4693116001) and PhosSTOP (Roche, 4906837001). Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was quantified with Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent (‘Bradford’; Bio-Rad, 500-0006). Streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads, Thermo-Fisher, 88816) were incubated for pulldown experiments with ratio between extract: beads as 1mg:200ul, respectively (for proteomics we used 500ug of the extract with 100ul beads per sample, in a complete volume of 500ul) with rotation overnight at 4°C. Then, the beads were washed twice with RIPA containing quencher solution, once with 1M KCl solution, once with 0.1M Na2CO3 solution (powder, Sigma-Aldrich, S7795), once with 2M Urea solution (2M Urea; powder, Sigma-Aldrich, U0631, and 10mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and for proteomics, each wash was done for 3min and the biotinylated proteins were transferred to on-bead digestion process by trypsinization.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Dry digested samples were dissolved in 97:3% H2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a Symmetry C18 reversed-phase trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 25%B in 155 min, 25% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. For MS, the nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 45sec  and maximum injection time of 60msec. 

### Data Protocol
The processing step was performed as described previously (32). In short, we processed the raw MS data by using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 (35), and a database search was done with the Andromeda search engine (36, 37) by using the human Uniprot database. The data were filtered with a threshold of 1% the false discovery rate (FDR) for both the peptide-spectrum matches and the protein levels. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant (38) was utilized to compare experimental samples, except for the negative controls. Additional settings included variable modifications. The “match between runs” option was enabled to transfer identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time after retention time alignment.

### Publication Abstract
Bloom's syndrome (BLM) protein is a known nuclear helicase that is able to unwind DNA secondary structures such as G-quadruplexes (G4s). However, its role in the regulation of cytoplasmic processes that involve RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) has not been previously studied. Here, we demonstrate that BLM is recruited to stress granules (SGs), which are cytoplasmic biomolecular condensates composed of RNAs and RNA-binding proteins. BLM is enriched in SGs upon different stress conditions and in an rG4-dependent manner. Also, we show that BLM unwinds rG4s and acts as a negative regulator of SG formation. Altogether, our data expand the cellular activity of BLM and shed light on the function that helicases play in the dynamics of biomolecular condensates.

### Keywords
Quma-1, Helicase, Blm, Lc-msms, G-quadruplex, Stress granule, Apex, Rg4-binding proteins

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Eran Hornstein
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel


