### Accession
PXD004948

### Title
Cystinosin interactomics -  Impact of cystinosin glycosylation on protein stability by differential dynamic SILAC

### Description
Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, characterized by an intra-lysosomal accumulation of cystine. The causative gene for cystinosis is CTNS, which encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal proton-driven cystine transporter. Over 100 mutations are reported, leading to different severity of the disease, often in correlation with cystinosin residual activity as a transporter and with maintenance of its protein-protein interactions. In this study we focus on ΔITILELP the only mutation reported, in some cases, to lead to severe forms, inconsistently with its residual transported activity. ΔITILELP is a deletion that eliminates a consensus site on N66, one of the 7 glycosylation sites of the protein. Our hypothesis is that ΔITILELP mutant is less stable and undergoes faster degradation. Our dynamic SILAC study clearly shows that wild-type cystinosin is very stable while ΔITILELP is degraded three times faster than the wild-type protein. Additional lysosome inhibition experiments confirm ΔITILELP instability and show that the degradation is mainly lysosomal. We can observe that at the lysosome, ΔITILELP is still capable of interacting with the V-ATPase complex and some members of the mTOR pathway like the wild-type protein. Intriguingly, our interactomic and immunofluorescence studies show that ΔITILELP is partially retained at the ER. We propose that ΔITILELP mutation causes protein misfolding, ER retention and incapability to be processed in the Golgi, as we demonstrate that ΔITILELP carries high mannose glycans on all its 6 remaining glycosylation sites. Altogether, we show that the high turnover of ITILELP, due to its immature glycosylation state together with low transport activity, might be responsible for the phenotype observed in some patients.  

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation and western blotting experiments of cystinosin-EGFP and its mutants in NIH/3T3 cells..  For interactomic analysis, co‐immunoprecipitated protein samples prepared as above were concentrated on the top of a 10% SDS‐PAGE gel and excised. In-gel tryspin digestion was performed as described before (5). Nano-LC-MS/MS data dependent analysis (DDA) of in-gel digested samples was performed on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) system coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described before (5).  I

### Data Protocol
nteractomic data analysis of the MS files was processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot database v.5/7/2012 (16331 entries) integrated with FASTA sequences of WT cystinosin-EGFP and ΔITILELP-EGFP. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J., Mann M., 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using Label-free Quantification LFQ intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906]. Protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. For pathway analysis we annotated all the protein according KEGG database, and we selected proteins classified as "Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum". Three biological replicates were analysed for WT cystinosin-EGFP, ΔITILELP-EGFP and controls (without GFP). Statistical analysis between WT cystinosin and ΔITILELP was performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.0.31) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. For statistical comparison, the LFQ data were transformed in log 2 and imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 2 to 5 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed volcano plot analysis of the data using FDR=0.05 and S0=1.

### Publication Abstract
Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder characterized by intralysosomal accumulation of cystine. The causative gene for cystinosis is <i>CTNS</i>, which encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal proton-driven cystine transporter. Over 100 mutations have been reported, leading to varying disease severity, often in correlation with residual cystinosin activity as a transporter and with maintenance of its protein-protein interactions. In this study, we focus on the &#x394;ITILELP mutation, the only mutation reported that sometimes leads to severe forms, inconsistent with its residual transported activity. &#x394;ITILELP is a deletion that eliminates a consensus site on N66, one of the protein's seven glycosylation sites. Our hypothesis was that the &#x394;ITILELP mutant is less stable and undergoes faster degradation. Our dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) study clearly showed that wild-type cystinosin is very stable, whereas &#x394;ITILELP is degraded three times more rapidly. Additional lysosome inhibition experiments confirmed &#x394;ITILELP instability and showed that the degradation was mainly lysosomal. We observed that in the lysosome, &#x394;ITILELP is still capable of interacting with the V-ATPase complex and some members of the mTOR pathway, similar to the wild-type protein. Intriguingly, our interactomic and immunofluorescence studies showed that &#x394;ITILELP is partially retained at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We proposed that the &#x394;ITILELP mutation causes protein misfolding, ER retention and inability to be processed in the Golgi apparatus, and we demonstrated that &#x394;ITILELP carries high-mannose glycans on all six of its remaining glycosylation sites. We found that the high turnover of &#x394;ITILELP, because of its immature glycosylation state in combination with low transport activity, might be responsible for the phenotype observed in some patients.

### Keywords
Human, High resolution, Rare disease, Lc msms

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Plateforme Protéomique Paris Descartes Necker, PPN, 3P5-Necker, SFR Necker, US24, 75014, Paris, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Plateforme Protéomique Paris Descartes Necker, PPN, 3P5-Necker, SFR Necker, US24, 75014, Paris, France


