### Accession
PXD024336

### Title
Newly translated protein misfolding after heat shock and translation during heat shock

### Description
Correct and efficient folding of nascent proteins to their native state requires support from the protein homeostasis network. We set to examine which newly translated proteins are less thermostable to infer which polypeptides require more time to fold. More specifically, we sought to determine which newly translated proteins are more susceptible to misfolding and aggregation under heat stress using pulse SILAC. These proteins were abundant, shorter, and highly ordered, with a potentially larger hydrophobic core as suggested by their higher hydrophobicity. Notably these proteins contain more β-sheets that typically require more time for folding and were enriched for Hsp70/Ssb and TRiC/CCT binding motifs, suggesting a higher demand for chaperone-assisted folding. These polypeptides were also more often components of stable protein complexes. All evidence combined suggests that a specific subset of newly translated proteins requires more time following synthesis to reach a thermostable native state in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
200μg of protein samples from pellet or total cell lysate fractions were cleaned up and trypsin digested using Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method as previously described (Hughes et al., 2019). The resulting peptides were desalted with high-capacity C18 (Phenomenex) STAGE Tips before an offline high pH reversed-phase chromatography fractionation as previously described (Udeshi et al., 2013). Fractions were collected at 2 minutes intervals. The resulting 40 fractions were pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 12 fractions per SILAC experiment. Each fraction was then dried in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf). Prior to mass spectrometry analysis each sample was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid with 2 % acetonitrile in water.  Mass spectrometry spectra were acquired on an Impact II (Bruker) on-line coupled to either an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) or a nanoElute (Bruker) liquid chromatography (LC). The LC was equipped with a 2-cm-long, 100-μm-inner diameter trap column packed with 5 μm-diameter Aqua C-18 beads (Phenomenex) and a 40-cm-long, 50-μm-inner diameter fused silica analytical column packed with 1.9 μm-diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch) and it was heated to 50°C using tape heater (SRMU020124, Omega.com and in-house build temperature controller). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid and 2 % acetonitrile in water, and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 90 % acetonitrile Samples were run with a 120 minutes gradient from 10% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile in water) to 17% Buffer B during the first 45 min, then Buffer B was increased to 35% by 90 min and to 80% at 95 min. The scanning range was from m/z 200 to 2000 Th. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at 18 Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 Th to m/z 2000 Th (at 5 Hz rate). The isolation window for MS/MS was 2 to 3 Th depending on parent ion mass to charge ratio and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge (Beck et al., 2015). Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.3 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than 5 times. Singly charged ions were excluded since in ESI mode peptides usually carry multiple charges. Strict active exclusion was applied. Mass accuracy: error of mass measurement is typically within 5 ppm and is not allowed to exceed 10 ppm. The nano ESI source was operated at 1900 V capillary voltage, 0.25 Bar nanoBuster pressure with methanol in the nanoBooster, 3 L/min drying gas and 150°C drying temperature.

### Data Protocol
The results were analyzed against SGD_orf_trans_all_20150113 released from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (yeastgenome.org) with common contaminants with the latest version of MaxQaunt software when the data was generated (version 1.6.14 for Experiment 1&3, version 1.5.7.4 for Experiment 2). The searches were done using the following parameters: multiplicity matching specific SILAC experiment design for Lys and Arg isotope type, trypsin enzyme specificity, fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, variable modifications - methionine oxidation and N-acetyl peptides with default software instrument specific search settings, plus match-between-runs and re-quantification and an FDR set below 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate and efficient folding of nascent protein sequences into their native states requires support from the protein homeostasis network. Herein we probe which newly translated proteins are thermo-sensitive, making them susceptible to misfolding and aggregation under heat stress using pulse-SILAC mass spectrometry. We find a distinct group of proteins that is highly sensitive to this perturbation when newly synthesized but not once matured. These proteins are abundant and highly structured. Notably, they display a tendency to form &#x3b2; sheet secondary structures, have more complex folding topology, and are enriched for chaperone-binding motifs, suggesting a higher demand for chaperone-assisted folding. These polypeptides are also more often components of stable protein complexes in comparison with other proteins. Combining these findings suggests the existence of a specific subset of proteins in the cell that is particularly vulnerable to misfolding and aggregation following synthesis before reaching the native state.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Proteostasis, Protein folding, Proteomics, Heat stress

### Affiliations
UBC
Michael Smith Laboratories, The University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Mang Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
Michael Smith Laboratories, The University of British Columbia


