### Accession
PXD012709

### Title
PolyQ-expanded ataxin-1 formed insoluble protein inclusions perturbing translation in a spinocerebellar ataxia type-1 model

### Description
Spinocerebellar ataxia type-1 is caused by an abnormally expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in ataxin-1 protein. These expansions are responsible for protein misfolding and self-assembly into intranuclear inclusion bodies (IIBs) that are linked to neuronal death. Here, we describe a nuclear protein aggregation model of pathogenic human ataxin-1. Using an inducible Sleeping Beauty transposon system, we overexpressed ATXN1Q82 gene in human mesenchymal stem cells that are resistant to the early cytotoxic effects of the mutant protein. We characterized the structure and the protein composition of insoluble polyQ IIBs which gradually occupy the nuclei. In response to their formation, our transcriptome analysis reveals a cerebellum-specific perturbed protein interaction network, primarily affecting protein translation. Our study resolves the previously unknown architecture of insoluble polyQ IIBs and suggests that they affect the assembly and the function of the ribosome. Our inducible cell system faithfully models a human cerebellum at the end-stage of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Tet-On YFP-ATXN1Q82 MSCs were cultured for 10 days with Dox before being lysed in 0.1% SDS PBS. Intact fluorescent polyQ inclusions were sorted from cell extracts in a BD FACSAria IIu instrument (BD Biosciences) after doublet exclusion and using an unstained control sample to exclude possible autofluorescence. Protein samples were processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Proteins were alkylated, digested by trypsin on filter unit membrane and resulting peptides were eluted by ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The peptide mixture was dried under vacuum and transferred using peptide extraction procedure to TPX vial. LC-MS/MS analysis of peptide mixture was done using the RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) on-line connected to Impact II Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ion source (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Nano Booster was filled with acetonitrile. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent strategy with 3 sec long cycle time. Acquisition speed of MS and MS/MS scans was 5 Hz and 4-16 Hz, respectively. The speed of MS/MS spectra acquisition was based on precursor intensity.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric data was carried out using the Maxquant (version 1.6.0.13) with Andromeda search engine utilization. Search was done against the UniProt KB Human (version 2017_07) and the Maxquant contaminant databases (downloaded with given version). Mass tolerances for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation (N, Q) as optional modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification and two enzyme missed cleavages were set for search. Peptides and proteins with false discovery rate (FDR; q-value) <1% were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Spinocerebellar ataxia type-1 (SCA1) is caused by an abnormally expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in ataxin-1. These expansions are responsible for protein misfolding and self-assembly into intranuclear inclusion bodies (IIBs) that are somehow linked to neuronal death. However, owing to lack of a suitable cellular model, the downstream consequences of IIB formation are yet to be resolved. Here, we describe a nuclear protein aggregation model of pathogenic human ataxin-1 and characterize IIB effects. Using an inducible Sleeping Beauty transposon system, we overexpressed the ATXN1(Q82) gene in human mesenchymal stem cells that are resistant to the early cytotoxic effects caused by the expression of the mutant protein. We characterized the structure and the protein composition of insoluble polyQ IIBs which gradually occupy the nuclei and are responsible for the generation of reactive oxygen species. In response to their formation, our transcriptome analysis reveals a cerebellum-specific perturbed protein interaction network, primarily affecting protein synthesis. We propose that insoluble polyQ IIBs cause oxidative and nucleolar stress and affect the assembly of the ribosome by capturing or down-regulating essential components. The inducible cell system can be utilized to decipher the cellular consequences of polyQ protein aggregation. Our strategy provides a broadly applicable methodology for studying polyQ diseases.

### Keywords
Ataxin-1, Polyglutamine, Ribosome, Rna-seq, Sleeping beauty transposon, Afm, Spinocerebellar ataxia type-1, Nucleolus., Protein network

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics CEITEC-MU Masaryk University Brno, Czech Republic
Zbynek Zdrahal, Research group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Kamil Mikulasek

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Zbynek Zdrahal, Research group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic


