### Accession
PXD019314

### Title
The protein repertoires of hydatid fluid from pulmonary cystic echinococcosis

### Description
Echinococcosis is a disease resulting from infection by flatworms of the Echinococcus genus. The vast majority of cystic echinococcosis cases in Southern Brazil are caused by Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus ortleppi. Here, we surveyed the protein contents of the hydatid fluid compartment of E. granulosus and E. ortleppi pulmonary bovine cysts, in an attempt to compare their molecular arsenal in this host-parasite interface. We detected some molecular players equally in E. granulosus and E. ortleppi, such as proteolytic enzymes and development signaling molecules, while some activities were more evident in one species, such as apoptosis in E. ortleppi, and cysteine protease activity in E. granulosus.

### Sample Protocol
Hydatid fluid samples recovered from three individual cysts of each species (EG1-3, for E. granulosus, and EO1-3, for E. ortleppi) were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C to sediment protoscoleces and debris. Only hydatid fluid samples from fertile cysts, i.e., with viable protoscoleces, and with similar sizes (4-6 cm in diameter) were used in the study. Hydatid fluid samples were in-solution trypsin digested and fractioned by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. The five SCX resulting fractions from each one of the six biological samples were analyzed individually by LC−MS/MS. The mixture of tryptic peptides corresponding to each SCX fraction was automatically loaded onto a C18 Jupiter pre-column by an Easy-nLCII nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). After loading the samples in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), the peptides were subjected to chromatographic separation in reverse phase using a C18 AQUA column. The peptides were eluted on a gradient of 5 - 35% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 60 min; 35 - 85% B in 5 min; 85% B in 5 min; 85 - 5% B in 2 min and; 5% B in 13 min, under a flow of 200 nL/min. Spray voltage was set at 1.8 kV, 200 °C, and the mass spectrometer was operated in positive, data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300–1800 followed by MS/MS acquisition using collisional induced dissociation (CID) of the ten most intense ions from the MS scan using isolation window width of 3 m/z. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 30,000 resolution (at 400 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was defined by a list size of 500 and exclusion duration of 90 s at repetition intervals of 30 seconds. For the survey (MS) scan a target value (AGC) of 1,000,000 and maximum injection time of 100 ms were set whereas the target value for the fragment ion (MS/MS) spectra was set to 10,000 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The lower threshold for targeting precursor ions in the MS scans was 200 counts per scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed with the MS/MS spectra data sets using the Mascot search algorithm (v 2.3.02, Matrix Science) against local databases containing the deduced amino acid sequences from the E. granulosus genome assembly (PRJEB121), version WBPS11, available at WormBase ParaSite (http://parasite.wormbase.org), and the Bos taurus protein sequences obtained from UniProt/Swiss-Prot (Proteome ID: UP000009136). The search parameters consisted of carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, two trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 1 Da for fragment ions. Ion type was set as monoisotopic, and peptide charges 2+, 3+ and 4+ were taken into account. Peptide and protein identifications were validated using Scaffold v. 4.8.7 (Proteome Software Inc.). The peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established with >95% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability and contained two unique identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host-parasite interface, Hydatid fluid, Echinococcus ortleppi, Echinococcus granulosus

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Cestódeos, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande Do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil
Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Cestódeos, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul

### Submitter
Arnaldo Zaha

### Lab Head
Dr Arnaldo Zaha
Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Cestódeos, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande Do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil


