### Accession
PXD005421

### Title
Large-scale filter-aided sample preparation method for the analysis of the ubiquitinome

### Description
Protein ubiquitination regulates key cellular functions including protein homeostasis and signal transduction. The digestion of ubiquitinated proteins with trypsin yields a glycine-glycine remnant bound to the modified lysine residue (K-ε-GG) that can be recognized by specific antibodies for immunoaffinity purification (IAP) and subsequent identification of ubiquitination sites by mass spectrometry. Previous ubiquitinome studies based on this strategy have consistently digested milligram amounts of protein as starting material using in-solution digestion protocols prior to K-ε-GG enrichment. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) surpasses in-solution protein digestion in cleavage efficiency but its performance has thus far been shown for digestion of sample amounts on the order of micrograms. Because cleavage efficiency is pivotal in the generation of the K-ε-GG epitope recognized during IAP, here we developed a large-scale FASP method (LFASP) for digestion of milligram amounts of protein and evaluated its applicability to the study of the ubiquitinome. Our results demonstrate that LFASP-based tryptic digestion is efficient, robust, reproducible and applicable to the study of the ubiquitinome. We benchmark our results with state-of-the-art ubiquitinome studies and show an ~3-fold reduction in the proportion of miscleaved peptides with the method presented here. Beyond ubiquitinome analysis, LFASP overcomes the general limitation in sample capacity of standard FASP-based protocols and can therefore be used for a variety of applications that demand a large(r) amount of starting material.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 4 % SDS) and lysed by pulse sonication. The sample was then incubated 5 min at 95 ºC after addition of DTT (100 mM, final concentration) and subsequently clarified by centrifugation. Proteins were digested by LFASP in 15 mL ultrafiltration units (Amicon Ultra 15, 10 kDa NMWL, Merck Millipore). All centrifugations for LFASP were carried out at 13ºC and 4,000 xg. To remove SDS from the lysates, samples were diluted 1/40 in UT buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and loaded in the passivated filters in two steps, centrifuged for 30 min and the flow through was discarded. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 2 mL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UT buffer and incubation for 20 min in the dark. Following alkylation, the filter units were centrifuged and washed thrice with UT buffer. To remove urea, three buffer exchange steps were performed by addition of 2 mL of 20 mM NH4HCO3 followed by centrifugation. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin (1:20 w/w) in 2 mL of 20 mM NH4HCO3 for 14 h at 37 ºC. Peptides were collected in a new collection tube by centrifugation followed by two washes with 2 mL of 20 mM NH4HCO3. Digests were acidified with TFA (1 % v/v, final concentration). K-ε-GG peptides were enriched by immunoaffinity purification (IAP) using the anti-K-ε-GG antibody from the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology) cross-linked to protein A agarose beads. To this end, peptides were dissolved in 1.5 mL of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl), centrifuged and then the supernatant was incubated (2 h at 4 ºC with rotation) with an amount of cross-linked antibody equivalent to 1/8 of the commercial vial. Following incubation, the antibody beads were washed twice with IAP buffer and three times with 20 mM NH4HCO3. Bound peptides were eluted with 2 x 50 µL of 0.15 % (v/v) TFA. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an HPLC system composed of an Agilent 1200 capillary nano pump, a binary pump, a thermostated microinjector and a microswitch valve coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon). Two micrograms of peptides (single-shot and comprehensive proteomic analyses) or 30 % of the IAP eluate (analysis of K-ε-GG peptides) were dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 1 % (v/v) formic acid, 5 % (v/v) methanol. Peptides were separated with a C18 pre-concentration cartridge (Agilent Technologies) connected to a 15 cm-long 100 μm i.d. C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co) at 400 nL/min using a linear gradient (120 min in the comprehensive proteomic analysis and 360 min in other analyses) from 0 to 35 % solvent B (Solvent A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid; solvent B: ACN 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). The source was operated in positive ion mode at 1.5 kV and with the capillary at 200 ºC. The LTQ Orbitrap XL was operated in data-dependent mode at a target mass resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400). The scan range of each survey scan was m/z 400-1800 and up to the 10 most intense peaks with charge ≥2 and an intensity above the 5,000 threshold, were selected and fragmented by collision induced dissociation with normalized collision energy of 35. The maximum injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scan were 1 s and 200 ms, respectively, and the respective ion target values were set to 2E5 and 1E4. To minimize the redundant selection of precursor ions, the fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 45 s (comprehensive proteomic analysis) or 60 s (other analyses).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched with the SEQUEST engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (canonical and isoform sequences, release 2016_05) using the following parameters: trypsin, maximum 3 missed cleavages, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, GG addition to lysine and acetylation of N-terminal as dynamic modifications. Peptide spectral matches were filtered at 1 % false discovery rate using Percolator. The localization probability for each K-ε-GG site was calculated using ptmRS and only K-ε-GG peptides with all sites localized with a probability ≥75 % were kept for further analyses. Peptides with a K-ε-GG site mapped to a peptide C-terminal lysine residue were removed from the dataset except when the site coincided with the protein C-terminal residue. Raw files from recent ubiquitinome studies were downloaded from data repositories and database searched to benchmark our results. The search was carried out as specified above with modifications. Specifically, the raw files from Udeshi et al. 2013 (PMID: 23266961) were searched with a 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance (MS2 spectra were acquired at high resolution using an Orbitrap mass analyzer). Also, to accommodate the possibility of two variable modifications (GG and SILAC label) on lysine residues, each raw file was searched 2 times for the data of Quadroni et al. 2015 (PMID: 25782750) or 3 times for the data of Udeshi et al. 2013 (i.e., one search per SILAC channel). The searches for the medium- and heavy-labeled peptides included the SILAC label and the SILAC label plus GG addition to lysine as variable modifications. The light-, medium- and heavy-labeled peptides from each search were combined using custom scripts and filtered as specified above. Unique peptides identified with different SILAC labels were only counted once when digestion efficiency was estimated using the number of identified peptides whereas the quantitative results of these datasets were calculated using the areas of the precursor ions of all peptides (i.e., including different SILAC labels).

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination regulates key cellular functions, including protein homeostasis and signal transduction. The digestion of ubiquitinated proteins with trypsin yields a glycine-glycine remnant bound to the modified lysine residue (K-&#x3b5;-GG) that can be recognized by specific antibodies for immunoaffinity purification (IAP) and subsequent identification of ubiquitination sites by mass spectrometry. Previous ubiquitinome studies based on this strategy have consistently digested milligram amounts of protein as starting material using in-solution digestion protocols prior to K-&#x3b5;-GG enrichment. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) surpasses in-solution protein digestion in cleavage efficiency, but its performance has thus far been shown for digestion of sample amounts on the order of micrograms. Because cleavage efficiency is pivotal in the generation of the K-&#x3b5;-GG epitope recognized during IAP, here we developed a large-scale FASP method (LFASP) for digestion of milligram amounts of protein and evaluated its applicability to the study of the ubiquitinome. Our results demonstrate that LFASP-based tryptic digestion is efficient, robust, reproducible, and applicable to the study of the ubiquitinome. We benchmark our results with state-of-the-art ubiquitinome studies and show a &#x223c;3-fold reduction in the proportion of miscleaved peptides with the method presented here. Beyond ubiquitinome analysis, LFASP overcomes the general limitation in sample capacity of standard FASP-based protocols and can therefore be used for a variety of applications that demand a large(r) amount of starting material.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Ubiquitinome, Large-scale, Proteome, Portein digestion, Lfasp

### Affiliations
CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Joaquin Abian Moñux
CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain


