### Accession
PXD016533

### Title
Global acetylation profiling for the Arabidopsis thaliana plasma membrane anchored NAA60 N-terminal acetyltransferase

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes and is catalysed in humans by seven N-terminal acetyltransferases. AtNAA60 is localized in vivo at the plasma membrane by an α-helical membrane anchor at its C-terminus. In this study, we investigated the Arabidopsis thaliana N-acetylome using the global acetylome profiling test (GAP test).

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells over-expressing AtNAA60 were centrifuged at 5000 rpm 4°C and pellets frozen at -80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 8 plus 250 mM NaCl, subjected to sonication and cell debris were removed by centrifugation. The lysate (1 mg of material) was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide required for Stable Isotope Labelling Protein N-terminal Acetylation (SILProNAc) quantitation. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then, N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min during the 40 min separation gradients. Fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 10 µl of each pooled mixtures were loaded on the pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nano-separation) of the Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) followed by the separation on a C18 reverse phase column (Nikkyo Technos capillary column,) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on 100 min gradient (5-35% Acetonitrile). The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration (lock mass) using the Top-20 acquisition method with 20 seconds exclusion time. Each sample was acquired twice including or excluding singly charge ions for signal triggering to acquire MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the E. coli K12 strain reference proteome subset extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
In humans and plants, N-terminal acetylation plays a central role in protein homeostasis, affects 80% of proteins in the cytoplasm and is catalyzed by five ribosome-associated N-acetyltransferases (NatA-E). Humans also possess a Golgi-associated NatF (HsNAA60) that is essential for Golgi integrity. Remarkably, NAA60 is absent in fungi and has not been identified in plants. Here we identify and characterize the first plasma membrane-anchored post-translationally acting N-acetyltransferase AtNAA60 in the reference plant Arabidopsis thaliana by the combined application of reverse genetics, global proteomics, live-cell imaging, microscale thermophoresis, circular dichroism spectroscopy, nano-differential scanning fluorometry, intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and X-ray crystallography. We demonstrate that AtNAA60, like HsNAA60, is membrane-localized in vivo by an &#x3b1;-helical membrane anchor at its C-terminus, but in contrast to HsNAA60, AtNAA60 localizes to the plasma membrane. The AtNAA60 crystal structure provides insights into substrate-binding, the broad substrate specificity and the catalytic mechanism probed by structure-based mutagenesis. Characterization of the NAA60 loss-of-function mutants (naa60-1 and naa60-2) uncovers a plasma membrane-localized substrate of AtNAA60 and the importance of NAA60 during high salt stress. Our findings provide evidence for the plant-specific evolution of a plasma membrane-anchored N-acetyltransferase that is vital for adaptation to stress.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Acetyltransferase, Gap test

### Affiliations
CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


