### Accession
PXD045318

### Title
Improved detection and quantitation of RNA-interactome using DIA SILAC

### Description
Detection and quantitation of the RNA-interacting proteome is commonly achieved applying SILAC labeling, following by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of the proteomic data. However, the limited sensitivity of the DDA approach often restricts protein detection to those with higher expression in cells, necessitating peptide fractionation prior to mass spectrometry. Here we report a pipeline for SILAC analysis using data-independent acquisition (DIA), with a spectral library constructed using gas-phase window separation of light materials followed by in silico prediction of heavy spectra. The resulting DIA datasets had 30-40% more detected proteins compared to the same biological materials analyzed using DDA, while abolishing the requirement for pre-MS reverse-phase fractionation of peptides. Lower inter-replicate variations were seen with DIA for proteins detected in both acquisitions. As a test, we determined the effects of arsenite treatment on the RNA-bound proteome of HEK cells recovered following total RNA-associated proteome purification (TRAPP). The DIA dataset yielded clear GO term enrichment for RNA-binding proteins involved in cellular stress responses, while enrichment in the DDA dataset was relatively weak. Dataset normalization of with Cyclic Loess slightly improved the DDA-DIA correlation over median normalization for DIA datasets, but not for DDA dataset relative to default MaxQuant normalization. Overall, the DIA SILAC approach improved both protein detection and biological significance over conventional DDA SILAC.

### Sample Protocol
For the library generation 30 µg of total protein from HEK cells were digested using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol as described by Wisniewski et al (2009) with minor modifications. In brief, the protein sample was added on the top of a 30 kDa MWCO filter units (Vivacon, UK) along with 150 µl of denaturation buffer (8M Urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma Aldrich)) and spun at 14,000 x g for 20 min, while another wash with 200 µl of denaturation buffer was performed under the same conditions. The protein sample was then reduced by the addition of 100 µl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in denaturation buffer for 30 min at ambient temperature, and alkylated by adding 100 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in denaturation buffer for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. Two washes with 100 µl of denaturation buffer and two with digestion buffer (50mM ABC) were performed under the same conditions described above before the addition of trypsin/lysC mix (Pierce, UK). The protease:protein ratio was 1:50 and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, the sample was spun at 14,000 x g for 20 min and the flow-through containing digested peptides was collected. Filters were then washed one more time with 100 µl of digestion buffer and the flow-through was collected again. The eluates from the filter units were acidified using 20 µl of 10% Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich), and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2007). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. LC-MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Four 2µg-injections from the HEK digest were performed. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated constantly at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (160 min). For gas phase fractionation survey scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1650 m/z) with an ion target of 5.0e6, and injection time of 20ms. MS2 Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) was performed in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution, maximum injection time of 55ms and AGC target of 3.0E6 ions. We used HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al, 2007) with stepped collision energy of 25.5, 27 and 30. For the first injection the scan range was between 400 and 600 m/z with isolation windows of 5 m/z. For the other three injections the scan range was 600-800, 800-1000 and 1000-1400, with 5 m/z isolation windows and default charge state of 3. For the SILAC samples that injected with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) the preparation was the same and the injection conditions as described above. MS1 was performed at 120,000 resolution with scan range 350-1500 m/z, AGC target of 3.0E6 ions and injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans were performed at resolution of 15,000 with isolation window of 1.4 Thompson AGC target of 8.0E5 and injection time of 60 ms. For the SILAC samples that analysed with DIA, the LC conditions and the MS conditions were the same as described above. We used variable isolation windows as seen on table with the narrower windows where the majority of the peptides were eluted (windows varied from 10 to 35+ m/z).

### Data Protocol
For the DDA-SILAC samples, the MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against the Homo sapiens (released 14/05/19) protein database, using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 5. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin and LysC allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Multiplicity was set to 2, specifying Arg6 and Lys6 for heavy labels. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. The DIA-NN software platform (Demichev et al, 2020) version 1.8.1. was used to process the the DIA raw files from the gas phase fractionation and the search was conducted against the Uniprot database (released in September, 2022). Precursor ion generation was based on the chosen protein database )- with deep-learning based spectra, retention time and IMs prediction. SILAC-DIA samples were then searched against the gas phase fractionation spectral library as well as against the database predicted light library with parameters and modifications as described in Decks et al, 2022. Regarding general parameters, digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of the N-terminus were set as variable modifications. The parameters for peptide length range, precursor charge range, precursor m/z range and fragment ion m/z range as well as other software parameters were used with their default values. The precursor FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek cells, Dia-silac, Rna-interactome

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Thomas Tan

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
University of Edinburgh


