### Accession
PXD005154

### Title
lncRNA MALAT1 interactome -  Quantitative proteomics reveals that long non-coding RNA MALAT1 interacts with DBC1 to regulate p53 acetylation

### Description
Metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that was first discovered as a prognostic marker for lung cancer metastasis. MALAT1 has been implicated in the tumorigenesis of numerous tumor types. To further delineate the underlying molecular mechanism, we established a high-throughput strategy to characterize the interacting proteins of MALAT1 by combining RNA pull down, quantitative proteomics, bioinformatics analysis, and experimental validation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were desalted using C18 ziptip and loaded on a nanoUPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) equipped with a self-packed C18 column (C18, 150 × 0.075 mm, 1.7 μm). The peptides were eluted using a 5-40% B gradient (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min into a nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode in which an initial FT scan recorded the mass range of m/z 350-1500. The spray voltage was set between 1.8 and 2.0 kV, and the mass resolution used for MS scan is 70,000. The dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. The top 20 most intense masses were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 30 eV. MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The AGC target value and maximum injection time were set as 1e6 and 100 ms respectively for MS scans, as well as 5e4 and 110 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against the Uniprot human protein database containing 129499 sequence entries using the SEQUEST algorithm embedded in the Protein Discoverer 1.4 Software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The following parameters were applied during the database search: 10 ppm precursor and fragment mass error tolerance, Arg/Lys (+6.0201 Da, SILAC heavy amino acid) as variable modifications, static modifications of carbamidomethylation for all cysteine residues, flexible modification of oxidation modifications for methionine residues, and one missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed.  False discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 was used as filtering criteria for all identified peptides. In addition, only proteins identified with two or more peptides were considered, and proteins identified with the same set of peptides were grouped and treated as one.  Quantitation analysis was conducted by the Protein Discoverer 1.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Three biological replicates and two technical replicates were analyzed. Ratios between control and MALAT1 pull down samples were calculated based on the extract ion chromatography areas. Identified proteins with ratiocontrol/MALAT1 ≤ 0.5 (2 fold enrichment) and standard deviation (S.D.) ≤ 0.2 were considered as potential MALAT1 interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) is a broadly expressed lncRNA involved in many aspects of cellular processes. To further delineate the underlying molecular mechanism, we employed a high-throughput strategy to characterize the interacting proteins of MALAT1 by combining RNA pull-down, quantitative proteomics, bioinformatics, and experimental validation. Our approach identified 127 potential MALAT1-interacting proteins and established a highly connected MALAT1 interactome network consisting of 788 connections. Gene ontology annotation and network analysis showed that MALAT1 was highly involved in five biological processes: RNA processing; gene transcription; ribosomal proteins; protein degradation; and metabolism regulation. The interaction between MALAT1 and depleted in breast cancer 1 (DBC1) was validated using RNA pull-down and RNA immunoprecipitation. Further mechanistic studies reveal that MALAT1 binding competes with the interaction between sirtuin1 (SIRT1) and DBC1, which then releases SIRT1 and enhances its deacetylation activity. Consequently, the deacetylation of p53 reduces the transcription of a spectrum of its downstream target genes, promotes cell proliferation and inhibits cell apoptosis. Our results uncover a novel mechanism by which MALAT1 regulates the activity of p53 through the lncRNA-protein interaction.

### Keywords
Rna pulldown, Malat1, Lc-ms/ms, Lncrna

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University

### Submitter
Ruibing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
Tianjin Medical University


