### Accession
PXD025851

### Title
Upregulation of USP18-ISG15 axis associates with protective immune responses and limited histopathology during SARS-CoV2 infection of the human lung

### Description
Investigating the intra-lung human immune responses to SARS-CoV-2, and how immune signatures temporally correlate to distinct histopathological manifestations of disease in the human lung, is not possible in human patients. While current non-human primate and rodent models have proven instrumental for evaluating COVID-19 treatments and vaccines, their non-human nature precludes faithful recapitulation of fundamental host-pathogen interactions and immunopathogenesis, particularly those governing severe COVID-19 disease. Here, using different mouse models engrafted with human lung tissues and human immune hematopoietic cells, we provide a unique picture of how differential human hematopoietic reconstitution, and immune signatures upon infection, correlate with distinct histopathology during SARS-CoV-2 infection.  To do so, we engrafted pairs of human fetal lung xenografts (fLX) harboring lung-resident hematopoietic lineages into immunodeficient NRG mice (NRG-L), or into NRG-Flk2-/-Flt3LG mice co-engrafted with components of a human immune system (HIS-NRGF-L). Strikingly, while SARS-CoV-2 inoculation of NRG-L mice resulted in productive infection and extensive histopathological features typically observed in the lungs of severe COVID-19 patients, HIS-NRGF-L were able to rapidly control infection while preserving tissue integrity. Distinct histopathological outcomes were governed by differential proteomics and phospho-proteomics signatures and underscored the USP18-ISG15 pathway as a top immunomodulatory pathway defining effective control of viral replication and maintenance of tissue integrity in human lung tissue during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our work highlights fLX-engrafted mice as a powerful platform to investigate the molecular basis that drives effective immune control of SARS-CoV-2, and open avenues for the development of innovative immunotherapies targeting the USP18-ISG15 pathway to alleviate severe COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Inactivated protein extracts were sonicated with a Branson probe sonicator and were then quantified via Bradford assay. The samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 buffer to lower the GuHCl concentration to 0.75 M. Lysate proteins were then digested by adding trypsin (Pierce) at a 1:50 ratio (enzyme: protein, w/w) and incubating the samples overnight at 37_C with shaking. Trypsin digestion was terminated with the addition of TFA to below pH 3 and the peptide digests were desalted via reversed-phase C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters) with a wash buffer of 0.1% TFA and elution buffer of 60% acetonitrile. The desalted peptides were then quantified with a Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce). Each sample comprising one hundred micrograms peptides was TMT-labeled with TMTPro 16plex reagents (ThermoFisher, cat. # A44520) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Labeled peptides was again desalted on a C18 column prior to basic reversed-phase fractionation. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated via basic reversed-phase chromatography on the Agilent 1200 series HPLC instrument equipped with the XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (130A° , 3.5 mm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm, Waters Corporation). Prior to loading peptides, the C18 column was washed with 100% methanol and equilibrated with Buffer A (0.1% ammonium hydroxide and 2% acetonitrile). Peptides were injected via the autosampler and eluted from the column using a gradient of mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH) to mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH) over 48 min at a flow-rate of 0.4 mL/minute. The 48 fractions collected were orthogonally concatenated into 12 pooled fractions. Three percent of each fraction was aliquoted and saved for global proteomic profiling and the remaining 97% of peptides were used for phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe-NTA magnetic beads (CubeBiotech) (Leutert et al., 2019). Briefly, the fractionated peptides were dried and resuspended in binding buffer (80% Acetonitrile and 01% TFA). Before being added to the peptides, the Fe-NTA beads were washed with binding buffer. Peptides were then incubated with the Fe-NTA bead slurry for 20 min in a Kingfisher Apex magnetic bead transferring system (Thermo) before being moved into wash wells. Beads with bound phosphopeptides were washed twice in binding buffer, after which phosphopeptides were serially eluted twice by moving the beads into wells containing 200uL of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile and 2.5% ammonium hydroxide). Both phosphopeptide eluates corresponding to an orthogonal fraction were combined prior to drying in a speedvac. Multiplexed peptide fractions from each time point were resuspended in mobile phase A solvent (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) to be analyzed on the Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with FAIMS (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was interfaced to the Easy nanoLC1200 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, the peptides were first loaded onto a reverse-phase nanotrap column in mobile phase A, (75 mm i.d. 3 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18 3 mm, 100 A ° , ThermoScientific) and separated over an EASY-Spray column, (ES803A, Thermo Scientific) using a gradient (6% to 19% over 58 min, then 19% to 36% over 34 min) of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275°C and a spray voltage of 2500 V. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, with FAIMS cycling through one of three compensation voltages (-50V, -57V, -64V) at each full scan. Precursor scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 120 ms in the Orbitrap analyzer. The following 0.8s were dedicated to fragmenting the most abundant ions at the same FAIMS compensation voltage, with charge states between 2 and 5, via HCD (NCE 33%) before analysis at a resolution of 45,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Phosphopeptides were analyzed in the same manner, save for the injection time being raised to 150ms to allow for lower abundant analyte to fill the trap.

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS/MS spectra were simultaneously searched against the complete SwissProt human proteome (downloaded on 2020-10-20), the complete SwissProt mouse proteome (downloaded on 2020-10-20), and the Uniprot SARS-CoV-2 proteome (downloaded on 2020-05-03) using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7.0), which integrates the Andromeda search engine. TMT reporter ion quantification was performed using MaxQuant with default settings. Briefly, enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phosphopeptides serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were specified as variable modifications. Precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). A threshold Andromeda score of 40 and a threshold delta score of 8 was applied to phosphopeptides. The MaxQuant output files designated ‘‘Phospho(STY)sites’’ and ‘‘proteinGroups’’ were filtered to remove entries that were either entirely mouse, or in the case of completely homologous peptides between mouse and human had annotations of both. These two files, filtered to contain only accessions related to human proteins were used for data normalization and other statistical analysis using in-house generated scripts in the R environment.

### Publication Abstract
The human immunological mechanisms defining the clinical outcome of SARS-CoV-2 infection remain elusive. This knowledge gap is mostly driven by the lack of appropriate experimental platforms recapitulating human immune responses in a controlled human lung environment. Here, we report a mouse model (i.e., HNFL mice) co-engrafted with human fetal lung xenografts (fLX) and a myeloid-enhanced human immune system to identify cellular and molecular correlates of lung protection during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Unlike mice solely engrafted with human fLX, HNFL mice are protected against infection, severe inflammation, and histopathological phenotypes. Lung tissue protection from infection and severe histopathology associates with macrophage infiltration and differentiation and the upregulation of a macrophage-enriched signature composed of 11 specific genes mainly associated with the type I interferon signaling pathway. Our work highlights the HNFL model as a transformative platform to investigate, in controlled experimental settings, human myeloid immune mechanisms governing lung tissue protection during SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid19, Humanized mice, Lung fetal xenograft

### Affiliations
Boston University

### Submitter
Ryan Hekman

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Douam
Boston University


