### Accession
PXD010386

### Title
A Critical Role of cTAGE5/MEA6 in Brain Development through Regulation of Trafficking of Cellular Components in Neurons

### Description
Normal neural development is essential for the formation of neuronal networks and brain function. cTAGE5/MEA6 plays a critical role in the secretion of proteins. However, its roles in the transport of non-secretory cellular components and in brain development remain unknown. Here, we show that cTAGE5/MEA6 is essential for brain development and function. Conditional knockout of cTAGE5/MEA6 in the brain leads to severe defects in neural development, including deficits in dendrite outgrowth and branching, synapse formation and/or maintenance, astrocyte activation, and abnormal behaviors. We reveal that loss of cTAGE5/MEA6 affects the interaction between the coat protein complex II (COPII) components, SAR1 and SEC23, leading to persistent activation of SAR1 and defects in COPII vesicle formation and transport from the ER to Golgi, as well as disturbed trafficking of membrane components in neurons. These defects affect not only the transport of materials required for the development of dendrites and spines, but also the signaling pathways required for neuronal development. Since mutations in cTAGE5/MEA6 have been found in patients with Fahr’s disease, our study potentially also provides insight into the pathogenesis of this disorder.

### Sample Protocol
Three WT and cKO mouse brains at P14 were dissected and lysed in the lysis buffer (0.4 M sucrose, 50 mM 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid (pH 7.0), 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5 mM PMSF). The protein samples were digested with the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method, in which the 100 μg lysates of mouse brain were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After digested with sequencing grade trypsin, the collected peptides of three biological replicates of the WT and cKO mouse brain were labeled with 6-plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tag, Thermo) and the labeling reaction was inactivated by addition of 5% hydroxylamine. The labeled samples were mixed together with equal ratios of these six samples and fractionated with reversed phase (RP)-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The fractioned peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed with a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric files were analyzed with the software MaxQuant , in which the Mus musculus (including canonical and isoforms) proteome sequence database used was downloaded from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ctage5/mea6; brain development; copii; vesicle trafficking

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Acadamy of Sciences
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, CAS

### Submitter
Feng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiheng Xu
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Acadamy of Sciences


