### Accession
PXD017231

### Title
DHHC7-mediated palmitoylation of barttin is a risk factor for Bartter syndrome

### Description
Chloride permeability in the thin and thick ascending limbs of the loop of Henle is a crucial component for urine concentration, with ClC-K/barttin chloride channels as a central component in establishing the cortico-medullary osmotic gradient. Barttin is an accessory subunit of human ClC-K channels, promoting trafficking of the ClC-K/barttin complex to the plasma membrane, increasing channel stability, and switching ClC-K/barttin channels into an active state. Barttin undergoes post-translational palmitoylation, which is essential for channel activation. Here, we identified DHHC7 as a major barttin palmitoyl-acyltransferase, the depletion of which reduced barttin palmitoylation and the macroscopic current amplitudes in cells expressing ClC-K/barttin channels. To investigate a functional role of barttin palmitoylation in vivo, we established Zdhhc7-/- mice. Although barttin palmitoylation was significantly decreased in the kidneys of Zdhhc7-/- animals, it did not result in any pathological consequences for kidney structure or function under physiological conditions. However, when Zdhhc7-/- animals were fed a low-salt diet, they developed hyponatremia and mild metabolic alkalosis, symptoms characteristic of human Bartter syndrome (BS) Type IV with mild progression. Notably, decreased barttin palmitoylation was also found for the R8L barttin mutant identified in human BS Type IV. These data suggest that barttin palmitoylation plays an important role in chloride channel dysfunction in certain variants of BS. Thus, our study provides evidence of the downregulation of barttin palmitoylation as a possible mechanism in the etiology of BS, making the restoration of barttin palmitoylation a promising clinical strategy for the treatment of Type IV BS.

### Sample Protocol
To identify specific sites of palmitoylated proteins in mouse kidneys, PANIMoni method was used as described previously (Zareba-Koziol et al., 2019). Obtained after ABE biotinylated protein lysates were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega V 5111) for 16 h at 37ºC. Digestion was terminated using a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete, Roche). The tryptic peptide mixture was incubated with 100 μl of neutravidin beads (Amersham) at room temperature for 1 h and beads were washed five times in 1 ml of wash buffer. Neutravidin-bound peptides were eluted with 150 μl of elution buffer (25 mM NH4CO3 [pH 8.2] and 5 mM TCEP (Sigma Aldrich). Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the peptide solution to (liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry) using a Nano-Acquity (Waters) LC system and an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp).  Peptides in 0.1% formic acid/water were loaded from a cooled (10 ºC) autosampler tray to a pre-column (Symmetry C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) and resolved on a BEH130 column (C18, 75 mm x 250 mm, 1.7 mm; Waters) in a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile/water for 70 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The ultra-performance LC system was directly connected to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. All MS runs were separated by blank runs to reduce the carry-over of peptides from previous samples. The mass spectrometer resolution was set to 50.000 for MS acquisitions, with an m/z measurement range of 300-2000 Th and up to 10 fragmentation events were allowed for each parent ion.

### Data Protocol
Datasets of parent and daughter ions were processed using MascotDistiller 2.6.1 software (MatrixScience). The Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1) was used to survey data against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Swissprot 2016_02; 552,259 sequences; 197,423,140 residues). The Mascot search parameters were set to the following: taxonomy (Mus musculus), variable modifications (cysteine carbamidomethylation or N-ethylmaleimide, methionine oxidation, peptide tolerance (5 ppm), fragment mass tolerance (5 ppm). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with one missed or non-specific cleavages permitted. The lists of the peptide sequences that were identified in all of the LC-MS/MS runs from control (nsamples=3) and KODHHC7(nsamples=3) All obtained data were merged into one selected peptide list (SPL) using MascotScan software (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). The SPL consists of sequences of peptides with Mascot scores exceeding the threshold value corresponding to <5% expectation value and FDR<1%. FDR was estimated with Mascot Decoy search, and score threshold was adjusted for each sample to keep the FDR below 1% (Supplemental Table 2). Subsequently, probable contaminants (keratin, albumin) were removed from the analysis. For evaluation of the relative protein abundance in each sample, spectral count values determined using exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) scores were used. Only proteins that met the acceptance criteria: FDR<1%, at least two unique peptides, Mascot score over 30, nonredundant proteins, were taken for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Barttin is the accessory subunit of the human ClC-K chloride channels, which are expressed in both the kidney and inner ear. Barttin promotes trafficking of the complex it forms with ClC-K to the plasma membrane and is involved in activating this channel. Barttin undergoes post-translational palmitoylation that is essential for its functions, but the enzyme(s) catalyzing this post-translational modification is unknown. Here, we identified zinc finger DHHC-type containing 7 (DHHC7) protein as an important barttin palmitoyl acyltransferase, whose depletion affected barttin palmitoylation and ClC-K-barttin channel activation. We investigated the functional role of barttin palmitoylation <i>in vivo</i> in <i>Zdhhc7</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice. Although palmitoylation of barttin in kidneys of <i>Zdhhc7</i><sup>-/-</sup> animals was significantly decreased, it did not pathologically alter kidney structure and functions under physiological conditions. However, when <i>Zdhhc7</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice were fed a low-salt diet, they developed hyponatremia and mild metabolic alkalosis, symptoms characteristic of human Bartter syndrome (BS) type IV. Of note, we also observed decreased palmitoylation of the disease-causing R8L barttin variant associated with human BS type IV. Our results indicate that dysregulated DHHC7-mediated barttin palmitoylation appears to play an important role in chloride channel dysfunction in certain BS variants, suggesting that targeting DHHC7 activity may offer a potential therapeutic strategy for reducing hypertension.

### Keywords
Bartter syndrome, Panimoni, Palmitoylation, Barttin, Dhhc7, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS

### Submitter
Monika Zareba-Koziol

### Lab Head
Dr Jakub Włodarczyk
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS


