### Accession
PXD017083

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of urinary exosomes from patients with primary aldosteronism that underwent fludrocortisone suppression test

### Description
The sodium chloride cotransporters (NCC) and the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) have been reported to be the main effectors of aldosterone in Na+ and Cl- reabsorption in the distal nephron and dietary K+ downregulates NCC. The Cl-/HCO3- exchanger pendrin has been revealed as a key role in maintaining extracellular fluid and electrolyte homeostasis by regulating Cl- reabsorption in the aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron working in tandem with ENaC and perhaps NCC. Pendrin-mediated Cl-/HCO3- exchange is stimulated in models of metabolic alkalosis (e.g. aldosterone administration or dietary NaHCO3 intake), and plasma K+ level is thought to negatively influence pendrin. In this study we used high-throughput proteomics and bioinformatics approaches to analyze urinary exosome contents isolated from patients undergoing fludrocortisone suppression test (FST, as a means of confirming or excluding primary aldosteronism [PA]) to examine the actions of administration of aldosterone analogs, NaCl and KCl orally on transmembrane proteins existing in urinary exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
We performed tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based relative quantification of the proteome in urinary exosomes isolated from participants (n=12, F4/M8) on the baseline day of FST (D0) and day 4 of FST (D4). Cross-set comparison was performed with the aid of a universal control channel to allow a direct comparison between all samples and target biomarker candidates. In total, three TMT sets were used to label all 24 samples. One TMT set includes nine channels, with eight of them labeling urinary exosomes from D0 and D4 in four patients and one dedicated to a universal control channel. The universal control channel consisted of an equal amount of peptides from all 24 samples and was adjusted to the same amount compared to the rest eight channels in the set.

### Data Protocol
Raw files belonging to one TMT set were searched together against Uniprot human protein database (downloaded on 25 January 2019) using both the Sequest and Mascot algorithms (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) through Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Quantification of peptides and proteins was done through the reporter ion quantification module of Proteome Discoverer, with corrections for TMT isotopic interferences enabled. Precursor mass tolerance was set as 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.02 Da, and a maximum of 2 miss cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, TMT labeling of peptide N-terminus and lysine were set as variable modifications. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by Percolator and confined to ≤1%. A paired t-test of logarithmically transformed protein ratios was performed using R, to determine the proteins that showed significant changes post adrenalectomy.

### Publication Abstract
In primary aldosteronism (PA), the occurrence of K<sup>+</sup> loss and hypertension suggest alterations in renal tubular transport, but the molecular basis of these alterations in humans is unclear. In this study, urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs) isolated from patients undergoing fludrocortisone suppression testing (FST, as a means of confirming or excluding PA) were analyzed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to determine the combined effects of an aldosterone analogue, NaCl and KCl supplementation on renal tubular protein abundance. Of quantified proteins, the Cl<sup>-</sup>/HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> exchanger pendrin decreased by a median 37% [-15, 57] (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) and the potassium channel ROMK increased by a median 31% [-10, 85] (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) during FST among 10 PA subjects. The trends remained, but to a lesser degree, in two subjects cured of PA by unilateral adrenalectomy. In PA subjects, plasma K<sup>+</sup> increased from median 3.6 to 4.2&#x2009;mM (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) and 24&#x2009;h urine K<sup>+</sup> from 101 to 202&#x2009;mmol (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01), while 24&#x2009;h urine Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> decreased from 2.3 to 0.8 (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). At baseline, pendrin negatively correlated with plasma K<sup>+</sup> (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) and positively correlated with plasma aldosterone (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). There were no clear correlations between &#x394; pendrin (&#x394;&#x2009;=&#x2009;D4-D0) and changes in blood or urine variables, and no correlations between ROMK in any of the blood or urine variables either at baseline or during FST. We conclude that oral co-administration of mineralocorticoid and KCl in PA patients is associated with reduced pendrin and enhanced ROMK in uEVs. Pendrin reduction during FST suggests that the suppressive effects of oral KCl may outweigh pendrin upregulation by mineralocorticoids.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Exosomes, Kidney

### Affiliations
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


