### Accession
PXD001126

### Title
Building high-quality assay libraries  for targeted analysis of SWATH MS data

### Description
Targeted proteomics by selected/multiple reaction monitoring or, on a larger scale, by SWATH MS relies on spectral reference libraries for peptide identification. Quality and coverage of these libraries are therefore of critical importance. Here we present a detailed protocol that has been successfully used to build high-quality, extensive reference libraries supporting targeted proteomics by SWATH MS. We describe each step of the process, including data acquisition by discovery proteomics, assertion of peptide-spectrum matches, generation of consensus spectra and compilation of mass spectrometric coordinates that uniquely define each targeted peptide. Crucial steps of this process such as FDR control, retention time normalization and handling of post-translationally modified peptides are discussed in detail. Finally we show how to use the library to extract SWATH data with the open-source software Skyline. The protocol takes 2-3 days to complete, depending on the extent of the library and the computational resources available.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast strain BY4741 MATa his3Δ leu2Δ met15Δ ura3Δ was grown in SD medium until they reached an A600 of 0.8. The culture media was quenched by addition of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to a final concentration of 6.25 % and the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1500 g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatants were discarded and the cell pellets were washed three times by centrifugation with cold (-20°C) acetone to remove interfering compounds. The final cell pellets were resolubilized in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and 5 mM EDTA and cells were disrupted by glass bead beating (5 times 5 minutes at 4°C). Yeast proteins were reduced with 12 mM dithiotreitol at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea and the proteins were digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a final enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide mixtures were desalted using reverse phase cartridges Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, Milford, MA) according to the following procedure; wet cartridge with 1 volume of 100% methanol, wash with 1 volume of 80% acetonitrile, equilibrate with 4 volumes of 0.1% formic acid, load acidified digest, wash 6 volumes of 0.1% formic acid, and elute with 1 volume of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resolubilized in 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
In the acompanying paper we describe a step-by-step protocol to generate high-quality assay libraries for targeted MS. The computational pipeline is suitable for large, organism-wide assay libraries as well as for experiment-specific assay libraries generated from as few as a single injection. All required tools are freely available through the TPP, ProteoWizard, and OpenMS software suites or provided as python package together with this protocol. The assay library generation workflow described here is optimized for SWATH MS. However, in combination with dedicated analysis tools, they are also applicable to other targeted MS techniques, including S/MRM.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomics by selected/multiple reaction monitoring (S/MRM) or, on a larger scale, by SWATH (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra) MS (mass spectrometry) typically relies on spectral reference libraries for peptide identification. Quality and coverage of these libraries are therefore of crucial importance for the performance of the methods. Here we present a detailed protocol that has been successfully used to build high-quality, extensive reference libraries supporting targeted proteomics by SWATH MS. We describe each step of the process, including data acquisition by discovery proteomics, assertion of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), generation of consensus spectra and compilation of MS coordinates that uniquely define each targeted peptide. Crucial steps such as false discovery rate (FDR) control, retention time normalization and handling of post-translationally modified peptides are detailed. Finally, we show how to use the library to extract SWATH data with the open-source software Skyline. The protocol takes 2-3 d to complete, depending on the extent of the library and the computational resources available.

### Keywords
Yeast, Spectral library, Swath, Assay library

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zürich Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zürich Switzerland


