### Accession
PXD039694

### Title
KSHV ORF18 TurboID in human iSLK cell lines

### Description
Beta- and gamma-herpesviruses transcribe their late genes in a manner distinct from host transcription. This process is directed by a complex of viral transcriptional activator proteins that hijack cellular RNA polymerase II, and an unknown set of additional factors. We employed proximity labeling to identify the ensemble of viral and cellular proteins dynamically associated with the KSHV late gene transcriptional complex late during infection.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of biotinylated proteins  50µl of Pierce Streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher) for each 4 mg sample were prewashed with RIPA lysis buffer. A total of 4 mg whole cell lysate was incubated with prewashed beads and rotated for 1 h at room temperature followed by rotation overnight at 4ºC. The beads were collected using a magnetic holder and washed as follows at room temperature: RIPA lysis buffer (twice, 2 min per wash), 1M KCl (once, 2 min), 0.1M sodium carbonate (once, 2 min), 2M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 (once, 10 sec), RIPA lysis buffer (twice, 2 min per wash). Samples for MS were resuspended in a final volume of 1 ml RIPA lysis buffer and sent to the Cristea Lab at Princeton University for analysis. Samples for Western blot analysis were eluted with 4X dye-free sample buffer (250 mM Tris–HCl (pH 6.8), 8% (w/v) SDS, 40% (v/v) glycerol, 20% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) and 10mM biotin.  TurboID sample preparation for MS Samples were stored at 4°C until ready to proceed with the streptavidin IP. Beads were transferred to a new LoBind tube (Amuza, Inc. (Eicom USA)), and the RIPA buffer was aspirated. Beads were then washed twice with 200 µL 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 and twice with 1 mL 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5. An on-bead digestion of the 4 mg sample was performed by resuspending the beads in 80 µL 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 with 1 mM DTT and 3.2 µg trypsin and incubating for 1 h at 25C while shaking at 600 rpm. Supernatant was transferred to a new LoBind tube, the beads were washed twice with 60 µl 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, and the washes were combined with the on-bead digest supernatant. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 25 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (Thermo Fisher) and 50 mM CAM (chloroacetamide) (Fisher Scientific) by shaking at 600 rpm in a thermomixer at 25C for 1.5 h. Samples were diluted 1:1 (v/v) with 50 mM Tris pH 8 and an additional 4 µg trypsin were added. Samples were digested overnight at 25C with shaking at 600 rpm. Samples were acidified to 1% TFA, incubated on ice for 15 min, and spun down at 4000 xg for 5 min at 4C. Samples were then desalted over C18 StageTips (Empore™ SPE Disks C18, Fisher Scientific). Samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 6 µL 1% formic acid/1% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition IP samples were run on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house 50 cm column (360 μm od, 75 μm id, Fisher Scientific) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 (120 Å pore size, 1.9 μm particle size, ESI Source Solutions). Peptides were separated over a 150 min gradient of 5% B to 30% B at a flow rate of 0.250 nl/min. MS1 scans were collected with the following parameters: 120,00 resolution, 30 ms MIT, 3e6 AGC, scan range 350 to 1800 m/z, and data collected in profile. MS2 scans were collected with the following parameters: 30,000 resolution, 150 ms MIT, 1e5 AGC, 1.2 m/z isolation window, loop count of 15, NCE of 28, 100.0 m/z fixed first mass, peptide match set to preferred, and data collected in profile at a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.  MS data analysis MS/MS spectra were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sequest HT was used to search spectra against a Uniprot database containing human (downloaded January 2021) and KSHV protein sequences (downloaded March 2021) and common contaminants. Offline mass recalibration was performed via the Spectrum Files RC node, and the Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free MS1 quantification. Fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages, a 4 ppm precursor mass tolerance, and a 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance were used in the search. Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that were allowed included the static modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and the dynamic modifications of oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine, loss of methionine plus acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, acetylation of lysine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) validation was done using the Percolator node and PTM sites were assigned in the ptmRS node. PSMs were assembled into peptide and protein identifications with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at both the peptide and protein level with at least 2 unique peptides identified per protein. Samples were normalized using the total peptide amount, protein abundances were calculated using summed abundances, and protein ratio calculations were performed using pairwise ratios.  Proteins were further filtered using Microsoft Excel. For a protein to be considered a putative interactor of ORF18, the protein had to have at least a twofold change in abundance when compared to all three control samples (WT - ligase, TurboID-NLS, and ORF18-TurboID - biotin) and had to have at least two peptides quantified in the ORF18-TurboID + biotin sample. The final interaction dataset contains the proteins that passed all filtering steps in all three replicates. Subcellular localization was assigned based on Uniprot annotations. Protein networks were generated using STRING (v.11) and Cytoscape (v.3.8.2). Gene ontology term analysis was carried out using the PANTHER Classification System.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;- and &#x3b3;-herpesviruses transcribe their late genes in a manner distinct from host transcription. This process is directed by a complex of viral transcriptional activator proteins that hijack cellular RNA polymerase II and an unknown set of additional factors. We employed proximity labeling coupled with mass spectrometry, followed by CRISPR and siRNA screening to identify proteins functionally associated with the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) late gene transcriptional complex. These data revealed that the catalytic subunit of the viral DNA packaging motor, ORF29, is both dynamically associated with the viral transcriptional activator complex and potentiates gene expression late in infection. Through genetic mutation and deletion of ORF29, we establish that its catalytic activity potentiates viral transcription and is required for robust accumulation of essential late proteins during infection. Thus, we propose an expanded role for ORF29 that encompasses its established function in viral packaging and its newly discovered contributions to viral transcription and late gene expression in KSHV.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Orf18, Kshv, Turboid

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA

### Submitter
Dawei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA


