### Accession
PXD038636

### Title
Fucosylation of HLA-DRB1 regulates CD4+T cell-mediated anti-melanoma immunity and enhances immunotherapy efficacy:  Fucoproteomic profiling of CD4 T cells

### Description
Immunotherapy efficacy is limited in melanoma, and combinations of immunotherapies with other modalities have yielded limited improvements but also adverse events requiring cessation of treatment. In addition to ineffective patient stratification, efficacy is impaired by paucity of intratumoral immune cells (itICs)—thus, effective strategies to safely increase itICs are needed. We report that dietary administration of L-fucose induces fucosylation and cell surface enrichment of the MHC-II protein HLA-DRB1 in melanoma cells, triggering CD4+T cell-mediated increases in ItICs and anti-tumor immunity, enhancing immune checkpoint blockade responses. Melanoma fucosylation and fucosylated HLA-DRB1 associate with intratumoral T cell abundance and anti-PD1 responder status in patient melanoma specimens, suggesting the potential use of melanoma fucosylation as a strategy for stratifying patients for immunotherapies. Our findings demonstrate that fucosylation is a key mediator of anti-tumor immunity, and importantly, suggest that L-fucose is a powerful agent for safely increasing ItICs and immunotherapy efficacy in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy human donor CD4+ T cells cultured and treated as indicated in the main text were harvested, lysed in standard RIPA buffer + protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and subjected to lectin pulldown using control or AAL beads as described above. The beads were washed with PBS and subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion. Proteins bound to beads were denatured in aqueous 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 95 degrees C for 5 minutes. Samples were reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60 degrees C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes, and digested overnight at 37 degrees C with 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio of trypsin (Worthington). The resulting peptide solution was acidified with a final concentration of 1% TFA. Samples were centrifuged at high speed and the supernatants were subjected to Ziptip purification (Millipore Ziptips, #Z720070). The eluted peptides were concentratedby vacuum centrifugation and suspended in 15 μL loading buffer (aqueous 5 % ACN and 0.1% TFA) prior to LC-MS/MS. Tryptic peptides were then analyzed using a nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an electrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. The peptide mixtures were loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 5 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted and separated on a 75 µm ID × 50 cm long C18 column, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) using a 90-minute gradient program at a flow rate of 300 nL/min of 2% to 3% solvent B over 5 minutes, 3 to 30% solvent B over 27 minutes, then 30% to 38.5% solvent B over 5 minutes, 38.5% to 90% solvent B over 3 minutes, then held at 90% for 3 minutes, followed by 90% to 2% solvent B in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 18 minutes. Solvent A was composed of 98% ddH2O and 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA. Solvent B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% ddH2O containing 0.1% FA. MS resolution was set at 70,000 and MS/MS resolution was set at 17,500 with max IT of 50 ms. The top sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) following each survey scan. MS and MS/MS scans were performed in an Orbitrap for accurate mass measurement using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) was used to identify and quantify the interacting proteins.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation were allowed as post-translational modifications.  The first search peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with 4.5 ppm mass tolerance for MaxQuant recalibrated peptides.  False discovery rate was set to 1%.  Similar searches were performed in Mascot for this upload.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Melanoma, Fucose, Cd4 t cells

### Affiliations
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Lau, PhD
Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


