### Accession
PXD014238

### Title
Quantitative proteome analysis of the Arabidopsis thaliana N-degron pathway E3 ligase mutant, prt1-1.

### Description
The N-degron pathway relates the half-life of a protein to its amino terminal (Nt) residue. Following cleavage of proteins by endopeptidases, new N-t amino acids are revealed and can be recognised by different E3 ligase enzymes that target the substrate proteins for degradation via the proteasome. Studies with artificial proteins have shown that PRT1 is an Arabidopsis thaliana E3 ligase with specificity for aromatic N-termini (phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan), but very little is known about its physiological roles and endogenous substrates. To gain insight into the impact of PRT1 on the proteome, we conducted a quantitative proteomic analysis, comparing leaf proteins from the prt1-1 loss of function mutant with those from wild type plants.

### Sample Protocol
Col-0 (wild type) and prt1-1 plants were grown in neutral days (12H 23OC/ 12H 18OC) for ~28 days. Proteins were extracted from the 5th, 6th and 7th of the true leaves from Col-0 (wild type) and prt1-1 plants in buffer containing 8M urea, pH 8.5 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1X Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1X PhosSTOP Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and 100µM MG-132 (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford’s reagent and input aliquots (250µg in 100µl) were reduced with 5 µL  200mM Tris[2-carboxylethyl] phosphine (TCEP) in 50mM TEAB to final concertation 10mM at 55 degree for 1 hour, alkylated with 5 µL  375mM iodoacetamide (IAA) to final 17mM for 30 minutes in the darkness and then diluted to total volume 800µl 50mM TEAB to obtain a final urea concentration of <1M. Proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Pellets were resuspended in 100µl 50mM TEAB and digested with 2µg trypsin (T8658-1VL, from bovine pancreas, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37oC for 700 rpm for 4 hours (Thermomixer Comfort, 5355 000.011, Eppendorf). An additional 2µg trypsin was added and reaction incubated overnight. Following quality control protein gel analysis, peptide concentration was determined using a PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (23275, Thermo Scientific to ensure equal peptide labelling per sample. 75µl of 100µg peptide aliquots were labelled using TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Regent Set (90110, Thermo Scientific). 5 biological replicates were performed: Col-0 was labelled with TMT10 -126, -127N, -127C, -128N, -128C and prt1-1 was labelled with -129 N, -129C, -130N, -130C, -131. The labelling reaction was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with 350rpm shaking and quenched using 8µl 5% hydroxylamine prior to storage in -80oC. Each TMT10 vial was combined, vortexed thoroughly, labelling test samples and 2 X 450µl experiment aliquots were dried down (Concentrator plus, 5305000.304, Eppendorf) and stored -80oC. Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography using a Waters reverse-phase nano column as described in Zhang et al. (2015). All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex 3000 RSL cnano system (Thermo Scientific) and a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the TAIR10 database using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer™ version 1.4.1.14 as described in Zhang et al. (2015) employing Top 10 peaks filter node and percolator nodes and reporter ions quantifier with Trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of one missed cleavage. The carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine and TMT isobaric labelling (+229.162 Da) of lysine and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications while, methionine oxidation (+15.996) was considered dynamic. Mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.06 Da for MS/MS. For quantification, purity correction factors were applied according to the product sheet and integration window tolerance was set to 2mmu. Each reporting ion was divided by the sum of total ion. The ratios were normalized by the medians. Statistical significance of quantification was assessed with an unpaired two-sample t-test on 8 degrees of freedom with multiplicity correction.

### Publication Abstract
N-degron pathways of ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (formerly known as the N-end rule pathway) control the stability of substrate proteins dependent on the amino-terminal (Nt) residue. Unlike yeast or mammalian N-recognin E3 ligases, which each recognize several different classes of Nt residues, in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, N-recognin functions of different N-degron pathways are carried out independently by PROTEOLYSIS (PRT)1, PRT6, and other unknown proteins. PRT1 recognizes type 2 aromatic Nt-destabilizing residues and PRT6 recognizes type 1 basic residues. These two N-recognin functions diverged as separate proteins early in the evolution of plants, before the conquest of the land. We demonstrate that loss of PRT1 function promotes the plant immune system, as mutant <i>prt1-1</i> plants showed greater apoplastic resistance than WT to infection by the bacterial hemi-biotroph <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv <i>tomato</i> (<i>Pst</i>) DC3000<i>.</i> Quantitative proteomics revealed increased accumulation of proteins associated with specific components of plant defense in the <i>prt1-1</i> mutant, concomitant with increased accumulation of salicylic acid. The effects of the <i>prt1</i> mutation were additional to known effects of <i>prt6</i> in influencing the immune system, in particular, an observed over-accumulation of pipecolic acid (Pip) in the double-mutant <i>prt1-1 prt6-1</i>. These results demonstrate a potential role for PRT1 in controlling aspects of the plant immune system and suggest that PRT1 limits the onset of the defense response via degradation of substrates with type 2 Nt-destabilizing residues<i>.</i>

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, N-degron pathway prt1 leaves tmt- labelling

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Sciences  Rothamsted Research, West  Common,   Harpenden, Herts, AL5 2JQ, UK
Plant Sciences and the Bioeconomy, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK

### Submitter
Hongtao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hongtao Zhang
Department of Plant Sciences  Rothamsted Research, West  Common,   Harpenden, Herts, AL5 2JQ, UK


