### Accession
PXD000738

### Title
SILAC-based proteomic quantification of chemoattractant induced cytoskeleton dynamics on a second to minute timescale

### Description
Cytoskeletal dynamics during cell behaviours ranging from endocytosis and exocytosis to cell division and movement is controlled by a complex network of signalling pathways, the full details of which are as yet unresolved. Here we show that SILAC-based proteomic methods can be used to characterise the rapid chemoattractant induced dynamic changes in the actin-myosin cytoskeleton and regulatory elements on a proteome wide scale with a second to minute timescale resolution. This approach provides novel insights in the ensemble kinetics of key cytoskeletal constituents and association of known and novel identified binding proteins. We validate the proteomic data by detailed microscopy based analysis of in vivo translocation dynamics for key signalling factors. This rapid large-scale proteomic approach may be applied to other situations where highly dynamic changes in complex cellular compartments are expected to play a key role.

### Sample Protocol
We have adapted the SILAC technique for Dictyostelium to obtain labelled and unlabelled cell populations. One population is stimulated with chemoattractant  (cAMP) and rapidly lysed at different times, while the lysates from the other unstimulated population are added in equal proportions to each time point to serve as an internal reference of protein abundance during mass-spectrometry analysis. We performed the chemoattractant stimulation experiments at 12ºC which slows down the responses and allows reproducible sample collection of the early time points. We prepared cell lysates before stimulation and at 1, 4  and 10 seconds after stimulation to catch the rising phase of the first response. The 20 and 60 seconds time points represent depolymerisation phase while 120 and 180 seconds time points represent the second phase of actin polymerisation. Crude cytoskeletal preparations were fractionated using SDS-PAGE followed by tryptic in-gel digest and peptide extraction.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed using LTQ-Velos Orbitrap tandem mass-spectrometer and the data processing and quantification was done using MaxQuant version 1.0.13.13 and Mascot Daemon version 2.3.2. Data were analysed with the following settings: 2 missed cleavages allowed, enzyme used was trypsin, 0.5Da mass tolerance for fragment ions, maximum 0.05 PEP value for peptide identification. One fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C); and few variable modifications were selected: Oxidation (M); Acetylation (N-term); Phosphorylation (S,T,Y). Protein ratios were determined based on a minimum of 2 peptide ratios using razor and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoskeletal dynamics during cell behaviours ranging from endocytosis and exocytosis to cell division and movement is controlled by a complex network of signalling pathways, the full details of which are as yet unresolved. Here we show that SILAC-based proteomic methods can be used to characterize the rapid chemoattractant-induced dynamic changes in the actin-myosin cytoskeleton and regulatory elements on a proteome-wide scale with a second to minute timescale resolution. This approach provides novel insights in the ensemble kinetics of key cytoskeletal constituents and association of known and novel identified binding proteins. We validate the proteomic data by detailed microscopy-based analysis of in vivo translocation dynamics for key signalling factors. This rapid large-scale proteomic approach may be applied to other situations where highly dynamic changes in complex cellular compartments are expected to play a key role.

### Keywords
Cytoskeleton, Silac

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelis J Weijer
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


