### Accession
PXD001619

### Title
Dynamics of the physiology, metabolome and proteins during the circadian cycle of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 under culturing conditions relevant for mass culturing

### Description
Here, we present the results of a study of the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, cultured in a lab-scale photobioreactor simulating physiological conditions present during large-scale culturing. The culture is flushed with N2 and CO2 without additional O2. This leads to an anoxic environment during the dark period. A circadian illumination regime of 12 h light/12 h dark is applied. We show that formation of biomass strictly follows the availability of light. The storage compound glycogen reached a maximum level of ~40 % of the cells gram dry weight already before the end of the light period. The subsequent consumption of glycogen during the dark period essentially only started in the last quarter of the dark period, which suggests anticipatory effects, possibly governed by the circadian clock, in order to prepare the cellular machinery for efficient energy usage. Most intracellular metabolite levels, as determined by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance analysis, from samples close to the transition points of light, change only mildly. Nevertheless, a distinct metabolic profile is evident from the cells sampled at different time points. Likewise, protein analysis by mass spectrometry shows moderate dynamics for the majority of the identified proteins. Both analyses suggest that in order to change the flux through a metabolic network the relative amounts of the metabolites and proteins do not need to change drastically, at least for the time points close to the change of the light regime.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling from the PBRs for protein analysis was performed as follows: 10 ml of cell suspension from the vessel were harvested via a sampling port with a syringe into a 15 ml tube (on ice) that already contained 5 ml of ice-cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka BioUltra >99.5 %). For samples from the dark period the tubes were thoroughly covered with aluminium foil. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 6000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. centrifuge). The supernatant was discarded completely and cells were re-suspended in 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and frozen rapidly in liquid N2 and stored at -20 °C. Prior to the opening by sonication, the cell suspension was supplemented with 0.1 % (w/v) Rapigest SF (Waters). Cell lysis was performed by 1 round of sonication with a micro-tip (duration for 5 min, output strength of 5, and a 50 % duty cycle by a probe-sonicator (Branson) on melting ice. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 14000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min (in a pre-chilled table top-centrifuge). The protein content of the supernatant, containing the soluble fraction of the crude cell free extract, was immediately determined by a BCA assay using bovine serum albumin as the standard according to the manufacturers protocol (Pierce). Lysates were brought to same concentrations (0.5 mg/ml) by diluting with 0.1 % Rapigest SF in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 60 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at ambient temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was initiated by addition of modified trypsin gold grade (Promega, Madison WI) at a 1:50 protease:protein (ratio by weight), followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Following digestion, breakdown of the acid-labile detergent (Rapigest SF) was induced by the addition of 1 % trifluoroacetic acid to achieve a pH<2 and subsequent incubation at 37 °C for 45 min. The peptide solutions were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min and supernatant was collected. Prior to analyses a protein digest MassPREP Protein Digestion Standard (Waters Corporation) was added, at 1:1 dilution to the sample (50 fmol/µl alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1) and enolase (ENO) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae).   Nanoscale LC separations of tryptic peptides were performed with a NanoAcquity system (Waters Corporation). Samples were loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 µm, 2 cm x 180 µm trap column (Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min prior to separation on a Bridged Ethyl Hybrid C18 1.7 µm, 25 cm x 75 µm analytical reversed phase column (Waters Corporation) by application of a 90 minute gradient from 1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid to 40 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid at a column flow rate of 0.300 µl/min. Analysis of eluting tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt G2 quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) equipped with a nanolockspray source (Waters Corporation) fitted with a pico-tip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Operated values: around 3 kV capillary voltage, cone voltage of 40 eV, a source temperature of 90 °C and TOF-voltage set at 7 kV. The collision gas used was argon, maintained at a constant pressure of 2.0x10-3 mbar in the collision cell. The lock mass, [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B, was delivered from the auxiliary pump of the NanoAcquity system at a concentration of 100 fmol/µl at 0.5 µl/min to the reference sprayer of the nanolockspray source which was sampled every 120 seconds. The data were post-acquisition lock-mass corrected using the monoisotopic mass of the doubly charged precursor of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B. Accurate mass precursor and fragment ion LC-MS data were collected in data independent LCMSE mode of acquisition [14, 15]. Samples of the two Bioreactors, each sampled over 2 days at five time-points (total of 20 samples) were injected twice (technical replicates) to ascertain the reproducibility of the mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data were processed using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER version 2.5 (PLGS 2.5, Waters Corporation). Parameter settings: digest reagent trypsin, allow 1 ‘missed cleavage’, search tolerances automatic, typically 5 ppm for precursor and 15 ppm for product ions, fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modification methionine oxidation. Protein identifications were obtained searching the entries of a Synechocystis proteome database (UniProt), with ADH1 and ENO1 of S. cerevisiae appended as internal standard to address technical variation and allow for absolute quantitation of protein amounts. Estimation of false-positive identification rates was done by searching a randomized version of the abovementioned human protein database generated within PLGS 2.5. HI3 peptide quantitation was used to quantify fmoles (label free absolute quantitation) of each protein measured by use of the known amounts of the added Massprep standards [16]. Data were exported as csv-files and fmoles determined by HI3 peptide quantitation were normalized by summed fmoles determined for each LC-MS run to adjust for variability in sample content and instrument performance. A protein was required to be detected a minimum of 9 (out of 40) injections to be regarded as reliably identified and quantified, which lead to identification of 357 Synechocystis proteins with a false discovery rate of <1% as determined by the number of identifications from the randomized database (data not shown). As the data acquired needed to reflect the protein profile over the whole time series to probe the diurnal rhythm of Synechocystis, we applied a second round of selection criteria: i.e. proteins needed to be detected over all time points measured, and be detected in both technical replicates for both the PBRs. This provided a list of 176 proteins for which the normalized fmoles (nfmol) are shown in Supplemental material table S1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Lcmse, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr J.M.F.G. Aerts
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam


