### Accession
PXD002969

### Title
Arabidopsis FTSH11 mutant

### Description
The membrane-integrated metallo-protease FtsH11 of Arabidopsis thaliana is proposed to be dual targeted to mitochondria and chloroplasts. A bleached phenotype was observed in ftsh11 grown at long days or continuous light, pointing to disturbances in the chloroplast. Under these growth conditions the morphology of the chloroplast became drastically altered, accompanied by a drop of NPQ, and the amount of PSI decreased relative to PSII. The abundance of plastidic proteins, especially of photosynthetic proteins, was altered in ftsh11 even during growth in normal conditions and short days. FtsH11 is crucial for chloroplast structure and function during growth in prolonged photoperiod . In chloroplasts FtsH11 was found to be located exclusively in the chloroplast envelope. Thanks to proteomic analyses, the Tic22-like protein and YGGT, both chloroplast proteins of unknown function, are proposed to be the substrates of FtsH11 .

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplasts were isolated according to Seigneurin-Berny, D., et al. (Purification of Intact Chloroplasts from Arabidopsis and Spinach Leaves by Isopycnic Centrifugation, in Current Protocols in Cell Biology. 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.). Envelope membranes for mass spectrometric analysis were isolated as described in Sun, X., et al. (A chloroplast envelope-bound PHD transcription factor mediates chloroplast signals to the nucleus. Nat Commun, 2011. 2: p. 477). Using SDS-PAGE, for envelope fractions, the migration was stopped between the stacking and the separating gels, so that the protein sample was concentrated in a fine band. For the chloroplast fractions, the migration was left for about 4 cm; consequently five bands, equally distributed , were cut out. After SDS PAGE of total chloroplasts or envelope fractions the gel bands were manually excised and cut in pieces before being washed by 6 successive incubations of 15 min in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and in 25mM NH4HCO3 containing 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100 % acetonitrile and incubated for 45 min at 53°C with 10 mM DTT in 25mM NH4HCO3 and for 35 min in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25mM NH4HCO3. Alkylation was stopped by adding 10 mM DTT in 25mM NH4HCO3 and mixing for 10 min. Gel pieces were then washed again by incubation in 25 mM NH4HCO3 before dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. 0.15 µg of modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gel pieces for an overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were then extracted from gel pieces in three 15 min sequential extraction steps in 30 µL of 50% acetonitrile, 30 µL of 5% formic acid and finally 30µL of 100% acetonitrile. The pooled supernatants were then dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification was performed using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 (Cox J & Mann M, 2008, Nat. Biotechnol.) and PERSEUS 1.4.1.3. Spectra were searched against TAIR database (TAIR V10 December 2014 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable), oxidation (M, variable) and deamidation (NQ, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 2. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. For chloroplast samples, as five bands of gel were cut out for a given sample, the LFQ method was used. For the envelope samples, the iBAQ values were considered. Either LFQ or iBAQ values were calculated using MaxQuant as previously described (Luber CA et al., 2010, Immunity ; Schwanhausser B et al., 2011, Nature), from MS intensity of unique peptides. For chloroplast samples, only proteins with two LFQ values for a given group (WT or mutant), taking into account the three biological replicates, were considered for the statistical analysis. For the 5 fractions of a same biologic replicate, LFQ intensities were added for the same protein. For envelope samples, only proteins with two iBAQ values for a given group (WT or mutant), taking into account the three replicates, were considered for the statistical analysis. The following steps were performed using the Perseus toolbox available in the MaxQuant environment.  After log2 transformation of LFQ or iBAQ values and data imputation (replacing missing values by normal distribution as described in (Deeb SJ et al., 2012, Mol Cell Proteomics), protein expression differences were identified using t-testing (welch t-test) with a Permutation-based FDR to correct for multiple hypothesis testing (FDR threshold value set to 0.01 or 0.05). Only proteins detected by the test were considered as differentially expressed between the Wt and ftsh11 mutant samples.

### Publication Abstract
The membrane-integrated metalloprotease FtsH11 of Arabidopsis thaliana is proposed to be dual-targeted to mitochondria and chloroplasts. A bleached phenotype was observed in ftsh11 grown at long days or continuous light, pointing to disturbances in the chloroplast. Within the chloroplast, FtsH11 was found to be located exclusively in the envelope. Two chloroplast-located proteins of unknown function (Tic22-like protein and YGGT-A) showed significantly higher abundance in envelope membranes and intact chloroplasts of ftsh11 and therefore qualify as potential substrates for the FtsH11 protease. No proteomic changes were observed in the mitochondria of 6-week-old ftsh11 compared with wild type, and FtsH11 was not immunodetected in these organelles. The abundance of plastidic proteins, especially of photosynthetic proteins, was altered even during standard growth conditions in total leaves of ftsh11. At continuous light, the amount of photosystem I decreased relative to photosystem II, accompanied by a drastic change of the chloroplast morphology and a drop of non-photochemical quenching. FtsH11 is crucial for chloroplast structure and function during growth in prolonged photoperiod.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ftsh, Protease, Photoperiod, Photosynthesis, Light adaptation

### Affiliations
Exploring the Dynamics of Proteomes laboratory; UGA/CEA/Inserm U1038 CEA/Grenoble 17 Avenue des Martyrs F-38054 Grenoble
CEA

### Submitter
Sabine Brugiere

### Lab Head
Dr ferro  
Exploring the Dynamics of Proteomes laboratory; UGA/CEA/Inserm U1038 CEA/Grenoble 17 Avenue des Martyrs F-38054 Grenoble


