### Accession
PXD010249

### Title
SERUM_Protein expression profiling of serum and lungs at different stages of metastatic development in a human triple negative breast cancer xenograft model - Part 2

### Description
The main objective of this study was to evaluate the protein expression profiling of serum and lungs at different stages of metastatic development in a human triple negative MDA-MB

### Sample Protocol
Mouse serum samples and lung tissue (approximately 25 mg) were solubilised in 4 % SDS / 0.1 M Tris-HCL with a blender before heating at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were sonicated 5 cycles at 30 % amplitude for 30 seconds to shear nucleic acids. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16000 x g for 10 min. Further processing of each protein sample (30 µg) for LC-MS was done according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. Q-Excative HF

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent-acquisition mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The scan range was 375-1500 m/z with resolution R = 120,000, and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. The MS/MS acquisition for the top 12 most intense peptides with intensity threshold >5e4, charge states 2 or more, were isolated to a target AGC value of 1e5 with IT 110 ms and resolution R = 60,000. The isolation window was 1.6 m/z, the isolation offset 1.3 m/z and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 20 seconds.  The MaxQuant module (version 1.5.2.2) with the integrated Andromeda search engine was used for identification and label-free protein quantification of LC-MS data. The raw MS data were searched against SwissProt Mus musculus database version 2016 01 (16747 entries)) with MaxQuant´s settings for label-free protein quantification

### Publication Abstract
The main objective of this study was to identify single proteins or protein networks that might be used as diagnostic biomarkers or for therapeutic purposes by evaluating the protein expression profiling of plasma and lungs at different stages of metastatic development in a human triple negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenograft model. MDA-MB-231 tumour cells were injected into the mammary fat pads on one side of the groin area. The mice were sacrificed day 19 (pre-metastases) and day 54 (metastases). Non-injected mice served as controls. Plasma was collected and lungs harvested for both immunohistochemistry and protein analysis. The most striking observation in plasma was the initial reduction in haptoglobin level at the pre-metastatic stage, to a following significant increase in haptoglobin level at the metastatic stage, with a more than 4000-fold increase from the pre-metastatic to the metastatic phase. A corresponding increase in haptoglobin level was also found in lung tissue after metastasis. Fibrinogen beta chain also had a similar change in expression level in plasma as haptoglobin, however not as prominent. There were also changes in plasma thrombospondin-4 and transferrin receptor protein 1 levels, from an increase at the pre-metastatic stage, to a significant fall when metastases were established. This suggests that especially changes in haptoglobin, but also fibrinogen beta chain, thrombospondin-4 and transferrin receptor protein 1 is indicative of metastasis, at least in this breast cancer model, and should be further evaluated as general breast cancer biomarkers.

### Keywords
Serum, Lcms, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine Faculty of medicine and Dentistry University of Bergen Service box 7804 N-5020 Bergen Norway
University

### Submitter
Frode Selheim

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Stuhr
Department of Biomedicine Faculty of medicine and Dentistry University of Bergen Service box 7804 N-5020 Bergen Norway


