### Accession
PXD005408

### Title
A novel tool, Multiple Marker Abundance Profiling, uses Selected Reaction Monitoring and data-dependent acquisition for rapid estimation of organelle abundance in subcellular samples.

### Description
Methods were investigated that would deliver rapid and semi-quantitative analysis of the subcellular composition of Arabidopsis samples, as the standard technique for this i.e. immunoblotting is difficult to quantify and relies on a very few protein targets, whose responses to developmental or environmental cues are often not known.  Spectral counts from shotgun analysis of different Arabidopsis tissues, cells or growth stages were compared to selected reaction monitoring (SRM) analyses of the same samples. Results were further compared to a novel protein abundance scoring method, MASCP Gator scoring, described in this study for the first time. The latter is reliant on previously collated public proteomics data and so provides an estimate of protein abundance even in the absence of de-novo experimentation. This scoring method is presented as an online tool, Multiple Marker Abundance Profiling (MMAP), available at http:SUBA.live. This submission comprises the shotgun data from this study. SRM results are available in a separate submission: http://www.peptideatlas.org/PASS/PASS00906

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was freeze-dried and homogenized in a ball-miller for 3 min at 30Hz. Proteins were extracted 125 mM Tris-HCl, 7% (w/v) SDS, 10% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and a plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich), precipitated according to Wessel and Flugge (1983), resuspended in  8M urea, reduced in 5mM DTT, alkylated in 100mM IAA, adjusted to pH 8 and digested overnight at 37C at a 1:10 trypsin: protein ratio after dilution to 1M urea. Peptides were purified and concentrated on C18 columns.  Data-dependent acquisition was performed on 1ug proteins using one of two protocols.  1: A Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters, USA), incorporating a C18 reversed phase column (Waters, 100 μ m×100 mm, 1.7 μ m particle, BEH130C18, column temperature 40 °C). Peptides were analyzed over a 150 min gradient using buffers A (as above) and B as above). Buffer B was increased from 2% to 10% over 2 min, to 40% over 110 min, then to 85% over 1 min, maintained at 85% for 10 min and equilibrated for 14 min with 2% buffer B.   2: ALC− MS/MS by nano-ESI-Q-TOF (TripleTOF 5600 System, AB SCIEX) coupled to an Eksigent nano LC system (AB Sciex). Peptide samples were injected onto a Pepmap100 μ-guard column (Dionex-LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) via a Famos Autosampler (Dionex-LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) and washed for 10 min with Buffer A  flowing at 15 μL/min. Peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, 300 nL/ min flow rate; Dionex-LC Packings) and into the TripleTOF 5600 via a gradient consisting of initial starting condition of 5% buffer B increasing B to 35% B over 60 min. Subsequently, B was increased to 90% over 3 min and held for 15 min followed by a ramp back down to 5% B over 3 min where it was held for 15 min to re-equilibrate the column to original conditions. Peptides were introduced to the mass spectrometer from the LC using a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX) with a nanotip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) operating in positive-ion mode (2400 V). Buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) Buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid)

### Data Protocol
Data were interrogated with the Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) with a peptide tolerance of ±50 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of ±0.1 Da.  Oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation (C) were used as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed. Searches were performed against Arabidopsis proteins (TAIR10 database containing keratin, trypsin, BSA contaminants) as detailed above. A false discovery rate and ions score or expected cutoff were calculated for each experiment using the Decoy feature of Mascot on the MS/MS ions search interface and a significance threshold corresponding to a false discovery rate of ≤5% (p < 0.05) was used to determine the ion score cut-off for peptide matches.

### Publication Abstract
Measuring changes in protein or organelle abundance in the cell is an essential, but challenging aspect of cell biology. Frequently-used methods for determining organelle abundance typically rely on detection of a very few marker proteins, so are unsatisfactory. In silico estimates of protein abundances from publicly available protein spectra can provide useful standard abundance values but contain only data from tissue proteomes, and are not coupled to organelle localization data. A new protein abundance score, the normalized protein abundance scale (NPAS), expands on the number of scored proteins and the scoring accuracy of lower-abundance proteins in Arabidopsis. NPAS was combined with subcellular protein localization data, facilitating quantitative estimations of organelle abundance during routine experimental procedures. A suite of targeted proteomics markers for subcellular compartment markers was developed, enabling independent verification of in silico estimates for relative organelle abundance. Estimation of relative organelle abundance was found to be reproducible and consistent over a range of tissues and growth conditions. In silico abundance estimations and localization data have been combined into an online tool, multiple marker abundance profiling, available in the SUBA4 toolbox (http://suba.live).

### Keywords
Subcellular proteomics, Arabidopsis, Organelle, Shotgun, Quantitation, Srm

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Dept. Biochemistry, Cambridge University, UK

### Submitter
Harriet Parsons

### Lab Head
Dr Harriet Parsons
Dept. Biochemistry, Cambridge University, UK


