### Accession
PXD036868

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling of estrogenic sexual endocrine perturbation in zebrafish embryos

### Description
Endocrine disruption (ED) can trigger far-reaching effects on environmental populations, justifying a refusal of market approval for chemicals with ED properties. For the assessment of ED effects on development and reproduction, regulatory decisions mostly rely on apical endpoints from in vivo testing with adult animals. Here, we present a rapid and reproducible data dependent proteomics approach for identifying comprehensive molecular fingerprints interfering with the sexual endocrine system in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos as an alternative to animal testing. For this, we have analysed ethinylestradiol as model substances for estrogenic perturbation in a modified zebrafish embryo toxicity test (zFET). These signatures allow for a definition of solid biomarkers as tools in screening approaches and for integration in chronic toxicity studies for identifying suspect ED substances, in the fish early life-stage test (OECD TG 210).

### Sample Protocol
Ethinylestradiol (CAS: 57-63-6) was tested as a model substance for estrogen inducing activity. In a modified version of the zebrafish embryo toxicity test (OECD 236), fifteen (15) fertilized eggs were exposed to two different sub lethal concentrations of ethinylestradiol for 96 hours under semi-static conditions. The test was performed in triplicate. This comprised of a low exposure (LE), high exposure (HE) and a non-treated control (NC) group. At 96 hours post fertilization (hpf), 10 larvae were randomly picked for each sample and pooled for RNA and protein extraction with NucleoSpin RNA/Protein kit (Macherey-Nagel). Digested proteins were labelled with isobaric TMT tags using 3 of a 6-plex TMT kit (ThermoFisherScientific), following the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative proteomic data were acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were loaded onto the ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column (waters, Massachusetts, USA) for 3mins at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After trapping, the peptides were eluted onto a 25 cm long ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 separation column (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) and separated by elution using a linear gradient from 3 to 97 % B in 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile A= 0.1 % FA in water, mobile B= 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN). The separated peptides were ionized by electrospray (nanospray ion source, ThermoFisher Scientific) while applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275 °C. The MS survey scans were acquired at 375-1500 m/z range, using a resolving power of 70,000 at 200 m/z for the MS and 35,000 for MS2 scans. Precursor ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 7+ and intensity threshold above 2E4 were sampled. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds within a 10-ppm window. The automatic gain control and maximum injection time for MS2 spectra were set at 1E5 and 200 ms, respectively. MS calibration was performed using the LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC–MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 software against the reference proteome of zebrafish and common contaminant proteins along with a reverse data for false discovery calculations. A precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm and the integration of fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were applied in the database search. Cysteine carbamidomethyl, peptide N-terminus TMT6plex and lysine TMT6plex were set as static modifications, whereas the acetylation of protein N-terminal and the oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. Protein significance was analyzed using MSstatsTMT package (version 2.4.0) in R statistical software (Choi et al., 2014). The proteinGroup and evidence tables were utilized for this analysis. Only unique peptides with no importation of missing values were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Endocrine disruptors (EDs), capable of modulating the sex hormone system of an organism, can exert long-lasting negative effects on reproduction in both humans and the environment. For these reasons, the properties of EDs prevent a substance from being approved for marketing. However, regulatory testing to evaluate endocrine disruption is time-consuming, costly, and animal-intensive. Here, we combined sublethal zebrafish embryo assays with transcriptomics and proteomics for well-characterized endocrine disrupting reference compounds to identify predictive biomarkers for sexual endocrine disruption in this model. Using RNA and protein gene expression fingerprints from two different sublethal exposure concentrations, we identified specific signatures and impaired biological processes induced by ethinylestradiol, tamoxifen, methyltestosterone and flutamide 96&#xa0;h post fertilization (hpf). Our study promotes vtg1 as well as cyp19a1b, fam20cl, lhb, lpin1, nr1d1, fbp1b, and agxtb as promising biomarker candidates for identifying and differentiating estrogen and androgen receptor agonism and antagonism. Evaluation of these biomarkers for pre-regulatory zebrafish embryo-based bioassays will help identify endocrine disrupting hazards of compounds at the molecular level. Such approaches additionally provide weight-of-evidence for the identification of putative EDs and may contribute significantly to a reduction in animal testing in higher tier studies.

### Keywords
Endocrine disruptors, Zebrafish embryos, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 | 57392 Schmallenberg | Germany
Fraunhofer IME

### Submitter
Steve Ayobahan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sebastian Eilebrecht
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Auf dem Aberg 1 | 57392 Schmallenberg | Germany


