### Accession
PXD035770

### Title
Generation of fibronectin fragments by pancreatic trypsin: a physiological mechanism hampering PDAC progression.

### Description
In this study we demonstrate that spheroids isolated from normal pancreas and co-trasplanted with PDAC orthotopically in mouse pancreas , inhibited tumor growth. Fibronectin proteolytic fragments generated by trypsin and released by pancreatic spheroids, were responsible for of the observed effect. Specifically, in vitro analysis revealed that FAK and FGFR1 signalling were  turned off in tumor cells inducing tumor cell detachment, indicating a cooperative activity between the two signalling pathways.  This mutual relationship was confirmed by the addition of FGF2 that reversed both FGFR1 and FAK defosphorilation and promoted PDAC cell adhesion and proliferation.  Mass spectrometry proteomic analysis and the use of mAb allowed the identification of the FN fragments belonging to the  Type III domain responsible of  PDAC inhibition. Finally, the effect of FAK and FGFR signalling inhibitors was tested in combination both in vivo and in vitro to emulate the effect of normal pancreatic spheroids on PDAC growth.

### Sample Protocol
An equal amount of proteins for each sample was separated by precast 4-12% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Genscript) under reducing conditions and stained with GelCode blue stain reagent (Thermo Scientific). Each gel lane was manually cut into 10 bands (Supplemental Figure 4). Excised bands were crushed into small fragments and submitted to in-gel trypsin digestion and peptide extraction using a published procedure (PMID: 22387315). Peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a DESI Omni Spray (Prosolia, Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) used in nanospray mode and a nano-flow LC system (Easy-nLC II, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Peptides were separated on a picofrit 25 cm x 0.75 µm i.d. column (New Objective, PF360-75-10- N-5, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA) packed in-house with C18 beads. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 2-60% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Label-free proteomics was done in data-dependent acquisition (DDA), MS1 spectra were acquired from 400 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 70000. The 20 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation at 30 eV collision energy and the corresponding MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 using singly charged precursor ions and ions of undefinable charged states were excluded from fragmentation

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to analyze MS raw files. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (Version 2016) and a database of common contaminants (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (IAA) and methionine oxidation were applied as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one razor peptide. A minimum ratio of 1 was required for valid quantification events in MaxQuant’s Label-Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fak, Trypsin, Pdac, Fgfr, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
Istituto ricerche farmacologiche mario negri

### Submitter
Laura Brunelli

### Lab Head
Dr Roberta Pastorelli
Istituto ricerche farmacologiche mario negri


