### Accession
PXD000057

### Title
MS characterization of spidroin-1

### Description
For MS characterization of major ampullate spidroin-1 from the three species of  Nephila clavipes, edulis and madagascariensis,  an experimental approach was developed combining 2-DE with multiple proteolytic in-gel digestion (trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin,  proteinase K, subtilisin and proteinase 10) followed by NanoLC and mass spectrometry analysis using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) for fragmentation. MASCOT searches were done by using the MASCOT 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against database for protein identification and post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
For MS characterization of major ampullate spidroin-1 from the three species of  Nephila clavipes, edulis and madagascariensis,  an experimental approach was developed combining 2-DE with multiple proteolytic in-gel digestion (trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin,  proteinase K, subtilisin and proteinase 10) followed by NanoLC and mass spectrometry analysis using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) for fragmentation. MASCOT searches were done by using the MASCOT 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against database for protein identification and post-translational modifications.

### Data Protocol
For MS characterization of major ampullate spidroin-1 from the three species of  Nephila clavipes, edulis and madagascariensis,  an experimental approach was developed combining 2-DE with multiple proteolytic in-gel digestion (trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin,  proteinase K, subtilisin and proteinase 10) followed by NanoLC and mass spectrometry analysis using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) for fragmentation. MASCOT searches were done by using the MASCOT 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against database for protein identification and post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Most reports about the 3-D structure of spidroin-1 have been proposed for the protein in solid state or for individual domains of these proteins. A gel-based mass spectrometry strategy using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) fragmentation methods was used to completely sequence spidroins-1A and -1B and to assign a series of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on to the spidroin sequences. A total of 15 and 16 phosphorylation sites were detected on spidroin-1A and -1B, respectively. In this work, we present the nearly complete amino acid sequence of spidroin-1A and -1B, including the nonrepetitive N- and C-terminal domains and a highly repetitive central core. We also described a fatty acid layer surrounding the protein fibers and PTMs in the sequences of spidroin-1A and -1B, including phosphorylation. Thus, molecular models for phosphorylated spidroins were proposed in the presence of a mixture fatty acids/water (1:1) and submitted to molecular dynamics simulation. The resulting models presented high content of coils, a higher percentage of &#x3b1;-helix, and an almost neglected content of 310-helix than the previous models. Knowledge of the complete structure of spidroins-1A and -1B would help to explain the mechanical features of silk fibers. The results of the current investigation provide a foundation for biophysical studies of the mechanoelastic properties of web-silk proteins.

### Keywords
Nanolc-esi-cid/etd-ms/ms, Phosphorylation, Nephila sp., Post-translational modifications, Major ampullate silk, Spidroin-1

### Affiliations
São Paulo State University - UNESP
Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria and Center of the Study of Social Insects, Department of Biology, São Paulo State University, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil.

### Submitter
José Roberto Aparecido dos Santos-Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr José Roberto Aparecido dos Santos Pinto
Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria and Center of the Study of Social Insects, Department of Biology, São Paulo State University, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil.


