### Accession
PXD005357

### Title
Cystinosin turnover -  Impact of cystinosin glycosylation on protein stability by differential dynamic SILAC

### Description
Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, characterized by an intra-Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, characterized by an intra-lysosomal accumulation of cystine. The causative gene for cystinosis is CTNS, which encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal proton-driven cystine transporter. Over 100 mutations are reported, leading to different severity of the disease, often in correlation with cystinosin residual activity as a transporter and with maintenance of its protein-protein interactions. In this study we focus on ΔITILELP the only mutation reported, in some cases, to lead to severe forms, inconsistently with its residual transported activity. ΔITILELP is a deletion that eliminates a consensus site on N66, one of the 7 glycosylation sites of the protein. Our hypothesis is that ΔITILELP mutant is less stable and undergoes faster degradation. Our dynamic SILAC study clearly shows that wild-type cystinosin is very stable while ΔITILELP is degraded three times faster than the wild-type protein. Additional lysosome inhibition experiments confirm ΔITILELP instability and show that the degradation is mainly lysosomal. We can observe that at the lysosome, ΔITILELP is still capable of interacting with the V-ATPase complex and some members of the mTOR pathway like the wild-type protein. Intriguingly, our interactomic and immunofluorescence studies show that ΔITILELP is partially retained at the ER. We propose that ΔITILELP mutation causes protein misfolding, ER retention and incapability to be processed in the Golgi, as we demonstrate that ΔITILELP carries high mannose glycans on all its 6 remaining glycosylation sites. Altogether, we show that the high turnover of ITILELP, due to its immature glycosylation state in combination with low transport activity, might be responsible for the phenotype observed in some patients. lysosomal accumulation of cystine. The causative gene for cystinosis is CTNS, which encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal proton-driven cystine transporter. Over 100 mutations are reported, leading to different severity of the disease, often in correlation with cystinosin residual activity as a transporter and with maintenance of its protein-protein interactions. In this study we focus on ΔITILELP the only mutation reported, in some cases, to lead to severe forms, inconsistently with its residual transported activity. ΔITILELP is a deletion that eliminates a consensus site on N66, one of the 7 glycosylation sites of the protein. Our hypothesis is that ΔITILELP mutant is less stable and undergoes faster degradation. Our dynamic SILAC study clearly shows that wild-type cystinosin is very stable while ΔITILELP is degraded three times faster than the wild-type protein. Additional lysosome inhibition experiments confirm ΔITILELP instability and show that the degradation is mainly lysosomal. We can observe that at the lysosome, ΔITILELP is still capable of interacting with the V-ATPase complex and some members of the mTOR pathway like the wild-type protein. Intriguingly, our interactomic and immunofluorescence studies show that ΔITILELP is partially retained at the ER. We propose that ΔITILELP mutation causes protein misfolding, ER retention and incapability to be processed in the Golgi, as we demonstrate that ΔITILELP carries high mannose glycans on all its 6 remaining glycosylation sites. Altogether, we show that the high turnover of ITILELP, due to its immature glycosylation state in combination with low transport activity, might be responsible for the phenotype observed in some patients.

### Sample Protocol
For turnover studies, immunoprecipitated protein samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE on 10% gel and large protein bands corresponding to cystinosin were excised. In-gel tryspin digestion was performed as described before (5). Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis of in-gel digested samples was performed on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 10% acetonitrile, and were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Dionex), followed by separation on the analytical 50 cm nano column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient from 5% to 40% B over 38 min and were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with a maximum injection time of 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 software (ThermoScientific, San Jose, CA) and searched against the Mus musculus Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot database v.5/7/2012 (16331 entries) integrated with the sequences of the EGFP cystinosin WT and EGFP cystinosin mutants. Search parameters included fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Label:13C(6) (K), Label:13C(6) (R), and two missed cleavages. Enzyme was trypsin, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was ± 2 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was ± 0.05 Da. The identification validation was performed using percolator, allowing between 1% and 5% of target FDR for peptide based on q-Value and determined by target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder characterized by intralysosomal accumulation of cystine. The causative gene for cystinosis is <i>CTNS</i>, which encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal proton-driven cystine transporter. Over 100 mutations have been reported, leading to varying disease severity, often in correlation with residual cystinosin activity as a transporter and with maintenance of its protein-protein interactions. In this study, we focus on the &#x394;ITILELP mutation, the only mutation reported that sometimes leads to severe forms, inconsistent with its residual transported activity. &#x394;ITILELP is a deletion that eliminates a consensus site on N66, one of the protein's seven glycosylation sites. Our hypothesis was that the &#x394;ITILELP mutant is less stable and undergoes faster degradation. Our dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) study clearly showed that wild-type cystinosin is very stable, whereas &#x394;ITILELP is degraded three times more rapidly. Additional lysosome inhibition experiments confirmed &#x394;ITILELP instability and showed that the degradation was mainly lysosomal. We observed that in the lysosome, &#x394;ITILELP is still capable of interacting with the V-ATPase complex and some members of the mTOR pathway, similar to the wild-type protein. Intriguingly, our interactomic and immunofluorescence studies showed that &#x394;ITILELP is partially retained at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We proposed that the &#x394;ITILELP mutation causes protein misfolding, ER retention and inability to be processed in the Golgi apparatus, and we demonstrated that &#x394;ITILELP carries high-mannose glycans on all six of its remaining glycosylation sites. We found that the high turnover of &#x394;ITILELP, because of its immature glycosylation state in combination with low transport activity, might be responsible for the phenotype observed in some patients.

### Keywords
Cystinosis, Dynamic silac, Er retention, Turnover, Cystinosin

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Plateforme Protéomique Paris Descartes Necker, PPN, 3P5-Necker, SFR Necker, US24, 75014 Paris, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Plateforme Protéomique Paris Descartes Necker, PPN, 3P5-Necker, SFR Necker, US24, 75014 Paris, France


