### Accession
PXD043955

### Title
Proteome analysis of rice seeds during artificial aging treatment for understanding the role of antioxidant machinery

### Description
Seed longevity is a crucial trait in agriculture as it determines the ability of seeds to maintain viability during dry storage. However, the molecular mechanism underlying seed aging and reduced seed longevity are currently not well understood. Here we report the comparative proteome and metabolome profiling of three rice cultivars varying in aging tolerance including an aging tolerant indica cultivar Dharial, an aging sensitive japonica cultivar Ilmi, and a moderately aging tolerant cultivar A2 that was generated by crossing between Dharial and Ilmi. Results obtained from comparative proteome and metabolome profiling suggest that aged seeds of all the cultivars utilize ubiquitin proteasome-mediated protein degradation which results in the accumulation of free amino acids in Ilmi while tolerant cultivars utilize those for energy production and synthesis of heat shock proteins, especially hsp20/alpha crystallin family protein. Additionally, aging tolerant cultivar seems to activate brassinosteroid signalling and suppress jasmonate signaling to initiate a signaling cascade that allows efficient detoxification of aging induced ROS to maintain the seed longevity during aging. Taken together, these results provide an in-depth understand of aging induced changes in rice seeds.

### Sample Protocol
Total seed proteins from 0, 3, 9, 12, and 15 days AAT exposed seeds were isolated using RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)] as described previously. Briefly, seeds were powdered using liquid nitrogen followed by addition of extraction buffer in a ratio of 1:5 (seed powder:extraction buffer). After vortexing and sonication, the extract was centrifuged and the clarified supernatant was subjected to phenol precipitation to precipitate the proteins as described previously (Hurkman and Tanaka, 1986). The pellet so obtained was washed again with the 80% acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol and used for in-solution trypsin digestion by FASP method as described previously. Peptides obtained after the trypsin digestion were quantified using a quantitative fluorometric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) and desalted using HLB OASIS column (Waters, MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 300 µg of each peptide sample was fractionated into three fractions using basic-pH reverse phase (BPRP) fractionation as described previously. The peptides samples so obtained were lyophilized to dryness and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired tandem MS spectra were cross searched against Oryza sativa v7.0 (Phytozome genome ID: 323) using MaxQuant (ver. 2.0.3.0) software with integrated Andromeda search engine (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Label-free quantification (LFQ) of the obtained data was carried out with default precursor mass tolerances with a maximum of two allowed missed trypsin cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for the fixed modifications and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen for additional modifications. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set as 1% for peptide identifications.  ProteinGroups file obtained from the MaxQuant search was used for the data processing using Perseus software (ver. 1.6.15.0). Identified proteins after removal of potential contaminants, log transformation of LFQ intensities, and missing values imputation (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), were subjected to multiple sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold ≤ 0.01. Multivariate analysis of the significantly modulated proteins including Hierarchical clustering analysis (HCL) and multi-scatter plot analysis were carried out using Perseus software while PLS-DA plots and VIP scores plots were generated using MetaboAnalyst software. Aging modulated proteins in all the three cultivars were functionally annotated by Gene Ontology, KEGG, and MapMan tools and integration of proteome and metabolome data was carried out using PathView software.

### Publication Abstract
Seed longevity is a critical characteristic in agriculture, yet the specific genes/proteins responsible for this trait and the molecular mechanisms underlying reduced longevity during seed aging remain largely elusive. Here we report the comparative proteome and metabolome profiling of three rice cultivars exhibiting varying degrees of aging tolerance: Dharial, an aging-tolerant cultivar; Ilmi, an aging-sensitive cultivar; and A2, a moderately aging-tolerant cultivar developed from the crossbreeding of Dharial and Ilmi. Artificial aging treatment (AAT) markedly reduced the germination percentage and enhanced the activities of antioxidant enzymes in all the cultivars. Further, proteomics results showed a key role of the ubiquitin (Ub)-proteasome pathway in the degradation of damaged proteins during AAT while other proteases were majorly reduced. In addition, proteins associated with energy production and protein synthesis were strongly reduced in Ilmi while these were majorly increased in A2 and Dharial. These, along with metabolomics results, suggest that Ub-proteasome mediated protein degradation during AAT results in the accumulation of free amino acids in Ilmi while tolerant cultivars potentially utilize those for energy production and synthesis of stress-related proteins, especially hsp20/alpha-crystallin family protein. Additionally, both Dharial and A2 seem to activate brassinosteroid signaling and suppress jasmonate signaling which initiates a signaling cascade that allows accumulation of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants for efficient detoxification of aging-induced ROS. Taken together, these results provide an in-depth understanding of the aging-induced changes in rice seeds and highlight key pathways responsible for maintaining seed longevity during AAT.

### Keywords
Seeds, Proteomics, Aging, Longevity, Rice

### Affiliations
Pusan National University
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea


