### Accession
PXD047029

### Title
Targeted mass spectrometry analyses of somatic mutations in colorectal cancer specimens using differential ion mobility

### Description
Identification of K-Ras and B-Raf mutations in colorectal cancer (CRC) is essential to predict patients' response to anti-EGFR therapy and formulate appropriate therapeutic strategies to improve prognosis and survival. Here, we combined parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) with high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility (FAIMS) to enhance mass spectrometry sensitivity and improve the identification of low-abundance K-Ras and B-Raf mutations in biological samples without immunoaffinity enrichment. In targeted LC-MS/MS analyses, FAIMS reduced the occurrence of interfering ions and enhanced precursor ion purity, resulting in a three-fold improvement in the detection limit for K-Ras and B-Raf mutated peptides. In addition, ion mobility separation of isomeric peptides using FAIMS facilitated the unambiguous identification of K-Ras G12D and G13D peptides. The application of targeted LC-MS/MS analyses using FAIMS is demonstrated for the detection and quantitation of B-Raf V600E, K-Ras G12D, G13D, and G12V in CRC cell lines and primary specimens.

### Sample Protocol
CRC cell line pellet samples (2 × 108 cells per replicate, four replicates per cell line) were resuspended with PBS up to 2 ml and then solubilized by adding 2 ml of ice-cold 2× lysis buffer (1% w/v CHAPS). Tissue samples (average 568 mg) were cut into small pieces (cubes, ∼3 mm in size), and 5 ml of ice-cold PBS containing protein inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, cat#P8340-5 ml) was added. Tissues were first homogenized twice for 20 s using an Ultra Turrax T25 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at a speed of 20,000 rpm and then 20 s using an Ultra Turrax T8 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at speed 25,000 rpm. Then, 550 μl of ice-cold 10× lysis buffer (5% w/v CHAPS) was added to each sample. After 60-min incubation with tumbling at 4 °C, tissue samples and CRC cell line samples were spun at 10,000g for 30 min at 4 °C and supernatants were collected and dried down in the speed-vac. Samples were reconstituted in ammonium bicarbonate 50mM pH 8.0. Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added at the final concentration of 5mM and samples were gently shaken at 37°C for one hour. Chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) was added at the final concentration of 55mM and the samples were shaken at 37°C for one hour. Trypsin (Promega) was then added (enz/prot: 1/50) and samples were shaken overnight at 37°C. Samples were then desalted on ultraspin column (The Nest Group).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with PEAKS X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) with a tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursors and fragments respectively against a tailored database made of the 6-peptide sequences. Peptide detection and quantitation was further performed with Skyline 22.2.0.312 using high selectivity extraction.  For injection time and isolation interference measurements, PRM and FAIMS-PRM analyses were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermofisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Colorectal cancer mutations, Braf, Kras, Mass spectrometry, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility (faims)

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


