### Accession
PXD028651

### Title
A Prostate Cancer Proteomics Database for SWATH-MS based Protein Quantification

### Description
Prostate cancer is the third most frequent cancer in men worldwide, with a notable increase in prevalence over the last two decades. The PSA is the only well-established protein biomarker for prostate cancer diagnosis, staging, and sur-veillance. It frequently leads to inaccurate diagnosis and overtreatment since it is an organ-specific biomarker rather than a tumour-specific biomarker. As a result, one of the primary goals of prostate cancer proteome research is to iden-tify novel biomarkers that can be used with or instead of PSA, particularly in non-invasive blood samples. Thousands of peptides or assays were detected in blood samples from patients with low to high-grade prostate cancer and healthy individuals, allowing data processing of sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS). By assisting in the detection of prostate cancer biomarkers in blood samples, this useful resource will improve our un-derstanding of the role of proteomics in prostate cancer diagnosis and risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled prostate cancer and healthy control serum samples were processed using PierceTM top 12 abundant protein depletion spin columns following the manufacturer's recommendations. Concen-tration and purification of depleted serum samples were performed using Amicon® ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices. To reduce the salt concentration in the serum samples, they were subjected to a buffer exchange with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The total protein content of concentrated serum samples was quantified using the bicinchoninic acid assay. The total protein concentration was then normalised to 60 μg per 140 μl of sample using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 35 μl LDSx4, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% sodium deoxycholate and denatured for 2 mins at 95 °C. Cell lysates were cooled at room temperature. Proteins were alkylated by adding 750 mM iodoacetamide to a final volume of 150  µL and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 20 mins with intermittent mixing. In-Gel fractionation was conducted to get ten gel fractions of each pooled sample. Gel fragments were submerged in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/10% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 5 ng/µL trypsin and centrifuged (1000xg) for 1 min at 4 °C, followed by 30 mins on ice. To ensure that all gel components were entirely immersed, wells were topped up with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were extracted by repeatedly adding 10% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile to each sample. Each wash was followed by the transfer of supernatant containing peptides to a non-Lobind 96-well plate and vacuum drying at 55 °C. Dried peptides were kept at -20 °C until further analysis was required.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS was loaded with reconstituted samples for nano- and micro-flow DDA analysis. Nano analysis (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) was performed using an accuity uPLC M-Class, C-18 column (Waters, Part No: 186007484) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a runtime of 87 mins. Microanalysis was performed using an analytical column – YMC-Triart C18 column (YMC Europe GmbH S/N 17019) with a flow rate of 5 µL/min and a run time of 87 mins. The LC gradients for nano- and micro-flows were composed of 0.1% formic acid/LC-MS grade water and 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile.  DDA analysis was carried out on a Sciex Triple TOF 6600 Mass Spectrometer (AB Sciex, Warrington, UK) using a nano-flow source with a 5 µL injection volume and a 5 µL/min flow rate for nano-flow analysis and a microflow duospray source with a 10µL injection volume and a 5µL/min flow rate for microflow analysis. For both analyses, the TOF-MS mass range was 400 – 1250 Da, and the product ion mass range was 100 – 1500 Da [43]. Additionally, 5µL (~1μg) of each reconstituted sample was loaded on a 10 cm fused silica AcclaimTM PepMapTM 5μm 100 Nano-Trap Column (Thermo Scientific) using a U3000 RSLC high-pressure nanoLC (Dionex) as described by Njoku et al. Eluting peptides were quantified using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer operating in DDA mode.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is the most frequent form of cancer in men, accounting for more than one-third of all cases. Current screening techniques, such as PSA testing used in conjunction with routine procedures, lead to unnecessary biopsies and the discovery of low-risk tumours, resulting in overdiagnosis. SWATH-MS is a well-established data-independent (DI) method requiring prior knowledge of targeted peptides to obtain valuable information from SWATH maps. In response to the growing need to identify and characterise protein biomarkers for prostate cancer, this study explored a spectrum source for targeted proteome analysis of blood samples. We created a comprehensive prostate cancer serum spectral library by combining data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS raw files from 504 patients with low, intermediate, or high-grade prostate cancer and healthy controls, as well as 304 prostate cancer-related protein in silico assays. The spectral library contains 114,684 transitions, which equates to 18,479 peptides translated into 1227 proteins. The robustness and accuracy of the spectral library were assessed to boost confidence in the identification and quantification of prostate cancer-related proteins across an independent cohort, resulting in the identification of 404 proteins. This unique database can facilitate researchers to investigate prostate cancer protein biomarkers in blood samples. In the real-world use of the spectrum library for biomarker detection, using a signature of 17 proteins, a clear distinction between the validation cohort's pre- and post-treatment groups was observed. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028651.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; spectral library; blood proteomics; protein; peptide; mass spectrometry; swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
AMMARA MUAZZAM

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Townsend
University of Manchester


