### Accession
PXD010072

### Title
Caulobacter crescentus GsrN overexpression proteome during hyperosmotic stress

### Description
In order to better define the global regulatory effects of the sRNA, GsrN, in Caulobacter crescentus during hyperosmotic stress, we submitted soluble lysates from a gsrN over-expression stain , as well as, a wild-type sample for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble protein extracted from exponential growth cultures.Cultures were grown to an OD660 0.06-0.11 in 100 mL of M2X in a 30°C shaking incubator. Cells were split after 1 hour of growth and split cultures were treated with sucrose (final concentration 150 mM sucrose). All cultures were then grown for 5 hours. Cells were spun down at 8000g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Cells were resuspended in 6 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer with DNase and RNase. Cells were mechanically lysed in LV1 Microfluidizer. Lysis was then spun down at 8000g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Triplicate Samples were immediately frozen and submitted to the University of Chicago Proteomics Facility. In brief from the University of Chicago Proteomics Facility, samples were run on a 12% MOPS buffered 1D Gel (Thermo Scientific) and run for 10 minutes at 200V constant. Gel was stained with Imperial Protein stain (Thermo Scientific), and a ~2 cm plug was digested with trypsin. Detailed trypsin digestion and peptide extraction by the facility is published in (Truman et al., 2012). Facility submiited samples for analysis in an electrospray tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360-2000 Fa, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60s (Truman et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
Raw files of LC-MS/MS runs of LC-MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software suitev1.5.1.2 (Cox et al., 2014). Samples were run against a FASTA file of proteins from the UniProt database (UP000001364) and standard contaminants. The label free quantitation (LFQ) option was turned on. Fixed modification included carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were acetyl or formyl (N-term) and oxidation (M). Protein groups file were created for two analyses: wild-type against gsrN++ samples (untreated) and wild-type against gsrN++ samples (treated). LFQ quantities of each protein group files were compiled and used as estimated protein quantities in our analyses.

### Publication Abstract
GsrN is a conserved small RNA that is under transcriptional control of the general stress sigma factor, &#x3c3;<sup>T</sup>, and that functions as a posttranscriptional regulator of <i>Caulobacter crescentus</i> survival under multiple stress conditions. We have defined features of GsrN structure that determine survival under hyperosmotic stress, and we have applied transcriptomic and proteomic methods to identify regulatory targets of GsrN under hyperosmotic conditions. The 5' end of GsrN, which includes a conserved cytosine-rich stem-loop structure, is necessary for cell survival after osmotic upshock. GsrN both activates and represses gene expression in this stress condition. Expression of an uncharacterized open reading frame predicted to encode a glycine zipper protein, <i>osrP</i>, is strongly activated by GsrN. Our data support a model in which GsrN physically interacts with <i>osrP</i> mRNA through its 5' C-rich stem-loop to enhance OsrP protein expression. We conclude that <i>sigT</i>, <i>gsrN</i>, and <i>osrP</i> form a coherent feedforward loop in which &#x3c3;<sup>T</sup> activates <i>gsrN</i> and <i>osrP</i> transcription during stress and GsrN activates OsrP protein expression at the posttranscriptional level. This study delineates transcriptional and posttranscriptional layers of <i>Caulobacter</i> gene expression control during hyperosmotic stress, uncovers a new regulatory target of GsrN, and defines a coherent feedforward motif in the <i>Caulobacter</i> general stress response (GSR) regulatory network.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacteria inhabit diverse niches and must adapt their physiology to constant environmental fluctuations. A major response to environmental perturbation is to change gene expression. <i>Caulobacter</i> and other alphaproteobacteria initiate a complex gene expression program known as the general stress response (GSR) under conditions including oxidative stress, osmotic stress, and nutrient limitation. The GSR enables cell survival in these environments. Understanding how bacteria survive stress requires that we dissect gene expression responses, such as the GSR, at the molecular level. This study is significant, as it defines transcriptional and posttranscriptional layers of gene expression regulation in response to hyperosmotic stress. We further provide evidence that a coherent feedforward motif influences the system properties of the <i>Caulobacter</i> GSR pathway.

### Keywords
Caulobacter crescentus, Sucrose, Srna overexpression, Hyperosmotic stress

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
University of Chicago, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Matthew Tien

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Crosson
University of Chicago, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology


