### Accession
PXD000111

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture filtrate LC-MS/MS

### Description
Triplicate culture filtrate samples of normal (log phase) and PBS cultured (starvation) M. tuberculosis were separated by SDS-PAGE, and 10 bands were excised from each lane after staining with Coomassie R-250. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed on gel bands followed by nanoLC. Eluting peptides were then analyzed on an LTQ FT instrument, and the resulting raw files were searched with Sequest (part of Proteome Discoverer) against an M. tuberculosis H37Rv database (downloaded from the Sanger Centre). The final combined dataset comprised 12,399 unique peptides derived from 1,362 proteins, each identified by a minimum of two distinct peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In order to successfully enter the latent stage, Mycobacterium tuberculosis must adapt to conditions such as nutrient limitation and hypoxia. In vitro models that mimic latent infection are valuable tools for describing the changes in metabolism that occur when the bacterium exists in a non-growing form. We used two complementary proteomic approaches, label-free LC-MS/MS analysis and two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis, to determine the proteome profile of extracellular proteins from M. tuberculosis cultured under nutrient starvation. Through the label-free LC-MS/MS analysis of fractionated samples, 1176 proteins were identified from culture filtrates of log phase and nutrient-starved cultures, and the protein levels of 230 proteins were increased in nutrient-starved culture filtrates, whereas those of 208 proteins were decreased. By means of Gene Ontology clustering analysis, significant differences in the overall metabolism during nutrient starvation were detected. Notably, members of the toxin-antitoxin systems were present in larger quantities in nutrient-starved cultures, supporting a role for these global modules as M. tuberculosis switches its metabolism into dormancy. Decreased abundance of proteins involved in amino acid and protein synthesis was apparent, as well as changes in the lipid metabolism. Further analysis of the dataset identified increased abundance of lipoproteins and decreased abundance of ESAT-6 family proteins. Results from the two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis proteomics demonstrated overall agreement with the LC-MS/MS data and added complementary insights about protein degradation and modification.

### Keywords
Culture filtrate, Tuberculosis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Infectious Disease Immunology

### Submitter
Ida Rosenkrands

### Lab Head


