### Accession
PXD013490

### Title
Inhibition of mPGES-1 or COX-2 Results in Different Proteomic and Lipidomic Profiles in A549 Lung Cancer Cells

### Description
We compared the effects of mPGES-1 inhibitor Compound III (CIII) with the cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor NS-398 on protein and lipid profiles in interleukin (IL)-1β induced A549 lung cancer cells using mass spectrometry. Inhibition of mPGES-1 decreased PGE2 production and increased PGF2α and thromboxane B2 (TXB2) formation, while inhibition of COX-2 decreased the production of all three prostanoids. Our proteomics results revealed that CIII downregulated multiple canonical pathways including eIF2, eIF4/P70S6K, and mTOR signaling, compared to NS-398 that activated these pathways.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate and 6 mM glutamine (all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) at 37C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. At 85% confluency, the cells were induced with 5 ng/mL of IL-1b (R&D Systems) in fresh medium and treated with either 10 μM of mPGES-1 inhibitor Compound III (CIII) (NovaSAID AB, Sweden) or 0.1 μM COX-2 inhibitor NS-398 (Sigma-Aldrich). Untreated cells were supplemented with 0.05% v/v of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich) as vehicle control. Microsomal and soluble protein fractions of A549 cell pellets were prepared as described elsewhere (Eriksson et al., 2008). The microsomes were solubilized in 50 mM TEAB buffer and delipidated using MeOH/CHCl3 precipitation according to Wessel and Flügge (Wessel & Flugge, 1984). Protein pellets were solubilized in 50 mM TEAB containing 0.01% SDS and 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters). The protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal aliquots of total protein obtained for soluble and microsomal fractions were subsequently reduced using 200 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated using 1 M iodoacetamide for 1 hr at RT in the dark. Two-step proteolytic digestion was performed, starting with digestion using Lys-C (1:50, w/w) for 2 hrs at 37 °C followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100, w/w) o/n at 37 °C. Samples were acidified using 100% formic acid and RapiGest SF Surfactant was removed by centrifugation. Supernatants were loaded onto Strata-X solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns (Phenomenex) and peptides were eluted with 80% MeCN in 0.2% formic acid and evaporated to dryness under vacuum. Stable isotope dimethyl labeling of obtained peptides utilizing light and intermediate labels was performed according to (Boersema et al., 2009).  In order to reduce sample complexity prior to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, off-line peptide fractionation was performed using Dionex Ultimate 3000 UV HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (20 mM ammonia) on XBridge peptide BEH300 C18 Column, 300Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 x 150 mm (Waters, USA) and separated using 40 min non-linear gradient of 3-88% B (80% MeCN in 20 mM ammonia) into 12 fractions. Obtained fractions were pooled into 4 final fractions across the gradient area and evaporated to dryness under vacuum. This resulted in 72 samples (2 cell fractions x 3 treatment groups x 3 replicates x 4 fractions from HPLC-fractionation) for proteomics using LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS of peptide fractions was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Obtained tandem mass spectra were converted to open source format (mzML) by “msconvert” from ProteoWizard (Chambers et al., 2012) and processed using OpenMS v2.1.0 (Rost et al., 2016) through the following workflow: The identification was based on the UniProt/Swiss-Pro human database (2016-04) combined with a decoy database. MS-GF+ (Kim & Pevzner, 2014) and Xtandem search engines were used to perform the identification using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.04 Da (only in Xtandem); charges: 2 to 4; enzyme: trypsin; Fixed Modifications:  Carbamidomethyl (C), Dimethyl, Dimethyl (K and N-term), Dimethyl:2H(4) (K and N-term), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (N and Q); missed cleavages: 2, Instrument: HighRes (only MS-GF+). The unmentioned parameters were set to default value. The search engine scores were converted to posterior error probability using “IDPosteriorErrorProbability” and merged using “ConsensusID” tool (Nahnsen et al., 2011). Q-values were calculated for peptides using “FalseDiscoveryRate” tool and peptides with q-values lower than 0.05 were selected for the next step. For quantification, the raw data was centroided using “PeakPickerHiRes” and features were detected using “FeatureFinderMultiplex” using the following parameters: labels: [Dimethyl0][Dimethyl4]; charge: 2:5, rt_typical: 12 sec; rt_min: 3 sec; mz_tolerance: 10 ppm; missed_cleavages: 2; intensity_cutoff: 10; peptide_similarity: 0.6; averagine_similarity: 0.5. The identification result was mapped to the quantification result using “IDMapper” allowing 5 seconds retention time and 5 ppm mass deviation. Finally, the peptides across the samples were linked using “FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT” allowing 60 seconds retention time and 10 ppm mass error deviation.

### Publication Abstract
Pharmacological inhibition of microsomal prostaglandin E synthase (mPGES)-1 for selective reduction in prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>) biosynthesis is protective in experimental models of cancer and inflammation. Targeting mPGES-1 is envisioned as a safer alternative to traditional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Herein, we compared the effects of mPGES-1 inhibitor Compound III (CIII) with the cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor NS-398 on protein and lipid profiles in interleukin (IL)-1&#x3b2;-induced A549 lung cancer cells using mass spectrometry. Inhibition of mPGES-1 decreased PGE<sub>2</sub> production and increased PGF<sub>2&#x3b1;</sub> and thromboxane B<sub>2</sub> (TXB<sub>2</sub>) formation, while inhibition of COX-2 decreased the production of all three prostanoids. Our proteomics results revealed that CIII downregulated multiple canonical pathways including eIF2, eIF4/P70S6K, and mTOR signaling, compared to NS-398 that activated these pathways. Moreover, pathway analysis predicted that CIII increased cell death of cancer cells (<i>Z</i> = 3.8, <i>p</i> = 5.1E-41) while NS-398 decreased the same function (<i>Z</i> = -5.0, <i>p</i> = 6.5E-35). In our lipidomics analyses, we found alterations in nine phospholipids between the two inhibitors, with a stronger alteration in the lysophospholipid (LPC) profile with NS-398 compared to CIII. Inhibition of mPGES-1 increased the concentration of sphinganine and dihydroceramide (C<sub>16:0</sub>DhCer), while inhibition of COX-2 caused a general decrease in most ceramides, again suggesting different effects on cell death between the two inhibitors. We showed that CIII decreased proliferation and potentiated the cytotoxic effect of the cytostatic drugs cisplatin, etoposide, and vincristine when investigated in a live cell imaging system. Our results demonstrate differences in protein and lipid profiles after inhibition of mPGES-1 or COX-2 with important implications on the therapeutic potential of mPGES-1 inhibitors as adjuvant treatment in cancer. We encourage further investigations to illuminate the clinical benefit of mPGES-1 inhibitors in cancer.

### Keywords
A549, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation, Cancer, Mpges-1

### Affiliations
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Elena Ossipova

### Lab Head
Dr Per-Johan Jakobsson
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden


