### Accession
PXD047236

### Title
Plasma Proteomic Analysis Based on 4D-DIA Evaluates the Clinical Response to Imrecoxib in the Early Treatment of Osteoarthritis

### Description
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the primary treatment for osteoarthritis (OA), but prolonged use has adverse effects and varying efficacy. Among NSAIDs, imrecoxib, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor, reduces side effects yet remains ineffective for half the patient population. This study aims to identify biomarkers for early imrecoxib efficacy evaluation in OA for personalized therapy optimization. From September 2021 to January 2022, imrecoxib was administered to patients with OA at Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital. Plasma samples from these patients underwent proteomic analysis through the four-dimensional data-independent acquisition (4D-DIA) method, followed by bioinformatics analysis. Potential differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were validated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Sixty-six patients with knee OA were included and divided into responders (n=35) and non-responders (n=31). Proteomic analysis was conducted on 15 patients from each group, and ELISA validation was performed for every patient. We found 140 DEPs between the two groups after administering imrecoxib treatment, characterized by 29 proteins showing up-regulation and 111 displaying down-regulation (p < 0.05, fold change > ±1.2). Galectin-1 (LGALS1), galectin-3 (LGALS3), and the cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44) could be utilized to evaluate the clinical response to imrecoxib in the treatment of OA after ELISA validation.This study successfully identified biomarkers for evaluating imrecoxib's clinical response in OA patients using 4D-DIA technology. These biomarkers may play a vital role in future personalized OA treatment strategies, pending further confirmation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: The high-abundance proteins of plasma samples were processed with High SelectTM Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Mini Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Subsequently, the low-abundance components were desalted and concentrated using a 5 kDa ultrafiltration membrane (Sartorius, Germany). Next, one volume of SDT buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) was added, and the mixture was boiled for 10 min. Afterward, the solution was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min to remove the precipitate. Protein quantification was performed using a BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime, China). Each sample, containing 20 µg of protein was added to 6X loading buffer (Beyotime, China) and boiled for an additional 5 min. Finally, the quality of protein separations was evaluated using 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE, Beyotime, China) and stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 (Beyotime, China).  Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) and Digestion: The FASP method was employed for protein digestion[21]. Firstly, 200 µg of protein solution for each sample was mixed with dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma, USA) to a final concentration of 100 mM. The mixture was then boiled for 5 min and allowed to cool to room temperature. Subsequently, 200 µL urea (UA) buffer (BIO-RAD, USA) was added, and the solution was transfered 30 kDa ultrafiltration units (Sartorius, Germany), followed by centrifugation at 12500 g for 25 min (this step was repeated twice). The samples were then mixed with 100 µL of iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, USA) buffer (100 mM IAA in UA) and incubated in the dark for 30 min. Afterward, the samples underwent centrifugation (12500 g, 25 min) and were washed twice with UA buffer. Next, 100 µL of 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was added, followed by two rounds of centrifugation (12500 g, 15 min). The samples were digested with 40 µL of trypsin buffer (4 µg trypsin in 40 µL of 0.1M TEAB solution) at 37℃ for 16–18 hours. After digestion, we centrifuged (12500 g, 15 min) the solution and the peptides as filtrates were collected after adding 40 µL of 0.1 M TEAB solution and subsequent centrifugation (12500 g, 15 min). The peptides were desalted with a C18 cartridge (Evosep, Denmark) and reconstituted in 40 µL of a 0.1% formic acid solution. Finally, the peptide content was estimated with UV light spectral density at 280 nm. Spectral library generation: Pooded peptides from all samples were separated using the Agilent 1260 Infinity II high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Initially, the chromatographic column was equilibrated with buffer A (10 mM HCOONH4, 5% ACN, pH 10.0), and then the samples were loaded onto the chromatographic column (Waters, XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm x 100 mm). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of buffer B (10 mM HCOONH4, 85% ACN, pH 10.0). The fractions were collected every 1 min during 26-62min. Thirty-six fractions were connected , reconstituted in a 0.1% (v/v) formic acid aqueous solution and combined into six fractions. The DDA method was employed to generate spectral library. The six fractions were diluted to 10 ng/ul with 0.1% FA, mixed with iRT and separated using a nanoliter flow rate Evosep One system (Evosep, Denmark), which was coupled to a mass spectrometer Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, OE 480) equipped with FAIMS PRO. Buffer solution A was 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution and solution B was 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile solution (acetonitrile was 100%). Peptides were separated on a 15cm X 150μm analytical column, 1.9μm C18 beads with a packed emitter tip (Evosep, Denmark). The column temperature was maintained at 55°C. The chromatographic method was the 30SPD method, and analyzed by mass spectrometry with OE 480.  The mass spectrometry settings were as follows: The MS scan range (m/z) was 350–1500 at a resolution of 60,000. The auto gain control (AGC) target was 300% with a 20 ms maximum injection time. The include charge states were 2-7, and the filter dynamic exclusion duration was 45 s. The dd-MS2 isolation window was 1.6 m/z at a resolution of 15,000. The AGC target was 75% with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. DIA Mass spectrometry analysis: Each peptide sample mixed with iRT was analyzed in the DIA mode. The mass spectrometry parameters were the same in the DDA mode. The DIA window was set under -45V FAIMS and -65V FAIMS respectively.

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw data were processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys AG, Switzerland). This involved searching for the library and creating a spectral database using the uniprot_homo_20220308_20377_9606_swiss_prot database, assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. Carbamidomethyl was specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. The Q-value cutoffs for both precursor and protein levels were set at 1%.  Regarding DIA MS data processing, Spectronaut was employed with default settings. The retention time prediction type was configured as dynamic iRT, with Spectronaut dynamically determining the optimal extraction window based on iRT calibration and gradient stability. Similarly, Q-value cutoffs for both precursor and protein levels remained at 1%. Following these analyses, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were selected using the Student's t-test, with proteins having p-values < 0.05 and fold changes of ≥ 1.2 being identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Osteoarthritis; imrecoxib; proteomics; biomarkers

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School
China Pharmaceuatical University

### Submitter
Yuan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Weihong Ge
Department of Pharmacy, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School


