### Accession
PXD024633

### Title
Mitochondrial mistranslation modulated by metabolic stress causes cardiovascular disease and reduced life-span

### Description
Changes in the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis impact the metabolic and physiological roles of mitochondria. Here we explored how environmental stress in the form of a high-fat diet modulates mitochondrial translation using mutant mice with error-prone (Mrps12ep/ep) or hyper-accurate (Mrps12ha/ha) mitochondrial ribosomes and their effects on lifespan. Intriguingly, although both mutations are metabolically beneficial in reducing body weight, decreasing circulating insulin and increasing glucose tolerance during a high-fat diet, they manifest divergent (either deleterious or beneficial) outcomes in a tissue-specific manner. In two distinct organ types that are commonly affected by metabolic disease, the heart and the liver, Mrps12ep/ep mice were protected against heart defects but sensitive towards lipid accumulation in the liver, activating genes involved in steroid and amino acid metabolism. In contrast, enhanced translational accuracy in Mrps12ha/ha mice protected the liver from a high-fat diet through activation of liver proliferation programs, but enhanced the development of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and led to reduced lifespan. While these findings reflect the complex transcriptional and cell signalling responses that differ between post-mitotic (heart) and highly proliferative (liver) tissues, they also suggest that trade-offs between the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis dictate tissue-specific outcomes toward commonly encountered stressful environmental conditions or aging.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and Housing Heterozygous mutant Mrps12+/ep and Mrps12+/ha mice were generated as described previously (Ferreira et al. 2019). Heterozygous mutants were bred to generate homozygous mutant mice and age- and litter-mate matched wild-type (Mrps12+/+) and homozygous (Mrps12ep/ep or Mrps12ha/ha) mice were housed in standard cages (45 cm × 29 cm × 12 cm) under a 12-h light/dark schedule (lights on 7 am to 7 pm) in controlled environmental conditions of 22 ± 2 °C and 50 + 10% relative humidity. Mice were fed a normal chow diet (Rat & Mouse Chow, Specialty Foods, Glen Forrest, Western Australia) or a high-fat diet (19 MJ/kg, 35% of energy from carbohydrate, 42% from fat, 23% from protein; Specialty Feeds, Perth, Australia) and water was provided ad libitum. The study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the UWA and performed in accordance with Principles of Laboratory Care (NHMRC Australian code for the care and use of animals for scientific purposes, 8th Edition 2013).  Mitochondria were collected from homogenized hearts and livers and isolated by differential centrifugation as described previously (Rackham et al 2016; Perks et al. 2018) with some modifications. Livers were homogenized in buffer containing 250 mM sucrose, 5 mM Tris, 1 mM EGTA, pH 7.4 with EDTA-free Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and hearts were homogenized in buffer containing 210 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 10 mM Tris, 0.1 mM EGTA, pH 7.4 with EDTA-free Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) before differential centrifugation. The mitochondrial protein concentration was quantified using the BCA assay using BSA as a standard.  Mitochondria were lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM tris-HCl (pH 8.5) with immediate heating of the lysates to 95°C for at least 10 min. Protein concentration was determined by BCA total protein assay (Pierce). 20ug of protein was reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with 40mM chloroacetamide simultaneously at 95°C for 10 min. Lysates were then diluted to a final concentration of 1% SDC using MQ water and digested overnight with 400ng MS-grade trypsin (in 50mM acetic acid) at 37°C with constant rocking. Samples were diluted with ethyl acetate (50% final concentration, v/v) and vortexed until all the precipitated SDC was resuspended. StageTips were prepared and sample purification performed as done previously (Harney et al., 2019, J. Proteome Res.), with the addendum that only the bottom aqueous phase of the sample was added to the StageTips. Peptides were reconstituted with 5% formic acid in MS-grade water, sealed and stored at 4°C until LC-MS/MS acquisition. Peptide samples prepared as in Trypsin digestion for proteome analysis, were directly injected onto a 30cm x 70 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 um) fused silica analytical column with a 10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over a gradient from 5% - 40% acetonitrile over 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. MS/MS analysis was performed using either a Q-Exactive HFX or Q-Exactive Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) with HCD fragmentation. Spectra were attained in a data-dependent acquisition of the top 20 most abundant ions at any individual point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (https://www.maxquant.org). This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the mouse UniProt database and a custom made mistranslation database for mitochondrially encoded proteins. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Changes in the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis impact the metabolic and physiological roles of mitochondria. Here we explored how environmental stress in the form of a high-fat diet modulates mitochondrial translation and affects lifespan in mutant mice with error-prone (Mrps12<sup>ep</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ep</sup> ) or hyper-accurate (Mrps12<sup>ha</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ha</sup> ) mitochondrial ribosomes. Intriguingly, although both mutations are metabolically beneficial in reducing body weight, decreasing circulating insulin and increasing glucose tolerance during a high-fat diet, they manifest divergent (either deleterious or beneficial) outcomes in a tissue-specific manner. In two distinct organs that are commonly affected by the metabolic disease, the heart and the liver, Mrps12<sup>ep</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ep</sup> mice were protected against heart defects but sensitive towards lipid accumulation in the liver, activating genes involved in steroid and amino acid metabolism. In contrast, enhanced translational accuracy in Mrps12<sup>ha</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ha</sup> mice protected the liver from a high-fat diet through activation of liver proliferation programs, but enhanced the development of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and led to reduced lifespan. These findings reflect the complex transcriptional and cell signalling responses that differ between post-mitotic (heart) and highly proliferative (liver) tissues. We show trade-offs between the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis dictate tissue-specific outcomes due to commonly encountered stressful environmental conditions or aging.

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Mouse

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.


