### Accession
PXD002434

### Title
Deep Proteomic Profiling of Vasopressin-Sensitive Collecting Duct Cells

### Description
The mouse mpkCCD cell line is a continuous cultured epithelial cell line with characteristics of renal collecting duct principal cells. This line is widely used to study epithelial transport and its regulation.  To provide a data resource useful for experimental design and interpretation in studies using mpkCCD cells, we have carried out 'deep' proteomic profiling of these cells using three levels of fractionation (differential centrifugation, SDS-PAGE, HPLC) followed by tandem mass spectrometry to identify and quantify proteins. The use of multiple levels of fractionation increases the ability to detect low abundance proteins. As a result, we identified 6766 proteins in mpkCCD cells at a high level of stringency. These proteins are expressed over 7 orders of magnitude of protein abundance.   The data are provided to users as a public data base at https://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/mpkFractions/.   The MS data were mapped back to gel slices to generate 'virtual western blots' for each protein.   For most of the 6766 proteins, the apparent molecular weight from SDS-PAGE agreed closely with the calculated molecular weight.  However, a substantial fraction (>15%) of proteins were found to run aberrantly, either with much higher or much lower than predicted.  These proteins were analyzed to identify mechanisms responsible for altered mobility on SDS-PAGE (high or low isoelectric point, high or low hydrophobicity, physiological cleavage, residence in the lysosome, post-translational modifications and expression of alternative isoforms due to alternative exon usage).  Additionally, this analysis identified a previously unrecognized isoform of aquaporin-2 with apparent molecular weight <20 kD.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture.  All studies were done in an AQP2-expressing mpkCCD clonal cell line (clone 11) grown on permeable membrane supports (Corning Costar Transwell). dDAVP (vasopressin V2 receptor-selective agonist 1-desamino-8-D-arginine-vasopressin, 0.1 nM) or vehicle were added to the basolateral medium for three days to stimulate expression of aquaporin 2 and other vasopressin-responsive proteins. The day before cell harvest, the cells were put into minimal medium (deprived of serum, hormones, and growth factors except transferrin and selenium) without dDAVP on both apical and basolateral aspect of cells. Then, on the day of cell harvest, the basolateral medium was replaced by fresh minimal medium with dDAVP or vehicle for 30 min and cells were collected for differential centrifugation described below.   Stable Isotopic Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC).   All chemicals and media for SILAC experiments were purchased from Thermo Scientific with 2% dialyzed fetal bovine serum plus light or heavy lysine and arginine, respectively. Light amino acids were [12C6]-lysine (50mg/500 ml) and [12C6, 14N4]-arginine (50mg/500mL). Heavy amino acids were [13C6]-lysine (50mg/500mL) and [13C6, 15N4]-arginine (50mg/500mL). Cells were grown in light or heavy medium for 28 days (> 5 passages). Previous studies had established in these cells that 12 days is sufficient for isotope labeling > 99% for almost all protein.   Differential centrifugation and sample preparation.  At 30 minutes, cells grown in light (vehicle-treated) and heavy (dDAVP-treated) media were collected by scraping into sucrose solution (250mM sucrose, 10mM triethanolamine, pH 7.6) with HaltTM protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail.  The scraped cells were then combined in a 1:1 ratio and homogenized for 30 slow strokes on ice using a motor-driven Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer. The homogenates were then subjected to a series of centrifugations :   1,000 Xg for 10 min at 4°C, 4,000 Xg for 20 min at 4°C, and 17,000 Xg for 20 min at 4°C, each time saving the pellet and passing the supernatant to the next step.  The 17,000 Xg supernatant was centrifuged in an ultracentrifuge at 200,000 Xg for 1 hour at 4°C, keeping both the supernatant and the pellet. The pellets obtained from the 1,000, 4,000, 17,000, and 200,000 Xg centrifugation were solubilized in Laemmli buffer (2% SDS, 63mM Tris, 10% Glycerol, pH 6.8) and labeled “1K”, “4K”, “17K”, and “200Kp” respectively. The remaining supernatant from the 200,000 Xg centrifugation was labeled “200Ks” and solubilized using the components of Laemmli buffer to achieve the same final concentrations as in the pellet fractions.  Preparation for mass spectrometry: SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion.   After differential centrifugation and solubilization, proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at 56 °C and then reduced cysteines were alkylated using 100 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. SDS-PAGE was performed. Precision Plus ProteinTM standards were used for the marker lane. Proteins in the gel were visualized with ImperialTM Protein Stain for 5 min followed by de-staining in deionized H2O for 1 hour. The gel was then sliced into small, equal-sized blocks using a GridCutter for a total of 43 blocks per lane. The corresponding gel slice numbers of all protein standards were recorded, and fitted with a power curve to infer MW from gel slice number. Gel pieces from each block were further de-stained and dehydrated by incubating and vortexing with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) solution for 30 min three times, and then vacuum dried. The dried gel pieces were immersed in 40 μl of a solution containing 25 mM NH4HCO3  and 12.5 ng/μl trypsin (Promega Trypsin Gold) and then incubated at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by vortexing in 100 μl of 50% ACN/0.5% formic acid (FA) for 30 min three times.  The pooled extracts were vacuum dried and then reconstituted to 20 μl of 0.1% FA. The resulting mixture of tryptic peptides was desalted with C18 ZipTipTM (Millipore) per manufacturer’s instructions, vacuum dried, and then stored in -800C. Immediately prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were reconstituted to 20μl with 0.1% FA in LC/MS grade water. Altogether, total 215 gel slices (43 slices x 5 differential centrifugation fractions) were analyzed by an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution and product mass spectra (MS2) were acquired with the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Matching spectra to peptides.   Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) was used to conduct the peptide-spectra-match (PSM) search. In order to maximize the number of peptide identifications, two different search algorithms, Mascot and SEQUEST, were used. The search criteria were: precursor mass tolerance = 25 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.8 Da, two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed per peptide. In addition, certain amino acid modifications were allowed including isotope labeling of lysine (K+6.020 Da) and arginine (R+10.008 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C+57.021 Da), oxidation of methionine (M+15.995 Da), and deamination on glutamine and asparagine (N, Q+0.984 Da). The protein database used was the mouse RefSeq (29,701 entries released on February 25, 2013 by National Center for Biotechnology Information, NIH amended with cRAP, common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01, set using the target-decoy algorithm. The search results from SEQUEST and Mascot searches were merged in Proteome Discoverer, and peptides with FDR < 0.01 and peptide rank =1 were retained for further analyses.   SILAC data handling. Quantification of peptides was performed using QUIL, an in-house software program for SILAC data. This program calculates light-to-heavy peptide abundance ratios from the reconstructed ion chromatograms for MS1 peak intensities corresponding to each peptide. The abundance for the identified light- and heavy versions of the same peptide can be separately measured on the basis of the area under the curve via numerical integration using the trapezoidal rule or on the basis of the maximum value over the duration of the reconstructed chromatogram. To filter the data based on quality, we compared the SILAC light:heavy ratios (R values) obtained using different integration methods and ranges.  Briefly, R was evaluated with three parameter settings: Rarea/0.2: ratio with QUIL parameters: integration range = 0.2; method, AUC Rarea/0.3: ratio with QUIL parameters: integration range = 0.3; method, AUC Rheight/0.2: ratio with QUIL parameters: integration range = 0.3; method, maximum peak height  Using these calculated values, we employed the following acceptance criteria for a given peptide:   0.5 ≤ ratio of Rheight/0.2/ Rarea/0.2 ≤ 1.5 and  0.5 ≤ ratio of Rarea/0.3/ Rarea/0.2≤ 1.5 Peptides that satisfied above criteria were retained for further analyses using the Rarea/0.2 values. In addition, we retained the corresponding values for area-under-curve (AUC) for both heavy and light channels. Because the accuracy of combining two samples (i.e. dDAVP versus vehicle) may not be perfect and may not yield a precise 1:1 ratio, it was necessary to renormalize the values.  We compared the median values and the sum of the integrated abundance values for all peptides in both heavy and light channels and found that both yielded the same heavy-to-light ratio (overall ratio was 1.120). The median values were then used to normalize all AUC values and to calculate revised heavy-to-light ratios.

### Publication Abstract
The mouse mpkCCD cell line is a continuous cultured epithelial cell line with characteristics of renal collecting duct principal cells. This line is widely used to study epithelial transport and its regulation. To provide a data resource useful for experimental design and interpretation in studies using mpkCCD cells, we have carried out "deep" proteomic profiling of these cells using three levels of fractionation (differential centrifugation, SDS-PAGE, and HPLC) followed by tandem mass spectrometry to identify and quantify proteins. The analysis of all resulting samples generated 34.6 gigabytes of spectral data. As a result, we identified 6,766 proteins in mpkCCD cells at a high level of stringency. These proteins are expressed over eight orders of magnitude of protein abundance. The data are provided to users as a public data base (https://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/mpkFractions/). The mass spectrometry data were mapped back to their gel slices to generate "virtual Western blots" for each protein. For most of the 6,766 proteins, the apparent molecular weight from SDS-PAGE agreed closely with the calculated molecular weight. However, a substantial fraction (&gt;15%) of proteins was found to run aberrantly, with much higher or much lower mobilities than predicted. These proteins were analyzed to identify mechanisms responsible for altered mobility on SDS-PAGE, including high or low isoelectric point, high or low hydrophobicity, physiological cleavage, residence in the lysosome, posttranslational modifications, and expression of alternative isoforms due to alternative exon usage. Additionally, this analysis identified a previously unrecognized isoform of aquaporin-2 with apparent molecular mass &lt;20 kDa.

### Keywords
Aquaporin-2, Kidney cortical collection duct, Sds-page, Lc-ms/ms, Mass spectrometry, Differential centrifugation

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart Lung and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart Lung and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health


