### Accession
PXD018324

### Title
Mutant EGFR is a preferred SMURF2 substrate of ubiquitination: role in enhanced receptor stability and TKI sensitivity

### Description
We previously reported that differential protein degradation of TKI-sensitive [L858R, del(E746-A750)] and resistant (T790M) epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutants upon erlotinib treatment correlates with drug sensitivity. However, the molecular mechanism remains unclear. We also reported SMAD ubiquitination regulatory factor 2 (SMURF2) as a stabilizer of EGFR in a ligase (E3) activity-dependent manner. Here, using in vitro and in vivo ubiquitination assays, mass spectrometry, and super-resolution microscopy, we show SMURF2-EGFR functional interaction is critical in receptor stability and TKI sensitivity. We found that L858R/T790M EGFR is a preferred substrate of SMURF2-UBCH5 (an E3-E2) complex-mediated K63-linked polyubiquitination, which preferentially stabilizes mutant receptor. We identified three lysine (K) residues (K721, 1037 and 1164) as the sites of ubiquitination and replacement of K to acetylation-mimicking asparagine (Q) at K1037 position in L858R/T790M background converts the stable protein sensitive to erlotinib-induced degradation. Using STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM) imaging, we show that SMURF2 presence allows longer membrane retention of activated EGFR upon EGF treatment, whereas, siRNA-mediated SMURF2 knockdown fastens receptor endocytosis and lysosome enrichment. In an erlotinib-sensitive PC9 cells, SMURF2 overexpression increased EGFR levels with improved erlotinib tolerance, whereas, SMURF2 knockdown decreased EGFR steady state levels in NCI-H1975 and PC9-AR cells to overcome erlotinib and AZD-9291 resistance respectively. Additionally, disruption of the SMURF2-UBCH5 complex destabilized EGFR. Together, we propose that SMURF2-mediated preferential polyubiquitination of L858R/T790M EGFR may be competing with acetylation-mediated receptor internalization to provide enhanced receptor stability and that disruption of the E3-E2 complex may be an attractive alternate to overcome TKI resistance

### Sample Protocol
The in vitro ubiquitination reaction mix was separated on a polyacrylamide gel, and proteins were visualized with colloidal Coomassie stain.  In-gel digestion followed by identification of ubiquitination site mapping was carried out essentially as described previously (40).  Briefly, upon trypsin digestion, peptides were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column and subjected to high-resolution, linear ion-trap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher).  The full MS scan was collected in Orbitrap (resolution 30,000@400 m/z), and data-dependent MS/MS spectra on the nine most intense ions from each full MS scan were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and peptides were identified by searching the data against the UniProt human protein database (20353 entries; reviewed only) using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4, ThermoScientific) using the following search parameters.  MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 50 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) was considered static modification; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) and diglycine remnant on lysines (114.0292 Da) were considered variable.  Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤1% FDR threshold.  Spectral matches to ubiquitinated peptides were manually verified

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations spurred the use of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as erlotinib, as the first-line treatment of lung cancers. We previously reported that differential degradation of TKI-sensitive (<i>e.g.</i> L858R) and resistant (T790M) EGFR mutants upon erlotinib treatment correlates with drug sensitivity. We also reported that SMAD ubiquitination regulatory factor 2 (SMURF2) ligase activity is important in stabilizing EGFR. However, the molecular mechanisms involved remain unclear. Here, using <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> ubiquitination assays, MS, and superresolution microscopy, we show SMURF2-EGFR functional interaction is important for EGFR stability and response to TKI. We demonstrate that L858R/T790M EGFR is preferentially stabilized by SMURF2-UBCH5 (an E3-E2)-mediated polyubiquitination. We identified four lysine residues as the sites of ubiquitination and showed that replacement of one of them with acetylation-mimicking glutamine increases the sensitivity of mutant EGFR to erlotinib-induced degradation. We show that SMURF2 extends membrane retention of EGF-bound EGFR, whereas <i>SMURF2</i> knockdown increases receptor sorting to lysosomes. In lung cancer cell lines, SMURF2 overexpression increased EGFR levels, improving TKI tolerance, whereas <i>SMURF2</i> knockdown decreased EGFR steady-state levels and sensitized lung cancer cells. Overall, we propose that SMURF2-mediated polyubiquitination of L858R/T790M EGFR competes with acetylation-mediated receptor internalization that correlates with enhanced receptor stability; therefore, disruption of the E3-E2 complex may be an attractive target to overcome TKI resistance.

### Keywords
Epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr); smad ubiquitination regulatory factor 2 (smurf2); ubiquitin conjugating enzyme h5 (ubch5); protective ubiquitination; tyrosine kinase inhibitor (tki) resistance; lc-ms

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Dept. of Radiation Oncology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Medical Science Building I, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

### Submitter
Dipankar Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Dipankar Ray
Dept. of Radiation Oncology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Medical Science Building I, Ann Arbor, MI 48109


