### Accession
PXD029573

### Title
Role of Nse1 subunit of SMC5/6 complex as a ubiquitin ligase

### Description
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) complexes - cohesin, condensin and SMC5/6 - are important for many aspects of the chromosomal organization. These complexes are composed of Smc and non-Smc element (Nse) subunits. The Nse1 subunit of SMC5/6 contains a variant RING domain, characteristic of ubiquitin ligases. Human NSE1 has been shown to possess ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro; however, other studies were unable to show such activity. Here, we confirm Nse1 ubiquitin-ligase activity in vitro using purified Schizosaccharomyces pombe proteins. We demonstrate that the Nse1 ligase activity is stimulated by Nse3 and Nse4, it specifically utilizes Ubc13/Mms2 E2 enzyme and Nse1 interacts directly with ubiquitin. We identify Nse1 mutation (R188E) that specifically disrupts its E3 activity, and show that the Nse1-dependent ubiquitination is particularly important under replication stress. Moreover, we identify Nse4 (lysine K181) as the first known SMC5/6-associated Nse1 substrate. Interestingly, abolition of Nse4 modification at K181 leads to suppression of DNA-damage sensitivity of other SMC5/6 mutants. Altogether, this study brings new evidence for Nse1 ubiquitin ligase activity, significantly advancing our under-standing of this enigmatic SMC5/6 function.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analyses of peptide mixture were done us-ing RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Prior to LC separation, peptide mixtures were online con-centrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping col-umn onto a Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (2 µm particles, 75 μm × 250 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by approximately 1 or 2 hour gradient program (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) with ini-tial and end mobile phase B composition of 1% and 56%, respectively; please, see the raw data or exported LC and MS methods for more details. Equilibration of the trapping col-umn and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target val-ue of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z. In case of the 2nd and or 3rd analysis of the same sample solution, scheduled precursor list (SPL) feature was used to exclude precursors already identified (false dis-covery rate 1%) in the 1st or 1st and 2nd analysis. Mass tolerance for m/z exclusion was set to 10 ppm and retention time window to 2 min. Please, see the raw data or exported LC and MS methods for more details.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and optionally also Sequest HT search engines utilisation. MS/MS ion searches were done against UniProt protein database for Schizosaccharomyces Pombe or Homo sapiens. Please, see msf files or exported files covering data processing pipeline used in Proteome Discoverer for more details. The two or three analyses of the sample solution were searched together as a single data set.

### Publication Abstract
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) complexes are important for many aspects of the chromosomal organization. Unlike cohesin and condensin, the SMC5/6 complex contains a variant RING domain carried by its Nse1 subunit. RING domains are characteristic for ubiquitin ligases, and human NSE1 has been shown to possess ubiquitin-ligase activity in vitro. However, other studies were unable to show such activity. Here, we confirm Nse1 ubiquitin-ligase activity using purified <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i> proteins. We demonstrate that the Nse1 ligase activity is stimulated by Nse3 and Nse4. We show that Nse1 specifically utilizes Ubc13/Mms2 E2 enzyme and interacts directly with ubiquitin. We identify the Nse1 mutation (R188E) that specifically disrupts its E3 activity and demonstrate that the Nse1-dependent ubiquitination is particularly important under replication stress. Moreover, we determine Nse4 (lysine K181) as the first known SMC5/6-associated Nse1 substrate. Interestingly, abolition of Nse4 modification at K181 leads to suppression of DNA-damage sensitivity of other SMC5/6 mutants. Altogether, this study brings new evidence for Nse1 ubiquitin ligase activity, significantly advancing our understanding of this enigmatic SMC5/6 function.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Ubiquitin ligase, Liquid chromatography, Mass spectrometry, Smc5/6; nse1

### Affiliations
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


