### Accession
PXD025258

### Title
Site-specific ubiquitylation acts as a regulator of linker histone H1

### Description
Decoding the role of histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is key to understand the fundamental process of epigenetic regulation. While this process is well studied for core histones and many of their PTMs, this is not the case for linker histone H1 in general and its ubiquitylation in particular due to a lack of proper tools. Here, we report on the generation of site-specifically mono-ubiquitylated H1.2 via click chemistry and identify its ubiquitin-dependent interactome on a proteome-wide scale. We show that the H1 interactome is generally modulated by ubiquitylation and that site-specific ubiquitylation results in overlapping, but distinct interactomes. We further demonstrate that site-specific ubiquitylation of H1 affects the interaction with enzymes relevant for deubiquitylation and deacetylation. We finally show that site-specific ubiquitylation at position K64 impacts H1-dependent chromatosome assembly as well as H1-induced phase separation. In summary, we propose that site-specific ubiquitylation plays a general regulatory role for linker histone H1.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous H1.2 posttranslational modifications: To identify endogenous posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of H1.2 in HEK 293T cells, H1.2 was enriched by immunoprecipitation followed by identification of potential PTMs and modification sites via LC-MS/MS. In the first step, the primary antibody H1.2 (Abcam) was immobilized (5 µg antibody/12.5 µl beads) on Pierce Protein G Magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After washing, 0.5 mg HEK 293T cell lysate was added, incubated for 2 h at 4 °C and washed. Samples were eluted in SDS-PAGE loading dye and fractionated by SDS-PAGE followed by tryptic digest. Samples were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were prepared in biological duplicates and measured in technical duplicates.  Generation of site-specifically ubiquitylated H1.2: The unnatural amino acid Aha (azidohomoalanine) was incorporated into Ub via selective pressure incorporation and Plk (propargyl-derivatized lysine) into H1.2 by amber stop codon suppression. Next, the proteins were linked by copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC, click reaction). H1.2 was ubiquitylated at positions K17, K64 and K206. Formation of the triazole linkage was verified by LC-MS/MS analysis. Therefore, proteins were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel, visualized with Coomassie blue staining, the respective band cut from the gel and prepared for analysis by in-gel digestion with trypsin (K17 and K64) or pepsin (K206). After desalting, samples were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the determination of full-length protein mass, recombinant proteins were analyzed on a micrOTOF II (Bruker) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC system. Compass DataAnalysis (Bruker) software was used for re-calibration and spectra deconvolution. AP-MS: To identify protein-protein interactions, pulldown assays were performed with H1.2 and H1.2 KxUb conjugates. Samples using Ub as bait proteins or without any bait protein served as control. 2.5 mg HEK 293T cell lysate and 2.35 nmol bait protein in 500 µl total volume were incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged for 10 min at 21885 x g at 4 °C. The supernatant was added to 20 µl Strep-Tactin Superflow resin (IBA Lifescience) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed, followed by elution of bound proteins in 2.5 mM desthiobiotin. For identification of co-purified proteins, elution fractions were freeze-dried, followed by tryptic in-solution digestion, desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each pulldown was performed in biological triplicates and measured in technical duplicate.  Ubiquitylation assay: In vitro ubiquitylation assays were performed with Ub-activating enzyme E1, UBA1, Ub-conjugating enzyme E2, UBCH5B, and E3 ligase HUWE1 (catalytic domain, 1147 aa (amino acids)/aa 3228-4374). 8.2 ng/µl E1, 8.3 ng/µl E2 and 25 ng/µl E3 were incubated with 0.3 µg/µl Ub (Ub (SA)) (Sigma-Aldrich) in 2 mM ATP, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl. For H1.2 ubiquitylation, 4.7 µM H1.2 were added, and samples incubated for 20 min at 30 °C. For the determination of ubiquitylation sites, triplicate samples were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, digested by tryptic in-gel digestion, desalted and analyzed on a QExcactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each of the triplicates was measured as a technical duplicate.  Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS): (1) Unmodified H1.2, (2) H1.2 K64Ub, (3) Ub alone or (4) H1.2 together with Ub were crosslinked with SIRT1. The molar ratio of histones/Ub and SIRT1 was 1:1. In total, 80 µg or 87.2 µg of protein were incubated in 1x PBS on ice for 5 min. BS³-H12/D12 (Creative Molecules) was added to a final concentration of 2.75 mM, incubated on ice for 10 min, followed by 20 min at 30 °C, 600 rpm. Finally, the reaction was quenched by the addition of 1 M NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 30 °C, 600 rpm. Each experiment was performed in three independent biological replicates. After crosslinking, samples were vacuum concentrated followed by in-solution digestion with trypsin and desalting. Next, samples were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator, dissolved in 30% ACN, 0.1% TFA and crosslinked peptides enriched by peptide size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex 30 Increase 3.2/300) (GE Healthcare). Elution fractions were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each of the biological triplicates was measured as technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Endogenous H1.2 posttranslational modifications: Samples were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation (M), acetylation and methylation (K), attachment of GG or LRGG (K) and phosphorylation (S, T or Y). Possible protein N-terminal modifications included were acetylation, M-loss or M-loss with acetylation. Modification site-probability threshold was set to 75%. Results were further filtered for no more than three modifications per peptide and only unambiguous PSMs were considered. Generation of site-specifically ubiquitylated H1.2: Raw files were analyzed using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine MS/MS ions search (Matrix Science). Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification as well as the triazole linkage resulting from click reaction with the additional G of Ub G76Aha which is still present after tryptic digest (K) (+C(10)H(13)N(5)O(5); monoisotopic: 283.091669 Da, average: 283.2407 Da). Trypsin cleavage allowing up to two missed cleavages was chosen. For the analysis of peptide spectra of H1.2 K206Ub, which were generated by pepsin cleavage, no enzyme was chosen to allow for the search of every sub-sequence of the H1.2 sequence. AP-MS: Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 with match between runs and label-free quantification (minimum ratio count set to one) enabled. The minimal peptide length was set to five (further settings: default). For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2018-02-22) and the integrated database of common contaminants were used. Further data processing was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software.  Ubiquitylation assay: Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation (M), attachment of GG (K) and acetylation and addition of GG were set as possible N-terminal modifications. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as static modification. Results were filtered for PTM site probability of 99-100% and high confident PSMs. Furthermore, GG-sites were only considered if they are reliably detected in at least four out of six replicates. Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS): Data were searched using xQuest 2.1.3 in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Carbamidomethylation (C) was used as static modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing up to three missed cleavages. Samples which contained unmodified H1.2 or H1.2 K64Ub were searched against a database containing the sequence of Ub G76M, samples with Ub WT were searched against the wild-type Ub sequence. Additionally, all databases contained the sequences of SIRT1 including a C-terminal His6-tag and H1.2 including a Strep- and His6-tag.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Chromatin, Linker histone h1, Histone code, Epigenetics, Posttranslational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology – Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology – Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz


