### Accession
PXD010827

### Title
Genetic analysis of Hsp70 phosphorylation sitesreveals a role in Candida albicanscell and colony morphogenesis

### Description
Heat shock proteins are best known for their role as chaperonins involved in general proteostasis, but they can also participate in specific cellular regulatory pathways, e.g. via their post-translational modification. Hsp70/Ssa1 is a central cytoplasmic chaperonin in eukaryotes, which also participates in cell cycle regulation via its phosphorylation at a specific residue. Here we analyze the role of Ssa1 phosphorylation in the morphogenesis of the fungus Candida albicans, a common human opportunistic pathogen. C. albicans can assume alternative yeast and hyphal (mold) morphologies, an ability that contributes to its virulence. We identified 11 phosphorylation sites on C. albicans Ssa1, of which 8were only detected in the hyphalcells. Genetic analysis of these sites revealedallele-specific effects on growth at high temperature, cell and colony morphology, and resistance to cell wall-active drugs.This analysis could help direct screens for Ssa1-specific drugs to combat C. albicans virulence.The pleiotropic effects of many Ssa1 mutations are consistent with the large number of Ssa1 client proteins, whereas the lack of concordance between the phenotypes of the different alleles suggests that different sites on Ssa1 can affect interaction with specific classes of client protein, and that modification of these sites can play cellular regulatory roles, consistent with the “chaperone code” hypothesis.

### Sample Protocol
CaSsa1 extraction and isolation: an exponential phase culture of C. albicansstrain KC807 was diluted either in YPD and further incubated for 3 h at 30°C, to obtain yeast-form cells (Y), or in YPD + 10% fetal calf serum and incubated for another 3 h at 37°C, to obtain hyphal cells (H). The cells were then spun down at 3000 rpm for 5 min, resuspended in cold distilled water, spun down again and resuspended in binding buffer (50mM NaH2PO4 pH 8.0, 300mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween-20, protease inhibitor mix). 0.5 mm glass beads were added, and the suspension was agitated in a mini-bead beater-24 (BioSpec Products) for 1 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant was separated and the protein was quantitated using the Bradford reagent. The heptahistidine-tagged CaSsa1 was purified from 0.5mg protein worth of cell lysate(0.1 – 0.14 ml) using theDynabeads His-Tag Isolation and Pulldown kit (Invitrogen 10103D) as per manufacturer protocol with the following alterations: siliconized 1.5ml tubes (Fisher Scientific) were used, sample binding buffer volume was 500 µl instead of 700 µl, Dynabeadincubation time was increased to 20min at 4°C, wash volumes increased to 500 µl with addition of 2M Urea in wash buffer, and elution time was increased to 20min at 4°C. SDS-PAGE Gels sample preparation: 30µl of CaSsa1 Ni-NTA eluate from cells either in the yeast (Y) state or hyphal (H) state were loaded onto a 4-12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and run for 50min at 200 V. The gel was stained with 25ml Imperial Stain (Pierce) at room temperature, and destained overnight in dH2O at 4°C.  A 5 cm gel section (~70Kd-~85Kd) was excised with a sterile razor blade for trypsin digestion and LC-MSMS PTM analysis. Trypsin Digestion: each gel section was chopped into ~1mm pieces, washed in dH2O, and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 µl of 200 mMtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µl of 50 mMiodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted sequentially with 5% formic acid, then with 75% ACN in 5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried. HPLC for mass spectrometry: all samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 µl C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated. LC–MS/MS analysis:the samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-ExactiveOrbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.  An inclusion list of expected CaSsa1 proteo-tryptic peptide ions predicted to have PTMs (Phosphorylation, Ubiquitination, or Acetylation) was used allowing for other ions.

### Data Protocol
Database searching: tandem mass spectra were extracted from *.raw files by MSconvert.exe (Proteowizard) and converted to *.mgf files. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping was performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the Candida albicans 140912_SPROT_CANAL.fasta database (downloaded from Uniprot.org on 9/12/2014) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the 140912_SPROT_CANAL.fasta database also assuming trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification.Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, formyl of the n-terminus, acetyl of lysine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine, phosphorylation of serine, theronine, and tyrosine, and GlyGly of lysine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine, formyl of the n-terminus and acetyl of lysine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and GlyGly of lysine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  Criteria for protein identification and PTM site validation: Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide probabilities from Mascot (ion score only) were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [19] with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [20]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. All potential SSA1 PTM sites were validated by manual validation of the MSMS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock proteins are best known for their role as chaperonins involved in general proteostasis, but they can also participate in specific cellular regulatory pathways, e.g. via their post-translational modification. Hsp70/Ssa1 is a central cytoplasmic chaperonin in eukaryotes, which also participates in cell cycle regulation via its phosphorylation at a specific residue. Here we analyze the role of Ssa1 phosphorylation in the morphogenesis of the fungus Candida albicans, a common human opportunistic pathogen. C. albicans can assume alternative yeast and hyphal (mold) morphologies, an ability that contributes to its virulence. We identified 11 phosphorylation sites on C. albicans Ssa1, of which 8 were only detected in the hyphal cells. Genetic analysis of these sites revealed allele-specific effects on growth or hyphae formation at 42&#x202f;&#xb0;C. Colony morphology, which is normally wrinkled or crenellated at 37&#x202f;&#xb0;C, reverted to smooth in several mutants, but this colony morphology phenotype was unrelated to cellular morphology. Two mutants exhibited a mild increase in sensitivity to the cell wall-active compounds caspofungin and calcofluor white. We suggest that this analysis could help direct screens for Ssa1-specific drugs to combat C. albicans virulence. The pleiotropic effects of many Ssa1 mutations are consistent with the large number of Ssa1 client proteins, whereas the lack of concordance between the phenotypes of the different alleles suggests that different sites on Ssa1 can affect interaction with specific classes of client proteins, and that modification of these sites can play cellular regulatory roles, consistent with the "chaperone code" hypothesis.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Post-translational modification, Colony morphology, Hsp70, Q-exactive, Lfq quantification., Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Microbiology, B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion – I.I.T. and the Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Haifa 31096, Israel

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Kornitzer
Department of Molecular Microbiology, B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion – I.I.T. and the Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Haifa 31096, Israel


