### Accession
PXD026307

### Title
Systematic analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Rheum palmatum L． leaves

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a recently discovered posttranslational modification (PTM). Its structure characterization and function illustration have been reported in some species. However, the study of Khib in plant species is still relatively limited.Rheum palmatum L. is a global important  plant. In this study, the first wheat global Khib analysis was performed with leave tissues; with the purpose of uncover the possible biological and physiological role of Khib in Rheum palmatum L.growth and development. Antibody based affinity enrichment technique was used to capture the modified peptides and high resolution mass spectrometry combining bioinformatics was applied to detect and decipher the Khib sites and proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction and trypsin digestion were performed referring previous report with some modifications19. In brief,  leaves were grinded into powder in a mortar with the addition of liquid nitrogen. The powder was dissolved in extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and sonicated for 10 minutes on ice. The remaining cell debris were depleted through centrifugation at 15 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. Then the supernatant was precipitated with ice-cold acetone for 8 hour at −20°C and then centrifuged at 15 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The obtained protein pellet was washed with cold acetone three times.

### Data Protocol
The resulted MS/MS data of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated peptides was processed using MaxQuant software with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Database for Rheum palmatum L. which concatenated with reverse decoy database and common proteins contaminants. The detailed parameters were listed as follow. Mass error for precursor ions and precursor ions were set within 10 ppm and 0.02D, respectively. Cleavage enzyme was specified as Trypsin/P with a maximum of 4 missing lysine or arginine sites. Fixed modification was defined as Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable modification was defined as oxidation on methionine and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on both lysine and N-terminal of protein. The false discovery rate for protein, peptide and modifcation site was specified at 1%. Peptide consisted of seven amino acid residues was set to the shorted peptide length for database search. All of the other parameters were set to default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Lc-ms/ms, Rheum palmatum l

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Dryland Farming Technology/College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong 266109, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jinzhe Du
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Dryland Farming Technology/College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong 266109, China


