### Accession
PXD004688

### Title
Transcription complexes in the embryo

### Description
In this study, we characterized the composition of TFIID and SAGA complexes in the mouse embryo and analyzed the effect of the depletion of a shared subunit TAF10 during development

### Sample Protocol
IP eluates were urea-denaturated, reduced, alkylated and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C, followed by modified trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, California) coupled in line with an linear trap Quadrupole (LTQ)-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3.5 min at 5 μl/min with 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid in H2O and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm, 2.6 μm, 150 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a  240 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 50% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 80% ACN, 0.08% FA in H2O). Peptides were analyzed by high resolution full MS scan (R240K, from 300 to 1650 m/z range) followed by 20 MS/MS events using data-dependent CID (collision induced dissociation) acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using Sequest HT within Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Tandem mass spectra were searched against a non-redundant protein sequence database for Mus musculus containing 16730 protein sequences entries (Uniprot release from 2015-11) where 5 interesting proteins sequences (TrEMBL entries) were added. Cysteine residues were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57 Da statically added) and methionine to be oxidized (+16 Da dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 7ppm and 0.5Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively. False discovery rate was applied using the Target Decoy node from Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
During development, tightly regulated gene expression programs control cell fate and patterning. A key regulatory step in eukaryotic transcription is the assembly of the pre-initiation complex (PIC) at promoters. PIC assembly has mainly been studied <i>in vitro</i>, and little is known about its composition during development. <i>In vitro</i> data suggest that TFIID is the general transcription factor that nucleates PIC formation at promoters. Here we show that TAF10, a subunit of TFIID and of the transcriptional co-activator SAGA, is required for the assembly of these complexes in the mouse embryo. We performed <i>Taf10</i> conditional deletions during mesoderm development and show that <i>Taf10</i> loss in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) does not prevent cyclic gene transcription or PSM segmental patterning, whereas lateral plate differentiation is profoundly altered. During this period, global mRNA levels are unchanged in the PSM, with only a minor subset of genes dysregulated. Together, our data strongly suggest that the TAF10-containing canonical TFIID and SAGA complexes are dispensable for early paraxial mesoderm development, arguing against the generic role in transcription proposed for these fully assembled holo-complexes.

### Keywords
Embryo, Transcription, Paraxial mesoderm, Somitogenesis, Tfiid, Saga

### Affiliations
Proteomics plateform IGBMC - CNRS UMR 7104 - Inserm U 964
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)- UMR 7104 CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg (UdS)

### Submitter
Mathilde Joint

### Lab Head
Dr Stéphane VINCENT
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)- UMR 7104 CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg (UdS)


