### Accession
PXD020074

### Title
Targeted analysis of alternative protein isoforms in the human hearts

### Description
Human heart lysates acquired commercially were digested and processed with shotgun proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring with the aid of predicted spectra from Prosit.

### Sample Protocol
Heart lysates acquired commercially were digested with trypsin and processed with shotgun proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun data were searched with a Comet/Percolator workflow. PRM data were searched with Comet/Percolator and matched with spectral library predicted by Prosit using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing is prevalent in the heart and implicated in many cardiovascular diseases, but not every alternative transcript is translated and detecting non-canonical isoforms at the protein level remains challenging. Here we show the use of a computation-assisted targeted proteomics workflow to detect protein alternative isoforms in the human heart. We build on a recent strategy to integrate deep RNA-seq and large-scale mass spectrometry data to identify candidate translated isoform peptides. A machine learning approach is then applied to predict their fragmentation patterns and design protein isoform-specific parallel reaction monitoring detection (PRM) assays. As proof-of-principle, we built PRM assays for 29 non-canonical isoform peptides and detected 22 peptides in a human heart lysate. The predictions-aided PRM assays closely mirrored synthetic peptide standards for non-canonical sequences. This approach may be useful for validating non-canonical protein identification and discovering functionally relevant isoforms in the heart.

### Keywords
Protein isoforms, Prm, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
UC Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus
University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus

### Submitter
Maggie Pui Yu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie PY Lam
University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus


