### Accession
PXD034934

### Title
Investigating proteome remodeling as a function of mammalian cell size

### Description
Investigating proteome remodeling as a function of mammalian cell size  Experiment design: Condition1: RPE1 cells treated with palbociclib (2days) Condition 2: RPE1 cells treated with palbociclib (6days) Condition 3: RPE1 cells treated with palbociclib (6days) +Torin1 Condition 4: RPE1 cells treated with palbociclib (6days) contact inhibited

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured as described in biological triplicate. Cells pellets were re-suspended in urea lysis buffer: 8M urea, 200 mm EPPS pH 8.0, Pierce protease inhibitor tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32963), and Pierce phosphatase inhibitor tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32957). Lysates were passed through a 21-gauge needle 20 times, and protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). One hundred micrograms of protein were reduced with 5 mm tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP) at room temperature for 15 min, alkylated with 10 mm iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, and were quenched with 15 mm DTT for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated using a methanol/chloroform extraction. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in 100 µL 200 mm EPPS, pH 8.0. LysC (Wako, 125-05061) was added at a 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at room temperature with agitation. Following overnight incubation, trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio, and samples were incubated for an additional 6 h at 37 °C. Tryptic digestion was halted by the addition of acetonitrile (ACN). Tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric reagents (TMTpro 16plex Thermo Fisher Scientific 44522) were dissolved in anhydrous ACN to a final concentration of 20 mg/ml, of which a unique TMT label was added at a 2:1 label:peptide ratio. Peptides were incubated at room temperature for one hour with vortexing after 30 min TMT labeling reactions were quenched by the addition of 10 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Equal amounts of each sample were combined at a 1:1 ratio across all channels and dryed by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were re-suspended in 1% formic acid and desalted using a 50 mg 1 cc SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters, WAT054955) following manufacture’s instruction. Peptides were washed with 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid, eluted with 50% ACN and 0.1% formic acid and dried. Peptides were subjected to fractionation with basic pH reverse phase HPLC chromatography using a linear gradient (5-40% acetonitrile, 9mM ammonium bicarbonate) on XBridge peptide BEH C18 column (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm, Waters). Fractions were collected in 96 well format plate and consolidated on 12 fractions, dryed and re-suspended in 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-class system (Waters). Peptides were loaded on commercial trap column (Symmetry C18, 100Å, 5µm, 180 µm*20mm, Waters) and separated on a commercial column (HSS T3, 100Å, 1.8µm, 75 µm*250mm, Waters) using a 113 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 2s cycle time. MS1 data were collected in the Orbitrap (400-1400 m/z) at 60’000 resolution, 50 ms injection time and 4e5 AGC target. Ions with charge states between two and six were isolated in quadrupole (isolation window 0.5 m/z), fragmented (CID, NCE 35%) and MS2 scans were collected in the ion trap (Turbo, maximum injection time 120ms, AGC 1.5e4); 60s of dynamic exclusion was used. MS3 quantification scans were performed with ten notches; ions were isolated in the quadrupole (2 m/z), fragmented (HCD, NCE 45%) and identified in the Orbitrap (50’000 resolution, maximum injection time 86ms and AGC 2e5).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 2.1.0.0 embedded with the Andromeda search engine  against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 06.04.2021) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides (Trypsin/P), maximum two missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl and TMT16 as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term). Precursor and fragment ion tolerance was set respectively to 4.5ppm and 20ppm. False discovery rate of <1% was used at the PSM and protein level. Reporter intensity for proteins identified with at least 2 peptides (5884) were normalized and missing values (1.7%) were imputed using random sampling from a normal distribution generated from 1% less intense values. ANOVA statistical test (pvalue was corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method) was performed to compare protein profiles in all conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence refers to an irreversible state of cell-cycle arrest and plays important roles in aging and cancer biology. Because senescence is associated with increased cell size, we used reversible cell-cycle arrests combined with growth rate modulation to study how excessive growth affects proliferation. We find that enlarged cells upregulate p21, which limits cell-cycle progression. Cells that re-enter the cell cycle encounter replication stress that is well tolerated in physiologically sized cells but causes severe DNA damage in enlarged cells, ultimately resulting in mitotic failure and permanent cell-cycle withdrawal. We demonstrate that enlarged cells fail to recruit 53BP1 and other non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) machinery to DNA damage sites and fail to robustly initiate DNA damage-dependent p53 signaling, rendering them highly sensitive to genotoxic stress. We propose that an impaired DNA damage response primes enlarged cells for persistent replication-acquired damage, ultimately leading to cell division failure and permanent cell-cycle exit.

### Keywords
Tmt; cell size

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC) ETHZ Zurich

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC) ETHZ Zurich


