### Accession
PXD002733

### Title
Proteomic profile of deleted in breast cancer 1 protein-protein interactions

### Description
Deleted in breast cancer 1 (DBC1) has emerged as an important regulator of multiple cellular processes, ranging from gene expression to cell cycle progression. DBC1 has been linked to tumorigenesis both as an inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDAC), HDAC3 and sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), and as a transcriptional cofactor for nuclear hormone receptors. However, despite mounting interest in DBC1, relatively little is known about the range of its interacting partners and the scope of its functions. DBC1 protien interactions were studied in two cell types, T cells and HEK293 kidney cells

### Sample Protocol
Retrovirus transduction was used to generate CEM T and HEK293 cell lines stably expressing DBC1-EGFP or an EGFP-only control. Immunoaffinity purifications of DBC1-GFP and GFP were performed in quadruplicate from each cell line. Immunoisolates were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then resolved by SDS-PAGE. Gel lanes were cut into 1 mm gel slices and pooled into 6 - 8 fractions Fractions were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were extracted, desalted, and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was submitted to Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4) to extract MS/MS spectra and perform forward/reverse database searching using the SEQUEST HT algorithm (ver. 1.3) against  human and herpesvirus protein sequences, obtained from UniProt-Swiss Prot (2013/08 release), as well as common contaminants. Search result files (msf) from EGFP only and DBC1-GFP samples (N = 4) were analyzed by Scaffold (vers. 3.6.5 or 4.4), while the two cell line dataset were analyzed in separate Scaffold analyses.  Peptide and Protien FDR was restricted to less than 1 and 2%, respectively, estimated  using reverse database protein assignments. Common contaminants were removed and unweighted spectral counts were exported to Excel. SAINT (ver. 2.4) was used to determine interaction specificity using spectral counting as the quantitative measurement. Protein interaction candidates with SAINT scores >= 0.90 were assigned as specific and taken for downstream functional analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Deleted in breast cancer 1 (DBC1) has emerged as an important regulator of multiple cellular processes, ranging from gene expression to cell cycle progression. DBC1 has been linked to tumorigenesis both as an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, HDAC3 and sirtuin 1, and as a transcriptional cofactor for nuclear hormone receptors. However, despite mounting interest in DBC1, relatively little is known about the range of its interacting partners and the scope of its functions. Here, we carried out a functional proteomics-based investigation of DBC1 interactions in two relevant cell types, T cells and kidney cells. Microscopy, molecular biology, biochemistry, and mass spectrometry studies allowed us to assess DBC1 mRNA and protein levels, localization, phosphorylation status, and protein interaction networks. The comparison of DBC1 interactions in these cell types revealed conserved regulatory roles for DBC1 in gene expression, chromatin organization and modification, and cell cycle progression. Interestingly, we observe previously unrecognized DBC1 interactions with proteins encoded by cancer-associated genes. Among these interactions are five components of the SWI/SNF complex, the most frequently mutated chromatin remodeling complex in human cancers. Additionally, we identified a DBC1 interaction with TBL1XR1, a component of the NCoR complex, which we validated by reciprocal isolation. Strikingly, we discovered that DBC1 associates with proteins that regulate the circadian cycle, including DDX5, DHX9, and SFPQ. We validated this interaction by colocalization and reciprocal isolation. Functional assessment of this association demonstrated that DBC1 protein levels are important for regulating CLOCK and BMAL1 protein oscillations in synchronized T cells. Our results suggest that DBC1 is integral to the maintenance of the circadian molecular clock. Furthermore, the identified interactions provide a valuable resource for the exploration of pathways involved in DBC1-associated tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Hdac, Protein interactions, Affinity purification, Saint, Sirt

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


