### Accession
PXD012032

### Title
Identification of DHC2 associated nuclear proteins in DHC2 knockdown U87 cells

### Description
The acquisition of temozolomide resistance is a major clinical challenge for glioblastoma treatment. Chemoresistance in glioblastoma is largely attributed to repair of temozolomide-induced DNA lesions by MGMT. However, many MGMT-negative glioblastomas are still resistant to temozolomide, and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. We found that DHC2 was highly expressed in MGMT-negative recurrent glioblastoma specimens and its expression strongly correlated to poor progression-free survival in MGMT-negative glioblastoma patients. In vivo and in vitro, silencing DHC2 enhanced temozolomide-induced DNA damage and significantly improved the efficiency of temozolomide treatment in MGMT-negative glioblastoma cells. It is known DHC2 is related to intracellular cargo transportation. To identify the potential interacted “cargo” DHC2 transported and explore the underlying molecular mechanisms of DHC2-midiated DNA damage repair, we performed subcellular proteomic and bioinformatic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
DHC2 knockdown U87 cells were produced by DHC2-shRNA lentiviruses. DHC2 knockdown and control U87 cells were treated with TMZ or DMSO for 1 week, and the nuclear fractions were harvested. Digestion of the nuclear protein (250 mg for each sample) was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski JR. The resultant peptides of trypsin digestion were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Empore disc cartridges (Supelco/Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Mass spectrometry (MS) experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five micrograms of peptide was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 mm inner diameter, 3 mm resin) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 120 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). The dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS experiments were performed in triplicate for three biological repetitions.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the raw MS/MS spectra were processed using a freely available software suite, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched against the UniProtKB database. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of trypsin and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The MaxLFQ label-free quantification method, a retention time alignment and identification transfer protocol (“match-between-runs” feature in MaxQuant) described in, was applied, and a novel algorithm was used to extract the maximum possible quantification information. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dhc2, Subcellular proteomics, Mgmt, Glioblastoma, Label-free

### Affiliations
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,China

### Submitter
Yawei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yawei Liu
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China


