### Accession
PXD038039

### Title
Insights into the sulfur metabolism of Chlorobaculum tepidum by label free quantitative proteomics

### Description
Chlorobaculum tepidum is an anaerobic green sulfur bacterium which oxidizes sulfide, elemental sulfur, and thiosulfate for photosynthetic growth. It can also oxidize sulfide to produce extracellular S0 globules, which can be further oxidized to sulfate and used as an electron donor. Here we performed label free quantitative proteomics on total cell lysates prepared from different metabolic states, including a sulfur production state (10 hours post incubation, PI), the beginning of sulfur consumption (20 hours PI) and the end of sulfur consumption (40 hours PI), respectively. We observed an increased abundance of the sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase Sqr proteins in 20PI indicated a sulfur production state. The periplasmic thiosulfate-oxidizing Sox enzymes and the dissimilatory sulfite reductase Dsr subunits showed an increased abundance in 20PI, corresponding to the sulfur-consuming state. In addition, we found that the abundance of the heterodisulfide-reductase and the sulfhydrogenase operons was influenced of electron donor availability and may be associated with sulfur metabolism. Further, we isolated and analyzed the extracellular sulfur globules in the different metabolic states in order to study their morphology and the sulfur cluster composition, yielding 58 previously uncharacterized proteins in purified globules. Our results show that Cba tepidum regulates the cellular levels of enzymes involved in sulfur metabolism in response to the availability of reduced sulfur compounds.

### Sample Protocol
Cba tepidum cell pellets were lysed in an ultrasonic bath for 20 min on ice in S-TRAP lysis buffer, supplemented with 1 µl benzonase. Protein samples (200 µg from cell pellets; 100 µl sulfur globule suspension) were reduced with TCEP (20 mM, 30 min, 37°C) and cysteines alkylated with IAA (40 mM, 20 min, RT) in the dark. Subsequent proteolytic digests were performed using S-TRAP minis (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were further desalted and purified on Isolute C18 SPE cartridges (Biotage, Sweden) and dried in an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany).  After solubilization in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ACN/water (95/5, v/v), samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher, Germany) system, equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column (2 cm * 75 µm, particle size: 3 µm; Thermo Fisher) and a C18 analytical column (50 cm * 75 µm, particle size: 1.7 µm; CoAnn Technologies) with an integrated liquid-junction and fused silica emitter, coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany).  Trapping was performed for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 µl/min using loading buffer (98/2 (v/v) water/ACN with 0.05% TFA) and peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with the following gradients: 4 to 48% B in 45 min, 48 to 90% B in 1 min and constant 90 % B for 9 min followed by 20 min column re-equilibration at 4% B for less complex sulfur globule samples and 4 to 33% B in 150 min, 33 to 48% B in 30 min, 48 to 90% B in 1 min and constant 90 % B for 5 min followed by 20 min column re-equilibration at 4% B for whole cell lysates with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80/20 (v/v) ACN/water).  Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Nano Flex ESI-source and analysed in data-dependent-mode. Survey scans were acquired over the mass range from 350 - 1400 m/z in the Orbitrap (maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC (automatic gain control) fixed at 2x10E5 with 60K mass resolution) and sequence information was acquired by a top speed method with a fixed cycle time of 2 s for the survey and following MS/MS-scans. MS/MS-scans were acquired for the most abundant precursors with a charge state from 2 to 10 and an intensity minimum of 3x10E4. Picked precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.4 m/z isolation window and fragmented using HCD (NCE (normalized collision energy) = 30%). For MS/MS spectra, an AGC of 10E4 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms were used and detection was carried out in the Orbitrap using 30K mass resolution. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed in MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0). Database searches were performed against the Uniprot proteome for Cba tepidum (UP000001007, retrieved 21-11-26) using default parameters for the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Further search parameters were strict trypsin specificity with a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids and allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The false-discovery-rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1% and label free quantification (LFQ) performed with a minimum of two unique peptides for a protein and match between runs enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
"chlorobaculum tepidum", Lfq, "sulfur metabolism"

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian D. Langer
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research


