### Accession
PXD002918

### Title
Analysis of skeletal muscle from a tailored pig model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Description
We recently generated a novel genetically engineered pig model displaying the fundamental biochemical, clinical and pathological hallmarks of human DMD. To get insight into the hierarchy of molecular derangements during progression of muscular dystrophy, we performed a label free proteome analysis of biceps femoris muscle samples from 2-day-old and 3-month-old DMD and WT pigs.

### Sample Protocol
Small pieces from the frozen muscle samples were excised, using a scalpel and transferred to a 1.5-ml reaction tube. Per mg of tissue, 15 µl of a buffer containing 8 M urea and 0.4 M NH3HCO3 was added. Tissues were lysed using a homogenizer (ART-MicraD8, ART Prozess- & Labortechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Müllheim, Germany) at a speed of 23,500 rpm for 30 sec and further homogenized by centrifugation (1 min, 2500  g) through QIA-Shredder devices (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Protein concentrations were determined by a Bradford assay (26) using BSA as a standard. Prior to tryptic digestion, protein concentrations were adjusted with 8 M urea and 0.4 M NH3HCO3 to give a 1 mg/ml solution. 100 µl lysate, corresponding to 100 µg protein, were further processed adding DTE to a final concentration of 4 mM. After 30 min incubation at room temperature, cysteine residues were blocked by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 8 mM and further incubated for 30 min in the dark. After dilution with water to give a concentration of 1 M urea, 2 µg porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptide samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Scientific). A solution of 5 µg of peptides diluted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) was injected at a flow rate of 5 µl/min and bound on a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particles, Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min at 40 °C with a 50 cm separation column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm) using consecutive linear gradients, from 2 % to 25 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 100 % ACN) in 320 min and from 25 % to 50 % solvent B in 120 min. For data acquisition (positive ion mode), cycles of one MS scan (mass range m/z 300–2000) followed by five data dependent CID MS/MS scans (collision energy 35 %) were performed.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed and searched, using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.1. For database searching, the Sus scrofa subset of the UniProt and the built-in common contaminants database was used. For identification, default values of MaxQuant were applied, leading to a protein FDR of 1 %. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. For quantification, the implemented label-free quantification (LFQ) strategy (28) was used with the match between runs option enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is caused by genetic deficiency of dystrophin and characterized by massive structural and functional changes of skeletal muscle tissue, leading to terminal muscle failure. We recently generated a novel genetically engineered pig model reflecting pathological hallmarks of human DMD better than the widely used mdx mouse. To get insight into the hierarchy of molecular derangements during DMD progression, we performed a proteome analysis of biceps femoris muscle samples from 2-day-old and 3-month-old DMD and wild-type (WT) pigs. The extent of proteome changes in DMD vs. WT muscle increased markedly with age, reflecting progression of the pathological changes. In 3-month-old DMD muscle, proteins related to muscle repair such as vimentin, nestin, desmin and tenascin C were found to be increased, whereas a large number of respiratory chain proteins were decreased in abundance in DMD muscle, indicating serious disturbances in aerobic energy production and a reduction of functional muscle tissue. The combination of proteome data for fiber type specific myosin heavy chain proteins and immunohistochemistry showed preferential degeneration of fast-twitch fiber types in DMD muscle. The stage-specific proteome changes detected in this large animal model of clinically severe muscular dystrophy provide novel molecular readouts for future treatment trials.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Dmd, Muscle, Model organism, Pig

### Affiliations
Dr. Thomas Fröhlich Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Gene Center Munich Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU) Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Dr. Thomas Fröhlich Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Gene Center Munich Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU) Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


