### Accession
PXD005095

### Title
A role for barley calcium-dependent protein kinase CPK2a in the response to drought

### Description
Increasing the drought tolerance of crops is one of the most challenging goals in plant breeding. To improve crop productivity during periods of water deficit, it is essential to understand the complex regulatory pathways that adapt plant metabolism to environmental conditions. Among various plant hormones and second messengers, calcium ions are known to be involved in drought stress perception and signaling. Plants have developed specific calcium-dependent protein kinases that convert calcium signals into phosphorylation events. In this study we attempted to elucidate the role of a calcium-dependent protein kinase in the drought stress response of barley (Hordeum vulgare L.), one of the most economically important crops worldwide. The ongoing barley genome project has provided useful information about genes potentially involved in the drought stress response, but information on the role of calcium-dependent kinases is still limited. We found that the gene encoding the calcium-dependent protein kinase HvCPK2a was significantly upregulated in response to drought. To better understand the role of HvCPK2a in drought stress signaling, we generated transgenic Arabidopsis plants that overexpressed the corresponding coding sequence. Overexpressing lines displayed drought sensitivity, reduced nitrogen balance index, an increase in total chlorophyll content and decreased relative water content. In addition, in vitro kinase assay experiments combined with mass spectrometry allowed HvCPK2a autophosphorylation sites to be identified. Our results suggest that HvCPK2a is a dual-specificity calcium-dependent protein kinase that functions as a negative regulator of the drought stress response in barley.

### Sample Protocol
HvCPK2a-GFP-His was transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana plants and extracted with buffer containing 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4; 100 mM NaCl; 0.1% Nonident P-40; 1 mM DTT; 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF); protease inhibitors (EDTA-Free, Roche). Next, the protein extract was incubated with Ni Sepharose resin (GE Helthcare Ni Sepharose 6 Fast Flow) to affinity purify HvCPK2a GFP His together with interacting proteins. To identify phosphorylation sites in barley HvCPK2a, we produced recombinant His HvCPK2a in Escherichia coli Rosetta 2 (DE3) (Novagen) cells. His-HvCPK2a protein was purified from the membrane fraction using Ni Sepharose resin according to standard procedures recommended by the manufacturer (GE Healthcare). Purified proteins were used for in vitro kinase assays. His-HvCPK2a was incubated at 30˚C in kinase buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT) containing 25 µM ATP and [γ-32P]ATP (2 µCi per reaction). Both sample types were then analyzed by mass spectrometry. For the identification of phosphorylation sites, tryptic peptides were additionally enriched in phosphopeptides using MagReSyn Ti-IMAC method according to the manufacturer's protocol (ReSyn Biosciences). Samples were concentrated and desalted on a RP C18 pre-column (Waters). Peptide separation was achieved on a nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) RP-C18 column (Waters, BEH130 C18 column, 75 µm i.d., 250 mm long) of a nanoACQUITY UPLC system using a 45 min linear acetonitrile gradient. Peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization (ESI) using the ion source of an Orbitrap Velos type mass spectrometer (Thermo). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used to obtain ion fragments. An electrospray voltage of 1.5 kV was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.2.0, MatrixScience). The peptide masses and fragmentation spectra obtained were matched against the Arabidopsis thaliana database TAIR10 (70772 sequences/28965710 residues) using the Mascot search engine (Mascot Daemon v. 2.4.0, Mascot Server v. 2.4.1, MatrixScience). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme specificity: semi trypsin; peptide mass tolerance: ± 30 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.1 Da,  fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine and ubiquitination of lysine. The protein mass was left as unrestricted, and mass values as monoisotopic with two missed cleavages allowed. To avoid false positive results, a decoy search was performed. Protein identification was performed using the probability based algorithm of the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science). The expected value threshold used for analysis was 0.05, which means that all peptide identifications had less than a 1 in 20 chance of being a random match. The spectra of peptides reported as being phosphorylated were examined manually to confirm the precise sites of phosphorylation.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing the drought tolerance of crops is one of the most challenging goals in plant breeding. To improve crop productivity during periods of water deficit, it is essential to understand the complex regulatory pathways that adapt plant metabolism to environmental conditions. Among various plant hormones and second messengers, calcium ions are known to be involved in drought stress perception and signaling. Plants have developed specific calcium-dependent protein kinases that convert calcium signals into phosphorylation events. In this study we attempted to elucidate the role of a calcium-dependent protein kinase in the drought stress response of barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i> L.), one of the most economically important crops worldwide. The ongoing barley genome project has provided useful information about genes potentially involved in the drought stress response, but information on the role of calcium-dependent kinases is still limited. We found that the gene encoding the calcium-dependent protein kinase <i>HvCPK2a</i> was significantly upregulated in response to drought. To better understand the role of HvCPK2a in drought stress signaling, we generated transgenic Arabidopsis plants that overexpressed the corresponding coding sequence. Overexpressing lines displayed drought sensitivity, reduced nitrogen balance index (NBI), an increase in total chlorophyll content and decreased relative water content. In addition, <i>in vitro</i> kinase assay experiments combined with mass spectrometry allowed HvCPK2a autophosphorylation sites to be identified. Our results suggest that HvCPK2a is a dual-specificity calcium-dependent protein kinase that functions as a negative regulator of the drought stress response in barley.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Calcium-dependent kinase, Hordeum vulgare l., Drought stress, Mass spectrometry, Post-translational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
UAM
Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Umultowska Street 89, 61-614 Poznań, Poland

### Submitter
Maciej Janicki

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Ludwików
Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Umultowska Street 89, 61-614 Poznań, Poland


