### Accession
PXD014879

### Title
Characterization of the C-terminal post-translational modification pattern of the catalytic C subunit of protein phosphatase 2A by mass spectrometry.

### Description
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is an important regulator of cellular signal transduction pathways. The carboxy-terminal tail of the PP2A catalytic C subunit is thought to be post-translationally modified at three critical sites. Carboxy-terminal methyl-esterification at Leucine 309 is essential for the assembly of most trimeric PP2A complexes. Two phosphorylation sites have been identified at threonine 304 and tyrosine 307. Phosphorylation at Tyr307 has been claimed to inactivate PP2A and has been examined in over 180 studies using commercial antibodies. Yet, surprisingly, Tyr307 phosphorylation has never been identified by mass spectrometry analysis. This fact raised our concern about the existence of this modification in vivo and also about the specificity of antibodies used to detect this modification.  For the first time we were able to identify by mass spectrometry phosphorylation of Tyr307 upon transient overexpression of active Src kinase and detected also tyrosine phosphorylation in hemagglutinin (HA) tags. In addition we were able to identify carboxy-terminal methyl-esterification at leucine 309 and also confirmed phosphorylation at threonine 304. Our analysis of  commercial antibodies against pTyr307 revealed that none of the tested antibodies shows the designated specificity solely for pTyr307 and thus all data generated by these antibodies need to be revisited.

### Sample Protocol
PP2Aca IPs were separated on poly acrylamide gels, corresponding bands were cut out and analysed by LC-MSMS. Gel pieces were cut into small cubes and washed in ammoniumbicarbonate buffer. Disulfide bridges were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and free thiols alkylated with iodoactemide (IAM). After digestion peptides were extracted from the gel by sonication. The peptide solutions were desalted on custom-made C18 stagetips (ref: Rappsilber, J. et al. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1896–1906 (2007)) Peptide samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 60 minutes. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the data-dependent mode survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380–1,500 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 60.000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 17500. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 20 s. For the targeted approach a list of precursors was generated based on the peptides of interest and included in a top 5 - PRM hybrid method with the following parameters: the resolution for the full scan was set to 60000 (at m/z 200), the AGC target to 3×106, maximum fill time to 60 ms. Resolution for the top 5 MS2 scans was set to 30000, the AGC target to 1×105, maximum fill time to 100 ms. PRMs were scheduled based on the retention time observed in previous experiments. PRM settings were 30000 resolution (at m/z 200), AGC target 2×105. The maximum fill time was 250 ms, the isolation window was set to 0.7 Da and isolation offset to 0.2 Da. Normalized collision energy of 28 was applied for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package 1.6.0.16 (http://www.maxquant.org/) (ref: Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008)) searching against the sequences of the PPP2ca construct, the sequences of all the mouse proteins that were identified in the gel bands with at least two unique and razor peptides, and a costum made database of common contaminants. The search was performed with full tryptic specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of STY, N-terminal protein acetylation and C-terminal protein methylation as variable modifications—all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at protein and peptide level for a false discovery rate of 1% and spectra assigned to phosphorylated peptides were validated manually. Data analysis, manual validation of all peptides and their transitions (based on retention time, relative ion intensities, and mass accuracy), was performed in Skyline (ref: MacLean B1 et al., Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics. 2010 26(7):966-8.) In parallel a database search was performed with MaxQuant with the described parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is an important regulator of signal transduction pathways and a tumor suppressor. Phosphorylation of the PP2A catalytic subunit (PP2A<sub>C</sub>) at tyrosine 307 has been claimed to inactivate PP2A and was examined in more than 180 studies using commercial antibodies, but this modification was never identified using mass spectrometry. Here we show that the most cited pTyr<sup>307</sup> monoclonal antibodies, E155 and F-8, are not specific for phosphorylated Tyr<sup>307</sup> but instead are hampered by PP2A<sub>C</sub> methylation at leucine 309 or phosphorylation at threonine 304. Other pTyr<sup>307</sup> antibodies are sensitive to PP2A<sub>C</sub> methylation as well, and some cross-react with pTyr residues in general, including phosphorylated hemagglutinin tags. We identify pTyr<sup>307</sup> using targeted mass spectrometry after transient overexpression of PP2A<sub>C</sub> and Src kinase. Yet under such conditions, none of the tested antibodies show exclusive pTyr<sup>307</sup> specificity. Thus, data generated using these antibodies need to be revisited, and the mechanism of PP2A inactivation needs to be redefined.

### Keywords
Ptyr307- specific antibodies, Tyrosine phosphorylation, C-terminal protein methylation, Protein phosphatase 2a

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Center for Medical Biochemistry, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Egon Ogris
Center for Medical Biochemistry, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


