### Accession
PXD021762

### Title
Mitochondrial mistranslation is modulated by metabolic stress

### Description
Changes in the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis impact the metabolic and physiological roles of mitochondria. Here we explored how environmental stress in the form of a high fat diet modulates mitochondrial translation using mutant mice with error-prone (Mrps12ep/ep) or hyper-accurate (Mrps12ha/ha) mitochondrial ribosomes. We find that while, metabolically both mutations are beneficial in reducing body weight, decreasing circulating insulin and increasing glucose tolerance they cause tissue specific defects when placed on a high fat diet. In contrast to the effect of the mutations on a normal diet the Mrps12ha/ha mice show more pronounced phenotypic and molecular defects as a result of the slow, accurate nature of their protein synthesis. While the Mrps12ep/ep mice accumulate more fat, exhibit larger vacuoles in the liver and lose glucose tolerance, the Mrps12ha/ha mice develop severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hypoxia due to the stress of the diet, showing that benefit or detriment of error-prone and hyper-accurate protein synthesis in mitochondria is dependent on tissue and environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was carried out on mitochondria isolated from hearts or livers from five Mrps12+/+, Mrps12ep/ep  and Mrps12ha/ha mice fed either a chow or high fat diet at 20 weeks. Mitochondrial proteins (100 µg) were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 2.5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, 10 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl). After lysis, samples were diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 and 100 µg of protein were mixed with 1 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37˚C to achieve complete digestion. Peptides were cleaned with home-made STAGEtips (Empore Octadecyl C18; 3M, Germany) and eluted in 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid buffer. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac apparatus (Eppendorf concentrator plus 5305) at 45˚C and the peptides were suspended with 0.1% formic acid, 1.5 µg of peptides were analyzed by LC- MS/MS. For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 50 cm long, 75 µm internal diameter EASY-spray PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Dionex.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer (PD, v.2.3; Thermo Scientific) software was used to process raw (Xcalibur) label-free MS/MS data produced by the Orbitrap Fusion (v.3.0.2041) mass spectrometer as described previously (Ferreira,N 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Changes in the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis impact the metabolic and physiological roles of mitochondria. Here we explored how environmental stress in the form of a high-fat diet modulates mitochondrial translation and affects lifespan in mutant mice with error-prone (Mrps12<sup>ep</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ep</sup> ) or hyper-accurate (Mrps12<sup>ha</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ha</sup> ) mitochondrial ribosomes. Intriguingly, although both mutations are metabolically beneficial in reducing body weight, decreasing circulating insulin and increasing glucose tolerance during a high-fat diet, they manifest divergent (either deleterious or beneficial) outcomes in a tissue-specific manner. In two distinct organs that are commonly affected by the metabolic disease, the heart and the liver, Mrps12<sup>ep</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ep</sup> mice were protected against heart defects but sensitive towards lipid accumulation in the liver, activating genes involved in steroid and amino acid metabolism. In contrast, enhanced translational accuracy in Mrps12<sup>ha</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>ha</sup> mice protected the liver from a high-fat diet through activation of liver proliferation programs, but enhanced the development of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and led to reduced lifespan. These findings reflect the complex transcriptional and cell signalling responses that differ between post-mitotic (heart) and highly proliferative (liver) tissues. We show trade-offs between the rate and fidelity of mitochondrial protein synthesis dictate tissue-specific outcomes due to commonly encountered stressful environmental conditions or aging.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Protein synthesis, Metabolism

### Affiliations
UWA
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and 2ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia

### Submitter
Irina Kuznetsova

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Filipovska
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and 2ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia


