### Accession
PXD033070

### Title
Athaliana light response with TMT labeling

### Description
Incident light is a central modulator of plant growth and development. However, there are still open questions surrounding wavelength-specific plant proteomic responses. Here we applied tandem mass tag (TMT) based on quantitative proteomics technology to acquire an in-depth view of proteome profile changes in Arabidopsis thaliana response to treatment with narrow wavelength blue (B; 450 nm), amber (A; 595 nm), or red (R; 650 nm) light. A total of 16,707 proteins were identified with 9,120 proteins quantified across all three light treatments in three biological replicates (9 samples in total). This enabled examination of changes in the abundance for proteins expressed at lower levels with important regulatory roles, including transcription factors and hormone signaling. Importantly, 18% (1,631 proteins) of the A. thaliana proteome is differentially abundant in response to narrow wavelength lights, and changes in proteome correlate with different morphologies exhibited by plants in these experimental groups. This high-resolution resource for A. thaliana provides baseline data and a tool for defining molecular mechanisms that control fundamental aspects of a plant’s response to light wavelengths, with implications in plant development and adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen leaves were homogenized with mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. To maximize the reliability and breadth of proteome coverage [23], a TMT-based isobaric labeling technology was utilized to quantitatively compare the proteomes of the rosette samples. Twelve fractions were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC pump. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000. The ten most intense ions were selected for MS/MS. Previously interrogated precursor ions were excluded using a dynamic window of 75 seconds ± 10 ppm. The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 0.5 m/z. MS2 scans were acquired in the IT using CID at 35% NCE. Ten product ions were isolated using synchronous precursor selection and fragmented using higher energy CID of 55% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzXML and spectra were identified with SEQUEST. Spectral searches were done with the following parameters: 50 PPM precursor tolerance, fully tryptic peptides only, fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da with a static modification of TMT (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da). Oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was specified as a variable modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was obtained via a linear discriminant analysis that utilized several features (XCorr, deltaCorr, PPM, missed cleavages, and charge state). Resulting peptides were further filtered to provide a 1% protein FDR. Proteins were collapsed into groups via the rules of parsimony. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted and divided by reported noise values to derive TMT reporter ion S/N.

### Publication Abstract
Incident light is a central modulator of plant growth and development. However, there are still open questions surrounding wavelength-specific plant proteomic responses. Here we applied tandem mass tag based quantitative proteomics technology to acquire an in-depth view of proteome changes in Arabidopsis thaliana response to narrow wavelength blue (B; 450&#xa0;nm), amber (A; 595&#xa0;nm), and red (R; 650&#xa0;nm) light treatments. A total of 16,707 proteins were identified with 9120 proteins quantified across all three light treatments in three biological replicates. This enabled examination of changes in the abundance for proteins with low abundance and important regulatory roles including transcription factors and hormone signaling. Importantly, 18% (1631 proteins) of the A. thaliana proteome is differentially abundant in response to narrow wavelength lights, and changes in proteome correlate well with different morphologies exhibited by plants. To showcase the usefulness of this resource, data were placed in the context of more than thirty published datasets, providing orthogonal validation and further insights into light-specific biological pathways, including Systemic Acquired Resistance and Shade Avoidance Syndrome. This high-resolution resource for A. thaliana provides baseline data and a tool for defining molecular mechanisms that control fundamental aspects of plant response to changing light conditions, with implications in plant development and adaptation. SIGNIFICANCE: Understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in wavelength-specific response of plant is question of widespread interest both to basic researchers and to those interested in applying such knowledge to the engineering of novel proteins, as well as targeted lighting systems. Here we sought to generate a high-resolution proteomic profile of plant leaves, based on exposure to specific narrow-wavelength lights. Although changes in plant physiology in response to light spectral composition is well documented, there is limited knowledge on the roles of specific light wavelengths and their impact. Most previous studies have utilized relatively broad wavebands in their experiments. Such multi-wavelengths lights trigger diverse and complex signaling networks that pose major challenges in inference of wavelength-specific molecular processes that underly the plant response. Moreover, most studies have compared the effect of blue and red wavelengths comparing with FL, as control. As FL light consists the mixed spectra composition of both red and blue as well as numerous other wavelengths, comparing undeniably results in inconsistent and overlapping responses that will hamper effects to elucidate the plant response to specific wavelengths [1, 2]. Monitoring plant proteome response to specific wavelengths and further contrasting the changes with one another, rather than comparing plants proteome to FL, is thus necessary to gain detailed insights on underlying biological pathways and their consequences in plant physiology. Here, we employed narrow wavelength LED lights in our design to eliminate a potential overlap in molecular responses by ensuring non-overlapping wavelengths in the light treatments. We further applied TMT-labeling technology to gain a high-resolution view on the proteome changes. Our proteomics data provides an in-depth coverage suitable for system-wide analyses, providing deep insights on plant molecular response particularly because of the tremendous increase in the coverage of identified proteins which outreach the other biological data.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana; development and adaptation; narrow wavelength; tmt-labeling technology

### Affiliations
Department of Bioresource Engineering, McGill University, Macdonald Campus, 21,111 Lakeshore Road, Ste-Anne-De-Bellevue, Quebec, Canada
McGill University

### Submitter
Nafiseh Yavari

### Lab Head
Dr Nafiseh Yavari
Department of Bioresource Engineering, McGill University, Macdonald Campus, 21,111 Lakeshore Road, Ste-Anne-De-Bellevue, Quebec, Canada


