### Accession
PXD017223

### Title
Global proteomics proteasome mutants

### Description
Temperature sensitive(TS)missense mutants have been foundational in the characterization of the function of essential genes due to their pronounced cellular phenotypes that are likely associated with protein functional disruption. However, an unbiased approach for the analysis of the biochemical and biophysical changes in missense mutants within the context of their functional proteomes is lacking. We applied mass spectrometry (MS) based thermal proteome profiling (TPP)to investigate the proteome-wide effects of missense mutations in a specific application of TPP that we refer to as mutant Thermal Proteome Profiling (mTPP). This study characterized the global changes in mRNA abundance, protein abundance, and protein thermal stability as a result of missense mutants within two subunits of the yeast ubiquitin-proteasome system. Global protein abundance measurements and RNA sequencing data resulted in a large number of possible candidates that could be causing the phenotypic changes observed in the mutant strains. The additional information gained from mTPP along with complementary proteomic and transcriptomic experiments allows for multiomic intersection analysis that may reveal interesting regulatory categories to pursue in follow-up mechanistic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of WT, pup2-ts, and rpn5-ts were prepared as explained above. Unlike the previous preparation, cells were lysed in 8M urea using a mini bead beater and a vortex genie. 50 μg equivalent of protein from each lysate were then subjected to reduction, alkylation, proteolytic digestion, and de-salting as described above. Peptide samples were labeled using a 10plex kit (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA). Specific labelling reagents corresponding to TMT127N; TMT127C; TMT128N; TMT128C; TMT129N; TMT129C; TMT130N, TMT130C, and TMT131 were respectively used to label the peptide solutions derived from three replicates from each genotype WT, PUP2-TS, and RPN5-TS. Following reaction quenching, mixing, and the subsequent drying step, the resulting peptide mixture was fractionated as described, resulting in 8 fractions. Each fraction was dried completely using a speed vacuum system and resuspended in .1% formic acid (30 μL) prior to the below explained nano-LCMS/MS analysis. Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap FusionÔ LumosÔ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA) coupled to an EASY-nLCÔ HPLC system (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA). 18 μL equivalent volume of the resuspended fractions were loaded onto an in-house prepared reversed phase column using 600 bar as applied maximum pressure. Each reversed phase column was prepared by pulling a 100 μm fusedsilica column to carry ca. 5 μm tip for the nanospray using a P-2000 laser puller, and then packing the capillary with C18 reverse phase resin (particle size: 3 μm diameter; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The peptides were eluted using a 180-minute gradient increasing from 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The peptides were eluted using a 180minute gradient increasing from 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Nano-LC mobile phase was introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex Source (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Denmark). During peptide elution, the heated capillary temperature was kept at 275 oC and ion spray voltage was kept at 2.6 kV. The mass spectrometer method was operated in positive ion mode for 180 minutes having a cycle time of 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method that was programmed to have 2 data dependent scan events following the first survey MS scan. During MS1, using a wide quadrupole isolation, survey scans were obtained with an Orbitrap resolution of 120 k with vendor defined parameters―m/z scan range, 375-1500; maximum injection time, 50; AGC target, 4E5; micro scans, 1; RF Lens (%), 30; “DataType”, profile; Polarity, Positive with no source fragmentation and to include charge states 2 to 7 for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for fragmentation was kept at 60 seconds. During MS2, the following vendor defined parameters were assigned to isolate and fragment the selected precursor ions. Isolation mode = Quadrupole; Isolation Offset = Off; Isolation Window = 0.7; Multi-notch Isolation = False; Scan Range Mode = Auto Normal; FirstMass = 120; Activation Type = CID; Collision Energy (%) = 35; Activation Time = 10 ms; Activation Q = 0.25; Multistage Activation = False; Detector Type = IonTrap; Ion Trap Scan Rate = Turbo; Maximum Injection Time = 50 ms; AGC Target = 1E4; Microscans = 1; DataType = Centroid. During MS3, daughter ions selected from neutral losses (e.g. H2O or NH3) of precursor ion CID during MS2 were subjected to further fragmentation using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) to obtain TMT reporter ions and peptide specific fragment ions using following vendor defined parameters. Isolation Mode = Quadrupole; Isolation Window =2; Multi-notch Isolation = True; MS2 Isolation Window (m/z) = 2; Number of notches = 3; Collision Energy (%) = 65; Orbitrap Resolution = 50k; Scan Range (m/z) = 100500; Maximum Injection Time = 105 ms; AGC Target = 1E5; DataType = Centroid. The data were recorded using Thermo Scientific Xcalibur (4.1.31.9) software (Copyright 2017 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA). The SEQUEST HT search engine was used to search against a yeast protein database from the UniProt sequence database (December 2015). Specific search parameters used were: trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, peptides with a max of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine(C) residues; 2) TMTsixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature-sensitive (TS) missense mutants have been foundational for characterization of essential gene function. However, an unbiased approach for analysis of biochemical and biophysical changes in TS missense mutants within the context of their functional proteomes is lacking. We applied MS-based thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to investigate the proteome-wide effects of missense mutations in an application that we refer to as <u>m</u>utant <u>t</u>hermal <u>p</u>roteome <u>p</u>rofiling (mTPP). This study characterized global impacts of temperature sensitivity-inducing missense mutations in two different subunits of the 26S proteasome. The majority of alterations identified by RNA-Seq and global proteomics were similar between the mutants, which could suggest that a similar functional disruption is occurring in both missense variants. Results from mTPP, however, provide unique insights into the mechanisms that contribute to the TS phenotype in each mutant, revealing distinct changes that were not obtained using only steady-state transcriptome and proteome analyses. Computationally, multisite &#x3bb;-dynamics simulations add clear support for mTPP experimental findings. This work shows that mTPP is a precise approach to measure changes in missense mutant-containing proteomes without the requirement for large amounts of starting material, specific antibodies against proteins of interest, and/or genetic manipulation of the biological system. Although experiments were performed under permissive conditions, mTPP provided insights into the underlying protein stability changes that cause dramatic cellular phenotypes observed at nonpermissive temperatures. Overall, mTPP provides unique mechanistic insights into missense mutation dysfunction and connection of genotype to phenotype in a rapid, nonbiased fashion.

### Keywords
Yeast, Tpp, Tmt, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Sarah Peck Justice 

### Lab Head
Dr Amber L Mosley
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN


