### Accession
PXD021131

### Title
The Bimodal Sugar Code of Neutrophil Myeloperoxidase

### Description
Myeloperoxidase (MPO), an important diprotomeric glycoprotein in neutrophil-mediated immunity, produces microbicidal hypohalous acids, but the underpinning glycobiology remains elusive. Deep characterisation of neutrophil-derived MPO (nMPO) using advanced mass spectrometry demonstrated that under-processed oligomannosidic- and hyper-truncated paucimannosidic- and N-acetyl-β-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc) core-type asparagine-linked glycans decorate the protein. Occlusion of Asn355 and Asn391 and sterical hindrance of Asn323- and Asn483-glycans located in the MPO dimerisation zone were found to shape the local glycan processing thereby providing a molecular basis of the site-specific nMPO glycosylation. Native mass spectrometry, mass photometry, and glycopeptide profiling revealed extreme molecular complexity of diprotomeric nMPO arising from heterogeneous glycosylation, oxidation, chlorination and polypeptide truncation variants, and a lower-abundance monomer. Longitudinal profiling of maturing, mature, granule-separated, and pathogen-activated neutrophils demonstrated that MPO is dynamically expressed during granulopoiesis, unevenly distributed across granules and rapidly degranulated, but surprisingly carries uniform glycosylation across conditions. Complete proMPO-to-MPO maturation evidently occur during early/mid-stage granulopoiesis. The conserved Asn355- and Asn391-sequons displayed elevated GlcNAc signatures and higher oxidation and chlorination activity of the secretory vesicle/plasma membrane-resident MPO relative to MPO from other granules. Endoglycosidase H-treated nMPO displaying Asn355-/Asn391-GlcNAcylation recapitulated the activity gain and showed increased thermal stability and polypeptide accessibility relative to untreated nMPO as measured by activity assays, circular dichroism and molecular dynamics. Endoglycosidase H-treated nMPO also demonstrated elevated ceruloplasmin-mediated inhibition relative to nMPO. Modelling revealed that hyper-truncated Asn355-glycans positioned in the MPO:ceruloplasmin interface are critical for uninterrupted inhibition. We report on novel bimodal roles of the peculiar MPO glycosylation providing new insight into neutrophil glycobiology.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycans were released from nMPO using Elizabethkingia miricola peptide-N-glycosidase F (Promega). Reduced N-glycans were profiled in technical triplicates using porous graphitised carbon liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in negative ion polarity on an LTQ Velos Pro ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Glycopeptides and peptides were profiled from i) nMPO, ii) mono- (αβ) and diprotomeric (ααββ)-separated nMPO, iii) endoglycosidase H- (Endo H-) treated and untreated nMPO, iv) granule-separated MPO, and v) Dg-MPO released from pathogen-activated neutrophils. For i) Reduced and carbamidomethylated nMPO was digested in technical triplicates using sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega), ii) Mono- and diprotomeric nMPO were separated using cooled non-reductive SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were in-gel trypsin digested, iii) Endo H-treated and untreated nMPO (see below) were applied separately to SDS-PAGE. The β-chains (53-58 kDa) were in-gel trypsin digested, iv) Isolated granule fractions were briefly introduced into SDS-PAGE gels. Bands containing all granule proteins were in-gel trypsin digested, and v) Released proteins were acetone precipitated, reduced, alkylated, and in-solution trypsin digested. All peptide mixtures were desalted before LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated using C18 chromatography and detected using a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in positive ion polarity.

### Data Protocol
Glycan fine structures were manually elucidated. RawMeat v2.1 (Vast Scientific) and GlycoMod (Expasy) aided the process. The N-glycan distribution was established from area-under-the-curve (AUC) measurements of extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) using Skyline v20.1.0.76. LC-MS/MS data were searched against the canonical human MPO (P05164) and/or the human proteome (reviewed UniProtKB entries) using Byonic v3.6.0 (Protein Metrics) and MaxQuant v1.6, see Supplementary Table S2 for overview. Variable modifications including Met and Trp mono-/di-oxidation, Tyr mono-/di-chlorination and N-glycan libraries were included in the searches. Glycopeptides with Byonic PEP-2D scores < 0.001 were considered and manually validated. Non-glycan modified peptides were filtered to peptide-to-spectral matches and protein false discovery rates < 0.01-0.03 (MaxQuant) or PEP-2D scores < 0.001 (Byonic). Glycopeptides were profiled based on AUCs of monoisotopic EICs of glycopeptide precursors using Skyline v20.1.0.76 or XCalibur v2.2 (Thermo Scientific). Non-glycosylated peptides and proteins were quantified based on precursor intensities using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) plays essential roles in neutrophil-mediated immunity via the generation of reactive oxidation products. Complex carbohydrates decorate MPO at discrete sites, but their functional relevance remains elusive. To this end, we have characterised the structure-biosynthesis-activity relationship of neutrophil MPO (nMPO). Mass spectrometry demonstrated that nMPO carries both characteristic under-processed and hyper-truncated glycans. Occlusion of the Asn355/Asn391-glycosylation sites and the Asn323-/Asn483-glycans, located in the MPO dimerisation zone, was found to affect the local glycan processing, thereby providing a molecular basis of the site-specific nMPO glycosylation. Native mass spectrometry, mass photometry and glycopeptide profiling revealed significant molecular complexity of diprotomeric nMPO arising from heterogeneous glycosylation, oxidation, chlorination and polypeptide truncation variants and a previously unreported low-abundance monoprotomer. Longitudinal profiling of maturing, mature, granule-separated and pathogen-stimulated neutrophils demonstrated that nMPO is dynamically expressed during granulopoiesis, unevenly distributed across granules and degranulated upon activation. We also show that proMPO-to-MPO maturation occurs during early/mid-stage granulopoiesis. While similar global MPO glycosylation was observed across conditions, the conserved Asn355-/Asn391-sites displayed elevated glycan hyper-truncation, which correlated with higher enzyme activities of MPO in distinct granule populations. Enzymatic trimming of the Asn355-/Asn391-glycans recapitulated the activity gain and showed that nMPO carrying hyper-truncated glycans at these positions exhibits increased thermal stability, polypeptide accessibility and ceruloplasmin-mediated inhibition potential relative to native nMPO. Finally, molecular modelling revealed that hyper-truncated Asn355-glycans positioned in the MPO-ceruloplasmin interface are critical for uninterrupted inhibition. Here, through an innovative and comprehensive approach, we report novel functional roles of MPO glycans, providing new insight into neutrophil-mediated immunity.

### Keywords
Ceruloplasmin, N-acetyl-β-d-glucosamine, : myeloperoxidase, Degranulation, Activity, Biosynthesis, Neutrophil, Granule, Inhibition, N-glycosylation, Granulopoiesis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia


