### Accession
PXD018399

### Title
Reduced proteasome activity in the aging brainresults in ribosome stoichiometry loss and aggregation

### Description
A progressive loss of protein homeostasis is characteristic of aging and a driver of neurodegeneration. To investigate this process quantitatively, we characterized proteome dynamics during brain aging in the short-lived vertebrate Nothobranchius furzeri combining transcriptomics and proteomics. We detected a progressive reduction in the correlation between protein and mRNA, mainly due to post-transcriptional mechanisms that account for over 40% of the age-regulated proteins. These changes cause a progressive loss of stoichiometry in several protein complexes, including ribosomes, which show impaired assembly / dis-assembly and are enriched in protein aggregates in old brains. Mechanistically, we show that reduction of proteasome activity is an early event during brain aging and is sufficient to induce proteomic signatures of aging and loss of stoichiometry in vivo. Using longitudinal transcriptomic data, we show that the magnitude of early life decline in proteasome levels is a major risk factor for mortality. Our work defines causative events in the aging process that can be targeted to prevent loss of protein homeostasis and delay the onset of age-related neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Brains from fish were collected and snap frozen, then lysed in 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH8, 1mM EDTA, 100mM DTT. Samples were vortexed (5x) and sonicated (Bioruptor Plus) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF),high setting,4°C. Samples were centrifuged (3000xg,5 min,RT), and transferred to new tubes. Reduction (15min,45°C) was followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA(30min,RT,dark). 2-300 µg of each sample was precipitated overnight at 20°C with addition of 4x vol of ice-cold acetone. Samples were centrifuged (20800xg,30min,4°C) and supernatant removed. Pellets were washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone,then centrifuged (20800x g,4°C). Pellets were air-dried and digestion buffer added (3M Urea,100mM HEPES,pH8). LysC added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein and digested for 4h (37°C,shaking 1000rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with water and trypsin added at the same enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with shaking (650 rpm). Digests were acidified with TFA and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) under slow vacuum according to manufacturer's instructions. The eluates were dried down and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile,0.1% formic acid in water for MS. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. The samples (500 ng) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/ min. Trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at constant flow of 0.3 µL/ min. The percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3 % to 25 % in 30 minutes, then increased to 32 % in 5 more minutes and finally to 50 % in 0.1 minutes. Total runtime was 60 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. Capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000 FWHM. The filling time was set at max of 50 ms with limitation of 2e5 ions. “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold 5e3 ) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, (cycle time,3s) . The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed with relaxed restrictions. Fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2e3 ions or filling time of 300 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7 + ) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. Additionally, only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (only the most intense charge state selected). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed. Isolation of SDS insoluble aggregates (mice and fish) Pools of brains from young and old mice/fish were lysed (protein conc 30µg/µL) in 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH8, 1mM EDTA, 100mM DTT. Samples were vortexed, centrifuged at 20000x g (5min,RT) and supernatant transferred to new tubes. Samples at this stage correspond to the "total homogenates" referred to in this experiment. To obtain pellets of aggregates, 200µL of lysate were transferred to UC tubes and submitted to ultracentrifugation (100000x g,30min,20°C). Supernatant was transferred and pellet washed twice with lysis buffer, followed by ultracentrifugation. To solubilize the SDS-insoluble proteins, pellets were treated with formic acid (1h,37 °C) with shaking (400 rpm). Samples were dried, resuspended in lysis buffer and boiled (95°C,10 mins), then rebuffered with 5M NaOH.  At this stage, total homogenate and aggregate samples were processed in parallel.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) was used to search the data. The data were searched against a species-specific (N. furzeri in-house or Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01 for mouse) database with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. LFQ values from the output were used to perform quantitative analyses. For aggregate analysis, iBAQ values (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) from the MaxQuant output were used to perform quantitative analyses. Only protein groups quantified in at least two replicates per sample group were retained. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package in R. Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR, denoted as “adj p”)

### Publication Abstract
A progressive loss of protein homeostasis is characteristic of aging and a driver of neurodegeneration. To investigate this process quantitatively, we characterized proteome dynamics during brain aging in the short-lived vertebrate Nothobranchius furzeri combining transcriptomics and proteomics. We detected a progressive reduction in the correlation between protein and mRNA, mainly due to post-transcriptional mechanisms that account for over 40% of the age-regulated proteins. These changes cause a progressive loss of stoichiometry in several protein complexes, including ribosomes, which show impaired assembly/disassembly and are enriched in protein aggregates in old brains. Mechanistically, we show that reduction of proteasome activity is an early event during brain aging and is sufficient to induce proteomic signatures of aging and loss of stoichiometry in&#xa0;vivo. Using longitudinal transcriptomic data, we show that the magnitude of early life decline in proteasome levels is a major risk factor for mortality. Our work defines causative events in the aging process that can be targeted to prevent loss of protein homeostasis and delay the onset of age-related neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Aging brain, Ribosome stoichiometry, Proteasome activity

### Affiliations
FLI Leibniz Institute on Aging, Beutenbergstr 11, 07745, Jena, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
FLI Leibniz Institute on Aging, Beutenbergstr 11, 07745, Jena, Germany


