### Accession
PXD023876

### Title
Proteomic analysis of HCC-1954 and MCF-7 cell lines highlights crosstalk between αvβ1 integrin, E-cadherin and HER-2

### Description
Overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) occurs in 20% of all breast cancer subtypes, those that present the worst prognostic outcome through a very invasive and aggressive tumour. HCC-1954 (HER-2+) is a highly invasive, metastatic cell line whereas MCF-7 is mildly aggressive and non-invasive. We investigated membrane proteins from both cell lines that could have a pivotal biological significance in the metastatic process. Membrane protein enrichment for HCC-1954 and MCF-7 proteomic analysis was performed. The samples were analysed on a two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (2-D-SCX/RP-LCMS system) and the protein expression was quantified by MSE method. High abundance membrane proteins were confirmed by western blot, immunofluorescence, and flow cytometry. Protein interaction prediction and correlations with TCGA patient’s data were conducted by bioinformatic analysis. The comparison between HCC-1954 and MCF-7 membrane proteins revealed that proteins involved in cytoskeleton organization, such as HER-2, β-1 integrin, E-cadherin and CD166 (ALCAM) were more abundant in HCC-1954. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) analysis showed a trend toward a positive correlation between HER-2 and β-1 integrin in HER-2+ breast cancer patients. Differences in protein profile and abundance reflect distinctive capabilities for motility and invasiveness between cell lines. HCC-1954 could be an excellent model to study β1 integrin and epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) involvement in trastuzumab resistance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture - Breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 (HTB-22) and HCC-1954 (CRL-2338) obtained from ATCC (American Type Culture Collection) were grown in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 4.5 g/L glucose and antibiotics (sodium G penicillin 100 U/ml and streptomycin 100 µg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37ºC and 5% CO2.  Enrichment of membrane proteins, quantification, and protein digestion - For membrane protein enrichment the cell surface protein isolation kit (Pierce®, cat. number 89881) was used exactly as described by the manufacturer. This generated two fractions from each cell line: the flow-through (FT) and the membrane-enriched (ME) fractions.  Proteins were quantified by 2D-quant kit (GE Healthcare®).  Enzymatic hydrolysis of proteins was performed according to the FASP protocol as described by Wiśniewski et al., 2009(Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Mann M. Combination of FASP and StageTip-based fractionation allows in-depth analysis of the hippocampal membrane proteome. J Proteome Res. 2009. doi:10.1021/pr900748n). Peptide desalting - The supernatants were desalted using the C18 reversed-phase column POROS R2 (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The homemade columns were packed in a 200 µL tip containing a small piece of fiberglass.  Resuspended C18 resin (100 µL at 40 mg/mL in isopropanol) was added  to bring column length to a few millimetres. The column was washed with 200 µL isopropanol, activated with 200 µL methanol and conditioned two times with 200 µL of 0.1% TFA. The sample was then passed 5 times through the column. After 2 washes with 200 µL 0.1% TFA, the sample was eluted with 50% acetonitrile solution in 0.1% TFA. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended at a concentration of 2 µg/µL in 5 mM ammonium formate buffer containing 5% acetonitrile pH 3.2. Label free LC-MSE analysis - Each sample was analysed in quadruplicate on a two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-SCX/RP-nanoAQUITY UPLC chromatography system, Waters, Farmington, MI, USA) coupled to a SYNAPT G1 HDMS™ mass spectrometer (Waters, Farmington, MI, USA). The samples were resuspended in an anion exchange loading buffer (5 mM ammonium formate and 5% acetonitrile, pH 3.2) to a final concentration of 1 µg/µL. A strong cation exchange column (SCX) (nanoACQUITY UPLC SCX TRAP 180 µm x 20 mm column packed with symmetrical particles of 5 µm diameter) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was used in the first dimension. For the second dimension, a nanoACQUITY BEH130 C18 reversed-phase analytical column (1.7 µm particle size, 130 Å pore size and 75 µm x 150 mm dimension) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was employed. Approximately 2 µg of peptide mixture was injected and 9 µL of a step gradient containing 8 fractions (“salt plugs”) of ammonium formate solution (50 to 350 mM) and acetonitrile (5 to 50%) were applied. The eluted peptides were then separated on the C18 reverse-phase analytical column with a linear gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (mobile phase B) for 80 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The reversed-phase column was equilibrated with 95% A and 5% B, and the gradient was formed by a linear increase in concentrations of 5 to 50% B over 56.8 minutes and then an increase to 85% B after 3 minutes,  and kept at 85% B for 3 minutes.  The gradient was then decreased to 5% B within 3 minutes. Mass spectrum data were acquired in ion positive mode. The flight time analyser (TOF) was calibrated with [Glu1] fibrinopeptide B (GFP) ion fragments (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at a concentration of 100 fmol/µL at 50:50:1, methanol:H2O:acetic acid, in the range 50 to 2000 m/z. The GFP double charge precursor m/z ratio 785.8426 was used for lock mass correction. Collision energies alternated between high and low, remaining for 0.8 s (per scan) in each mode and 0.02 s in the scan interval. In low energy MS mode, the collision energy was 6 eV, and in high energy MS mode the collision energy increased from 15 to 55 eV. Fragmentation of the ions was performed by the collision-induced dissociation (CID) process that generates the MS/MS mass spectrum using argon as an inert gas for collision. The cone voltage of the ionization source was 30 V.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data analysis and protein quantification - Proteins were identified and quantified using the Progenesis QI software v. 2.0 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Mass spectrometry data files for each one of the four fractions, HCC-1954 ME (membrane enriched), HCC-1954 FT (flow through), MCF-7 ME and MCF-7 FT, were obtained in nine raw archives from the corresponding gradient elution steps applied onto the anion exchange chromatography column. Raw archives were merged according to the following schema: HCC-1954 ME1 (RAW file also called "Eluido 1") (HCC-1954 injection 1, injection 1 step 1 to step 2, injection 2 step 3, injection 1 step 4, injection 2 step 5, injection 1 step 6 to step 8); HCC-1954 ME2 (RAW file also called "Eluido 2") (HCC-1954 injection 2, injection 2 step 1 to step 2, injection 3 step 3, injection 2 step 4, injection 3 step 5, injection 2 step 6 to step 8); HCC-1954 ME3 (RAW file also called "Eluido 3") (HCC-1954 injection 4, injection 4 step 1, injection 3 step 2, injection 4 step 3, injection 3 step 4, injection 4 step 5, injection 3 step 6 to step 8); HCC-1954 ME4 (RAW file also called "Eluido 4") (HCC-1954 injection 5, injection 5 step 1 to step 8); MCF-7 ME1 (RAw file also caled "Eluido 1") ( injection 1, injection 1 step 1 to 4, injection 2 step 5, injection 1 step 6 to 8); MCF-7 ME2 (RAw file also caled "Eluido 2") ( injection 2, injection 3 step 1 to 2, injection 2 step 3 to 4, injection 3 step 5, injection 2 step 6 to 8);  MCF-7 ME3 (RAw file also caled "Eluido 3") (injection 4, injection 4 step 1 to 2, injection 3 step 3, injection 4 step 4 to 6, injection 3 step 7 to 8); MCF-7 ME4 (RAw file also caled "Eluido 4") (injection 5, injection 5 step 1 to 2, injection 4 step 3, injection 5 step 4 to 8); HCC-1954 FT1 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 1") (injection 1, injection 1 step 1 to step 8); HCC-1954 FT2 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 2") (injection 2, injection 2 step 1 to step 8), HCC-1954 FT3 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 3") (injection 3, injection 3 step 1 to step 8), HCC-1954 FT4 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 4") (injection 4, injection 4 step 1 to step 8); MCF-7 FT1 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 1") (injection 1, injection 1 step 1 to step 8), MCF-7 FT2 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 2") (injection 2, injection 2 step 1 to step 8), MCF-7 FT3 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 3") (injection 3, injection 3 step 1 to step 8), MCF-7 FT4 (RAW file also called "NAO RETIDO 4") (injection 4, injection 4 step 1 to step 8). Proteomic analysis was evaluated with ANOVA <0.05 for each step separately and then all nine steps analysed individually were combined using the application combine samples embedded in Progenesis QI. Mass spectrum analyses were performed using the revised and reverse human database from the UNIPROT database (http://www.uniprot.org/) published in July 2019. For protein search carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification and the variable modifications considered were methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, N-terminal carbamylation, N-terminal and C-terminal methylation. One trypsin miscleavage was considered acceptable. The precursor ion mass and fragment error tolerance were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Protein identification criteria were based on at least 2 ions per peptide fragment, 5 peptide fragments per  protein and 1 peptide per protein. The acceptable false discovery rate (FDR ) was 4%. After Progenesis QI Program chromatogram alignment, normalisation was performed using the normalisation method for all proteins and relative quantification was based on non-conflicting peptides with protein grouping. Proteins identified as unnamed as well as the reversed ones were removed from the list of identified proteins.  Bioinformatic analysis - Venn diagram was  constructed with InteractiVenn (http://www.interactivenn.net/). Gene ontology and pathway analysis were performed with Panther GO (pantherdb.org), KEGG Mapper (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway2.html) and Proteomaps (https://www.proteomaps.net/). Protein interactions were analysed with String (https://string-db.org/). Volcano plot and Heat maps analyses were carried out with Perseus v.1.6.10.50 and Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/) respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) occurs in 20% of all breast cancer subtypes, especially those that present the worst prognostic outcome through a very invasive and aggressive tumour. HCC-1954 (HER-2+) is a highly invasive, metastatic cell line, whereas MCF-7 is mildly aggressive and non-invasive. We investigated membrane proteins from both cell lines that could have a pivotal biological significance in metastasis. Membrane protein enrichment for HCC-1954 and MCF-7 proteomic analysis was performed. The samples were analysed and quantified by mass spectrometry. High abundance membrane proteins were confirmed by Western blot, immunofluorescence, and flow cytometry. Protein interaction prediction and correlations with the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) patient data were conducted by bioinformatic analysis. In addition, &#x3b2;1 integrin expression was analysed by Western blot in cells upon trastuzumab treatment. The comparison between HCC-1954 and MCF-7 membrane-enriched proteins revealed that proteins involved in cytoskeleton organisation, such as HER-2, &#x3b1;v and &#x3b2;1 integrins, E-cadherin, and CD166 were more abundant in HCC-1954. &#x3b2;1 integrin membrane expression was higher in the HCC-1954 cell line resistant after trastuzumab treatment. TCGA data analysis showed a trend toward a positive correlation between HER-2 and &#x3b2;1 integrin in HER-2+ breast cancer patients. Differences in protein profile and abundance reflected distinctive capabilities for aggressiveness and invasiveness between HCC-1954 and MCF-7 cell line phenotypes. The higher membrane &#x3b2;1 integrin expression after trastuzumab treatment in the HCC-1954 cell line emphasised the need for investigating the contribution of &#x3b2;1 integrin modulation and its effect on the mechanism of trastuzumab resistance.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Hcc-1954, Proteome, Breast cancer, Her-2, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Unidade de Espectrometria de Massas e Proteômica (UEMP) Programa de Biologia Estrutural Bloco D, Primeiro andar, Sala 45 – Centro de ciências da saúde - Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
National Instituit of Cancer from Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Denise de Abreu Pereira

### Lab Head
Dr Russolina B. Zingali
Unidade de Espectrometria de Massas e Proteômica (UEMP) Programa de Biologia Estrutural Bloco D, Primeiro andar, Sala 45 – Centro de ciências da saúde - Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro


