### Accession
PXD016220

### Title
Seminal plasma proteome of chicken with different sperm motility

### Description
We characterized the seminal plasma proteome of eight Beijing-you (BJY) chickens, an indigenous chicken breed in China, differ in sperm motility.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal plasma was immediately separated after semen collection by centrifugation at 4°C. Absence of spermatozoa in the seminal plasma was confirmed by observation under a microscope. Protein from each sample was treated with peptide-N-glycosidase F. Separation was performed by 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Immediately following the electrophoresis, the gel was washed with water and stained using Coomassie blue G-250. Each lane in the gel was cut into four fractions according to protein abundance, and each cut into one mm2 cubes. The cubes were washed with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and Ammoniumbicarbonate (Ambic) to remove the Coomassie blue. The cubes were incubated with DTT and IAA in the dark at room temperature for 60 min for the reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues. The samples were digested with trypsin solution (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 12 h at 37°C in a water bath. The peptides were collected and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The peptides were resuspended and centrifugated at 12 000 g for five min at 4°C, and transferred a volume of 20 µL to a crimp vial. The tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiment was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were used for label-free quantitation of proteins analyzation by Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 against the Gallus gallus reference proteome (UniProt release 2019_03, 27711 proteins, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000539) and contaminants database (https://lotus1.gwdg.de/mpg/mmbc/maxquant_input.nsf/7994124a4298328fc125748d0048fee2/$FILE/contaminants.fasta) with Sequesr HT search engine. The processing workflow for label-free quantification was designed according to the user guide. Oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity was selected as protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The mass spectra were set in the range of 300 Da to 8 000 Da. Decoy database search was set to 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level, peptides for quantification was set as "Unique + razor". Proteins were grouped automatically, and the master protein per group was assigned by the parsimony principle. Contaminants were removed from the protein list.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular mechanisms underlying sperm motility have not been fully explained, particularly in chickens. The objective was to identify seminal plasma proteins associated with chicken sperm motility by comparing the seminal plasma proteomic profile of roosters with low sperm motility (LSM, <i>n</i> = 4) and high sperm motility (HSM, <i>n</i> = 4). Using a label-free MS-based method, a total of 522 seminal plasma proteins were identified, including 386 (&#x223c;74%) previously reported and 136 novel ones. A total of 70 differentially abundant proteins were defined, including 48 more-abundant, 15 less-abundant, and seven proteins unique to the LSM group (specific proteins). Key secretory proteins like less-abundant adhesion G-protein coupled receptor G2 (ADGRG2) and more-abundant serine peptidase inhibitor Kazal-type 2 (SPINK2) in the LSM suggested that the corresponding secretory tissues played a crucial role in maintaining sperm motility. Majority (80%) of the more-abundant and five specific proteins were annotated to the cytoplasmic domain which might be a result of higher plasma membrane damage and acrosome dysfunction in LSM. Additionally, more-abundant mitochondrial proteins were detected in LSM seminal plasma associated with lower spermatozoa mitochondrial membrane potential (&#x394;&#x3a8;m) and ATP concentrations. Further studies showed that the spermatozoa might be suffering from oxidative stress, as the amount of spermatozoa reactive oxygen species (ROS) were largely enhanced, seminal malondialdehyde (MDA) concentrations were increased, and the seminal plasma total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) were decreased. Our study provides an additional catalogue of chicken seminal plasma proteome and supports the idea that seminal plasma could be as an indicator of spermatozoa physiology. More-abundant of acrosome, mitochondria and sperm cytoskeleton proteins in the seminal plasma could be a marker of sperm dysfunction and loss of motility. The degeneration of spermatozoa caused by the reduced seminal T-AOC and enhanced oxidative stress might be potential determinants of low sperm motility. These results could extend our understanding of sperm motility and sperm physiology regulation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Sperm motility, Chicken, Seminal plasma, Label-free

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Jilan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jilan Chen
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


