### Accession
PXD023032

### Title
The immunopeptidome of HLA-DR from PBMC

### Description
Quantifiying the impact of initial cell counts on the identified HLA-DR immunopeptidome of PBMC.

### Sample Protocol
For each replicate 5x10^7and 1x10^8cells were lysed, and HLA-DR was pulled down using L243 antibody (Bio X cell). Peptides were released from HLA-DR using 0.1 M acetic acid and purified using C18 purifications columns. Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). The samples were washed on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) for 2 min with 2% ACN/0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 20 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C-18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex). Peptides were separated over a 90 min gradient (5-30%B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05% formic acid) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% formic acid). Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 250 and 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense precursors with charge states greater than 2+ were selected with an isolation window of 2.1 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies (NCE) of 27.5 at a resolution of 17,500. Maximum MS2 ion injection time was set to 200 ms. Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (20 seconds) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was carried out using MHCQuant using the human reference proteome available on Uniprot. With a peptide-level False Discovery rate of 5% and peptide length range of 9 to 27 amino acids, all other values where set to their default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-dr, Immunopeptidome, Hla-ii, Pbmc, Human blood

### Affiliations
Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany
Institute of Experimental Medicine, Kiel University

### Submitter
Hesham  ElAbd

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Andreas Tholey
Institute of Experimental Medicine, Kiel University


