### Accession
PXD038932

### Title
Development and validation of a method for analyzing the sialylated glycopeptides of recombinant erythropoietin in urine using LC-HRMS

### Description
1. Profiling of sialylated glycopeptides from rEPO was performed via LC–HRMS 2. LC–HRMS methods for analyzing sialylated glycopeptide in urine samples were developed 3. The method was validated and applied to detection of rEPO biosimilars in urine

### Sample Protocol
1.Sialylated glycopeptide enrichment  2.Immuno-affinity purification of EPO from urine  3.LC for rEPO sialylated glycopeptide detection In the target-selected ion monitoring (t-SIM)/ddms2 mode for the target glycopeptide, the gradient elution process consisted of the following steps: 12% mobile phase B linear to 22% mobile phase B until 28.5 min; 35% mobile phase B linear to 95% mobile phase B until 29 min; 2 min of isocratic flow in 95% mobile phase B; 95% mobile phase B linear to 2% mobile phase B until 31.1 min; and 4 min of isocratic flow in 2% mobile phase B with a total run time of 35 min. After cooling the samples, enzyme digestion was performed as previously described.  MS for rEPO sialylated glycopeptide detection Samples were analyzed for the presence of the target glycopeptide using Exploris 240 MS provided by Thermo Fisher Scientific. The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. The voltage of the ion spray was 1.8 kV in the positive mode. The auxiliary gas flow rate, sheath gas flow rate, and sweep gas flow rate was set to 0 arbitrary units. For the t-SIM mode, the mass scan was analyzed at a resolution of 120,000. The value of AGC was set to 2 × 106, and the maximum injection time was 200 ms. The MS/MS mode, isolation window (m/z): 2. HCD Stepped collision energies (V): 10, 20, and 30. The resolution was set to 120,000, AGC was set to 2 × 105, and the maximum injection time was 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
In Byonic software, the fragmentation type was set to QTOF/HCD, and the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The cleavage site was EDRK, the cleavage side was C-terminus, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The digestion specificity was set to the fully specific (fastest) mode. Missed cleavages were set to 2. Protein FDR was 1% FDR or 20 reverse count. The maximum precursor mass was 10,000, and the maximum number of precursors per MS/MS was 5. The glycan list was set to N-glycan 47 rEPO provided by Byonic.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein hormone that stimulates red blood cell production. It is produced naturally in the body and is used to treat patients with anemia. Recombinant EPO (rEPO) is used illicitly in sports to improve performance by increasing the blood's capacity to carry oxygen. The World Anti-Doping Agency has therefore prohibited the use of rEPO. In this study, we developed a bottom-up mass spectrometric method for profiling the site-specific N-glycosylation of rEPO. We revealed that intact glycopeptides have a site-specific tetra-sialic glycan structure. Using this structure as an exogenous marker, we developed a method for use in doping studies. The profiling of rEPO N-glycopeptides revealed the presence of tri- and tetra-sialylated N-glycopeptides. By selecting a peptide with a tetra-sialic acid structure as the target, its limit of detection (LOD) was estimated to be&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;500&#xa0;pg/mL. Furthermore, we confirmed the detection of the target rEPO glycopeptide using three other rEPO products. We additionally validated the linearity, carryover, selectivity, matrix effect, LOD, and intraday precision of this method. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a doping analysis using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry-based detection of the rEPO glycopeptide with a tetra-sialic acid structure in human urine samples.

### Keywords
Erythropoietin, Doping control, Liquid chromatography, Mass spectrometry, Sialylated glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Korea university and Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Korea institute of science and technology, Doping control center, Seoul, S,Korea

### Submitter
YOONDAM SEO

### Lab Head
Dr Yoondam, Seo
Korea institute of science and technology, Doping control center, Seoul, S,Korea


