### Accession
PXD022865

### Title
The reproductive toxicant acrylamide modulates the mouse epididymal proteome to drive alterations to the sperm epigenome and dysregulate embryo development

### Description
Paternal exposure to a range of environmental and lifestyle factors elicits distinct changes to the sperm sncRNA profile; modifications that have significant post-fertilization consequences. Despite this knowledge, there remains limited mechanistic understanding of how paternal exposures effect the sperm sncRNA landscape. Here, we report the acute sensitivity of the sperm sncRNA profile to the potent reproductive toxicant, acrylamide. Further, we traced the differential accumulation of acrylamide responsive sncRNAs to coincide with sperm transit of the proximal (caput) segment of the epididymis, wherein acrylamide exposure altered the expression of several transcription factors implicated in the expression of acrylamide-sensitive sncRNAs. We also identified extracellular vesicles secreted from the caput epithelium in relaying altered sncRNA profiles to maturing spermatozoa, the implications of which manifest in the form of dysregulated gene expression during early embryonic development. These data provide a causative mechanistic link to account for how environmental insults can alter the sperm epigenome and compromise the transcriptomic profile of early embryos

### Sample Protocol
Epididymal epithelial cell preparations from control and acrylamide treated animals were pooled from five to six animals to generate a single biological replicate, with three such replicates being generated for analysis. In brief, thawed cell suspensions containing lysis buffer, 0.1MNa2CO3 containing protease (Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Complete EDTA free), were probe tip sonicated at 4°C for 3 x 10 sec cycles (100% output power) prior to incubation at 4°C for 1 h. A bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was conducted to determine the protein concentration of each sample. Protein solutions were diluted in urea (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea), reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (30 min, room temperature) and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, in the dark). Proteins were digested with Lys-C/Trypsin using 1:30 ratio of protease to total protein concentration, for 3 h at room temperature. The urea concentration was then reduced to below 1 M by addition of 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB; pH 7.8) and incubated at 37°C overnight.  Lipids were precipitated using formic acid (2% v/v final concentration), and peptide populations were purified using desalting columns (Oasis PRIME HLB; Waters, Rydalmere, NSW, Australia). Quantification of peptides was performed using fluorescent quantification (Qubit) and 100 μg of each sample was labeled using tandem mass tags (TMT) and comparative analyses was performed. (TMT 10plex labels; control 1 = 126, control 2 = 127N, control 3 = 127C, acrylamide 1 = 129N, acrylamide 2 = 129C, acrylamide 3 = 130N) (TMT-10plex; Thermo Fisher Scientific).Reverse phase nLC-MS/MS was performed on 11 HILIC enriched fractions using Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was then achieved using an in-house made¬ column, employing a stepped linear gradient of acetonitrile (300 nL/min; 3-25%, 55 min; 25-60%, 70 min; 60-98%, 15 min). A Q-Exactive HF-X-MS System was operated in full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode (data-dependent acquisition). The Orbitrap mass analyzer was used at a resolution of 60,000 to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 300-1,650 and via incorporating a target automatic gain control value of 3x106 and maximum fill times of 50 ms. The 15 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a normalized collisional energy of 32. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 45,000 using an automatic gain control target of 1x06 and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the Uniprot Mus musculus database (25,260 sequences, downloaded 12th November 2019). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and trypsin was designated as the digestion enzyme. Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate of peptide identification using Percolator on the basis of q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed false discovery rate of 1% was set at the peptide level. Protein lists were exported from Proteome Discoverer 2.4 as Excel files. The list of proteins was further refined to only include those with a quantitative value in all three replicates, and a minimum of two unique peptides, resulting in the identification of 4,405 proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Paternal exposure to environmental stressors elicits distinct changes to the sperm sncRNA profile, modifications that have significant post-fertilization consequences. Despite this knowledge, there remains limited mechanistic understanding of how paternal exposures modify the sperm sncRNA landscape. Here, we report the acute sensitivity of the sperm sncRNA profile to the reproductive toxicant acrylamide. Furthermore, we trace the differential accumulation of acrylamide-responsive sncRNAs to coincide with sperm transit of the proximal (caput) segment of the epididymis, wherein acrylamide exposure alters the abundance of several transcription factors implicated in the expression of acrylamide-sensitive sncRNAs. We also identify extracellular vesicles secreted from the caput epithelium in relaying altered sncRNA profiles to maturing spermatozoa and dysregulated gene expression during early embryonic development following fertilization by acrylamide-exposed spermatozoa. These data provide mechanistic links to account for how environmental insults can alter the sperm epigenome and compromise the transcriptomic profile of early embryos.

### Keywords
Acrylamide, Epididymis, Spermatozoa, Sperm maturation, Small non-protein-coding rna, Proteome, Embryo development

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Brett Nixon
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.


