### Accession
PXD025096

### Title
Integration of functional imaging, cytometry and unbiased proteomics reveals new features of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition in ischemic mitral valve regurgitation in human patients

### Description
Background: Following myocardial infarction, mitral regurgitation (MR) is a common complication. Previous animal studies demonstrated the association of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) with mitral valve (MV) remodeling. Nevertheless, little is known about how MV tissue responds to ischemic heart changes in humans.   Methods: MVs were obtained by the Cardiothoracic Surgical Trials Network from 17 patients with ischemic mitral regurgitation (IMR). Echo-doppler imaging assessed MV function at time of resection. Cryosections of MVs were analyzed using a multi-faceted histology and immunofluorescence examination of cell populations. MVs were further analyzed using unbiased label-free proteomics. Echo-Doppler imaging, histo-cytometry measures and proteomic analysis were then integrated.   Results: MVs from patients with greater MR exhibited proteomic changes associated with proteolysis-, inflammatory- and oxidative stress-related processes compared to MVs with less MR. Cryosections of MVs from patients with IMR displayed activated valvular interstitial cells (aVICs) and double positive CD31+ αSMA+ cells, a hallmark of EndMT. Univariable and multivariable association with echocardiography measures revealed a positive correlation of MR severity with both cellular and geometric changes (e.g., aVICs, EndMT, leaflet thickness, leaflet tenting). Finally, proteomic changes associated with EndMT showed gene-ontology enrichment in vesicle-, inflammatory- and oxidative stress-related processes. This discovery approach indicated new candidate proteins associated with EndMT regulation in IMR.  Conclusion: We describe an atypical cellular composition and distinctive proteome of human MVs from patients with IMR, which highlighted new candidate proteins implicated in EndMT-related processes, associated with maladaptive MV fibrotic remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Each piece of frozen MV (n=27) was pulverized in liquid nitrogen, then sonicated in RIPA buffer (Pierce, 89900) complemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein precipitation was performed with chloroform:methanol (2:1) method and redissolve using a solution of urea 6M/thiourea 2M/TEAB 100mM (pH 8). 15µg of protein were cleaved using trypsin/LysC cocktail at 37°C overnight. The peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB column (Waters, USA) and dried with a Speed Vacuum concentrator (SPD1010, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). After re-suspension in 40 μl of 5% mass spectrometry grade acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and 5% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition:  the peptides were analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: An Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray LC heated (45o C) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nl/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 75 min, 21 to 30 % Solvent B for 15 min, followed by 10 min of a ‘jigsaw wash’, alternating between 5 and 95 % Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in a 3 second cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; ion trap scan rate, normal) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (60 seconds).  Mass spectrometric data analysis: The MS/MS spectra were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 01, 2018; 155, 133 sequencing) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The enzyme was set to trypsin (full), with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages, using a 10 ppm precursor tolerance window and a 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% FDR based on the reverse database (decoy) results. In order to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were, RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of five. Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for normalization. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). We used unique and razor peptides per protein for quantification and filtered for proteins with 2 or more unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Echocardiography, Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (endmt), Proteomic, Mitral valve (mv), Histo-cytometry, Ischemic mitral regurgitation (imr)

### Affiliations
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA
Center  for  Excellence  in  Vascular  Biology,  Division of  Cardiovascular  Medicine,  Brigham  and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA

### Submitter
Adrien Lupieri

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Center  for  Excellence  in  Vascular  Biology,  Division of  Cardiovascular  Medicine,  Brigham  and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA


