### Accession
PXD046058

### Title
Protein profiling of plasma extracellular vesicles from rheumatoid arthritis patients.

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by chronic synovial inflammation and cartilage/bone damage. Cytokines like IL-1 and TNF, play a crucial role in the pathophysiology of RA but have limited diagnostic and prognostic value. Recently, extracellular vesicles (EVs) have gained attention in the pathogenesis of this disease, but which processes they reflect in RA is unknown. Therefore, we identified and quantified proteins in plasma-derived EVs from RA patients (RA-pEVs) by mass spectrophotometry (MS) and compared these proteins to pEVs from healthy controls (HC). The observed RA-pEV proteins were coupled to clinical or laboratory  parameters to investigate which RA disease process is reflecting by circulating EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Blood from individual RA patients or healthy controls was collected in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid tubes and within 1 hour after collection centrifuged at 1,690 g for 10 minutes at 4oC to obtain plasma. Next, supernatant (plasma) was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 minutes at 4oC to obtain platelet-free plasma (pfp). Obtained pfp was passed through a 0.22 m filter, and plasma EVs were isolated from 500 µl  pfp by an optimized size exclusion chromatography (SEC) columns. Thereafter, proteins were concentrated by acetone precipitation, and were denatured by adding 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris pH8.5, and DTT (10 mM). Samples were prepared using the FASP protocol on a spin filter and proteins were digested using trypsin. Resulting peptides were analyzed during a 60 minute gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), running in Top20 mode with an exclusion duration of 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data were used to query the Uniprot_HomoSapiens_154578_20160822.fasta (154578 total entries, downloaded 22/08/16) using the free MaxQuant software. Label-free quantification (LFQ), match between runs, and iBAQ quantification were enabled and levels of each protein from individual donors were analyzed using Perseus. Note that the dataset was first filtered on proteins which are present in minimal 4 donors. Furthermore, each protein must be at least detected by 4 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Rheumatology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center (Radboudumc), Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter M. van der Kraan
Department of Rheumatology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center (Radboudumc), Nijmegen, Netherlands.


