### Accession
PXD013075

### Title
KRASG12C inhibition produces a driver-limited state revealing collateral dependencies

### Description
Inhibitors targeting KRASG12C are a promising new class of oncogene-specific therapeutics for the treatment of tumors driven by KRASG12C mutations. These molecules react with the mutant cysteine residue by binding covalently to the switch-II pocket present only in the inactive-GDP state of KRASG12C, sparing the wild type protein. We systematically probe genetic interactions with direct KRASG12C inhibition in cellular models of KRASG12C mutant lung and pancreatic cancer using a genome-scale CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) functional genomics platform. Our data reveal that repression of genes selectively essential in an oncogenic driverlimited cell state, which we term collateral dependencies (CDs), enhances cellular susceptibility to direct KRASG12C inhibition. We nominate two classes of combination therapies targeting CDs that increase KRASG12C target engagement or block residual survival pathways. We demonstrate in vitro and in vivo that both classes enhance response to anti-KRASG12C therapy and propose a new framework for assessing genetic dependencies with driver oncogenes.

### Sample Protocol
H358 or MIA PaCa-2 cells were expanded in conventional 2D culture conditions, adapted to 3D culture in ultra-low adherence plates (Corning) over 72 hours, and treated with DMSO or 3.3 μM ARS-1620 for 24 hours. Cells were then collected, lysed, and subjected to tryptic digest. Phosphoenrichment was then performed with immobilized metal affinity chromatography following established protocols(55). Samples were then lyophilized, desalted, and acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and label free quantification was then performed using MaxQuant (56), and statistical comparison using MSstats (57). Kinase substrate identification was performed using two established databases: Phosphonetworks (58) and RegPhos 2.0 (59)

### Publication Abstract
Inhibitors targeting KRAS<sup>G12C</sup>, a mutant form of the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) KRAS, are a promising new class of oncogene-specific therapeutics for the treatment of tumors driven by the mutant protein. These inhibitors react with the mutant cysteine residue by binding covalently to the switch-II pocket (S-IIP) that is present only in the inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound form of KRAS<sup>G12C</sup>, sparing the wild-type protein. We used a genome-scale CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) functional genomics platform to systematically identify genetic interactions with a KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor in cellular models of KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> mutant lung and pancreatic cancer. Our data revealed genes that were selectively essential in this oncogenic driver-limited cell state, meaning that their loss enhanced cellular susceptibility to direct KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibition. We termed such genes "collateral dependencies" (CDs) and identified two classes of combination therapies targeting these CDs that increased KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> target engagement or blocked residual survival pathways in cells and in vivo. From our findings, we propose a framework for assessing genetic dependencies induced by oncogene inhibition.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Pancreatic cancer, Kras

### Affiliations
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Medicine and Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr John D. Gordan
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Medicine and Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


