### Accession
PXD013736

### Title
Acetyl-CoA flux regulates the proteome and acetyl-proteome to maintain intracellular metabolic crosstalk

### Description
The acetyl-CoA transporter, AT-1 (also referred to as SLC33A1), is a key member of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) acetylation machinery; it transports acetyl-CoA from the cytosol into the ER lumen where it serves as donor of the acetyl group for Nε-lysine acetylation 1,2. Dysfunctional ER acetylation, as caused by heterozygous or homozygous mutations as well as gene duplication events of AT-1/SLC33A1, has been linked to both developmental and age-associated human diseases 3-7. Mice with reduced or increased AT-1 expression mimic associated human diseases 8-10. In this study, we investigated the pervasive effects that dysregulated AT-1 has on intracellular acetyl-CoA homeostasis. Specifically, we used AT-1S113R/+ mice 8, a model of AT-1 haploinsufficiency, and AT-1 sTg mice 10, a model of AT-1 overexpression. We found that reduced AT-1 activity in AT-1S113R/+ mice led to increased availability of acetyl-CoA in the cytosol and spontaneous steatosis. Conversely, increased AT-1 activity decreased the availability of acetyl-CoA in the cytosol and made the animals resistant to diet-induced steatosis. Both models displayed significant metabolic adaptation involving different cellular organelles and compartments. Mechanistically, the metabolic adaptation was driven by changes in both protein levels (proteome) and stoichiometry of acetylation (acetylome) within fundamental pathways. Collectively, our results suggest that AT-1 acts as an important metabolic regulator that maintains acetyl-CoA homeostasis by promoting functional “cross-talk” between different intracellular organelles and compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Quadruplicate liver samples of cytosol, mitochondria, nucleus and whole liver were homogenized, then lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH=8, 5 mM CaCl2, 20 mM NaCl, 1 EDTA-free Roche protease inhibitor tablet and 1 Roche PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor tablet) with a probe sonicator for 3 pulses at 60W, 20kHz for 15 s, each followed by a 30 s pause for cooling at 4ºC. Crude lysates were then centrifuged at 14000g for 5 min, after which the supernatant was collected and protein concentrations were measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Lysate containing 400 μg proteins was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 1h, followed by alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by adding DTT to 5mM. The resulting solution was then diluted with Tris buffer (pH=8) to 0.9M urea and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio at 37 ºC for 18 hours. Digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% and desalted with C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB before labeling. Each batch of 4-plex dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) tags were assigned to two pairs of samples from either cytosol, mitochondria, nucleus or whole liver with two conditions per mouse. 4 mg of each DiLeu tags were suspended in anhydrous DMF and combined with 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methyl-morpholinium tetrafluoroborate (DMTMM) and N-methylmorpholine (NMM) at 0.6×molar ratios to tags. The mixture was vortexed at room temperature for 1 h. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was immediately mixed with 400 μg tryptic peptides from one condition. Peptides were labeled at a 10:1 label to peptide mass ratio and vortexed at room temperature for 2 h. The reaction was quenched by adding 5% NH2OH to the final concentration of 0.25%, after which samples were dried under vacuum. Each batch of labeled peptides was combined respectively as 4-plex mixtures. The mixtures were purified by strong cation exchange liquid chromatography (SCX LC) with a PolySULFOETHYL A column (200mm × 2.1 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å, PolyLC, Columbia, MD). Elutes containing labeled peptides were collected by a FC-4 fraction collector (Rainin Dynamax) and dried under vacuum. The cleaned samples were then fractionated with a Kinetex C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA), and a binary mobile phase at pH=10 (mobile phase A is 10 mM aqueous ammonium formate and mobile phase B is 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN). Gradient was set as following: 0-3 min 1% B phase; B phase linearly increased to 35% from 3-50 min, then quickly increased to 60%, 70% and 100 in 4 min, 4 min, and 2 min respectively, after which the column was washed by 100% B phase for 15 min. Eluents in the linear gradient were collected by 2-min intervals and combined into 10 fractions. Each fraction was dried under vacuum. Peptides in each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and subjected to reversed phase LC-MS/MS analysis with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column custom-packed with 15 cm of Bridged Ethylene Hybrid C18 particles (1.7 μm, 130 Å, Waters). Labeled peptide were separated with a 90 min gradient from 3% to 30% ACN with 0.1% FA, followed by 10 min to 75% ACN and then 10 min to 95% ACN. After that, the column was equilibrated at 3% ACN for 15 min to prepare for the next injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in a top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from m/z 350 to 1500 were performed at a resolving power of 60K and an AGC target of 2×105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The top 20 intense precursor ions were selected and subjected to the HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% followed by tandem MS acquisition at a resolving power of 15K and an AGC target of 5×104, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a lower mass limit of m/z 110. Precursors were subjected to a dynamic exclusion of 45s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc, San Carlos, CA). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Mus Musculus reviewed database with trypsin as the enzyme and maximum two missed cleavages. The parent mass error tolerance was set to be 50 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications included DiLeu labels on peptide N-termini and lysine residues (+145.12801 Da) and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da). Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). Identifications were filtered to 1% peptide and protein FDR. Quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a reporter ion integration tolerance of 20 ppm for the most confident centroid. Only the PSMs that contained all reporter ion channels were considered, and protein quantitative ratios were determined using a minimum of one unique quantified peptide. Reporter ion ratio values for protein groups were exported to Excel workbook and student t-test was performed with biological quadruplicates. Proteins that had >20% fold change and P<0.05 were filtered as significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
AT-1/SLC33A1 is a key member of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) acetylation machinery, transporting acetyl-CoA from the cytosol into the ER lumen where acetyl-CoA serves as the acetyl-group donor for N&#x3b5;-lysine acetylation. Dysfunctional ER acetylation, as caused by heterozygous or homozygous mutations as well as gene duplication events of AT-1/SLC33A1, has been linked to both developmental and degenerative diseases. Here, we investigate two models of AT-1 dysregulation and altered acetyl-CoA flux: AT-1<sup>S113R/+</sup> mice, a model of AT-1 haploinsufficiency, and AT-1 sTg mice, a model of AT-1 overexpression. The animals display distinct metabolic adaptation across intracellular compartments, including reprogramming of lipid metabolism and mitochondria bioenergetics. Mechanistically, the perturbations to AT-1-dependent acetyl-CoA flux result in global and specific changes in both the proteome and the acetyl-proteome (protein acetylation). Collectively, our results suggest that AT-1 acts as an important metabolic regulator that maintains acetyl-CoA homeostasis by promoting functional crosstalk between different intracellular organelles.

### Keywords
Suborganelle, Mouse, Liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Yusi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
UW-Madison


