### Accession
PXD043920

### Title
MLL-AF4 cooperates with PAF1 and FACT to drive high density enhancer interactions in leukemia

### Description
Aberrant enhancer activation is a key mechanism driving oncogene expression in many cancers. While much is known about the regulation of larger chromosome domains in eukaryotes, the details of enhancer-promoter interactions remain poorly understood. Recent work suggests co-activators like BRD4 and Mediator have little impact on enhancer-promoter interactions. In leukemias controlled by the MLL-AF4 fusion protein, we use the ultra-high resolution technique Micro-Capture-C (MCC) to show that MLL-AF4 binding promotes broad, high-density regions of enhancer-promoter interactions at a subset of key targets. These enhancers are enriched for transcription elongation factors like PAF1C and FACT and loss of these factors abolishes enhancer-promoter contact. This work not only provides a new model for how MLL-AF4 is able to drive high levels of transcription at key genes in leukemia, but also suggests a more general model linking enhancer-promoter crosstalk and transcription elongation.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts from HEK 293 cells expressing a FLAG- and HA-tagged fragment of the MLL protein (amino acids 1101 to 1978; containing the CXXC domain as well as the PHD fingers, referred to as FLAG-C-PHD) were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma Aldrich) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM KCl, and 20% glycerol. Beads were washed in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 0.05% NP-40, and 20% glycerol, and then 3 times with the same again but with either 150mM KCl (lanes 1 and 2) or 300mM KCl (lanes 3 and 4). Bound proteins were eluted with FLAG peptide. Nuclear extracts from normal HEK 293 cells with no expression construct were used as a control. Eluted material was run on a 4-12% NuPAGE gel and stained with colloidal blue. Bands were separately cut out of the FLAG-C-PHD and control lanes and submitted for mass spectrometry. The protein samples were processed and analyzed at the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan. Each lane was cut into 12 equal slices and in-gel digestion with trypsin followed by LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described elsewhere

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using the Comet (version 2022.01 rev. 0). Searches were done with the Uniprot Human reference proteome (UP000005640) with reversed sequences appended as decoys (downloaded May 9, 2022). Each search was done using the following parameters: parent mass error +/- 3 Da; fragment bin ion tolerance +/- 1.0005; tryptic digestion with up to 1 missed cleavage; variable modification of +16 Da on methionine and a fixed modification of +57 Da on Cysteine. Search results were then processed using the Trans-proteomic Pipeline (TPP) tools PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet. These tools collapse proteins with shared peptide evidence into protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leukemia, Mll-af4

### Affiliations
MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Thomas Milne

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A Milne
MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK


