### Accession
PXD040467

### Title
Metabolic influence of core ciliates within the rumen microbiome

### Description
Protozoa comprise a major fraction of the microbial biomass in the rumen microbiome, of which the  entodiniomorphs (order: Entodiniomorphida) and holotrichs (order: Vestibuliferida) are consistently  observed to be dominant across a diverse genetic and geographical range of ruminant hosts. Despite  the apparent core role that protozoal species exert, their major biological and metabolic contributions  to rumen function remain largely undescribed in vivo. Here, we have leveraged (meta)genome27 centric metaproteomes from rumen fluid samples originating from both cattle and goats fed diets with  varying inclusion levels of lipids and starch, to detail the specific metabolic niches that protozoa  occupy in the context of their microbial co-habitants. Initial proteome estimations via total protein  counts and label-free quantification highlight that entodiniomorph species Entodinium and Epidinium  as well as the holotrichs Dasytricha and Isotricha comprises an extensive fraction of the total rumen  metaproteome. Proteomic detection of protozoal metabolism such as hydrogenases (Dasytricha,  Isotricha, Epidinium, Enoploplastron), carbohydrate-active enzymes (Epidinium, Diplodinium,  Enoploplastron, Polyplastron), microbial predation (Entodinium) and volatile fatty acid production (Entodinium and Epidinium) was observed at increased levels in high methane-emitting animals. Despite certain protozoal species having well-established reputations for digesting starch, they were unexpectedly less detectable in low methane emitting- 37 animals fed high starch diets, which were instead dominated by propionate/succinate-producing bacterial populations suspected of being resistant to predation irrespective of host. Finally, we reaffirmed our abovementioned observations  in geographically independent datasets, thus illuminating the substantial metabolic influence that  under-explored eukaryotic populations have in the rumen, with greater implications for both digestion and methane metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
To 300 μL of rumen fluid sample 150 μL lysis buffer (30 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH=8), 0.3% Triton X-100, 12% SDS) was added together with 4 mm glass beads (≤ 160 μm), briefly vortexed and let rest on ice for 30 mins. Lysis was performed using FastPrep-24™ Classic Grinder (MP Biomedical, Ohio, USA) for 3 × 60 seconds at 4.0 meter/ second. Samples were centrifuged at 16 000 × g at 15 minutes at 4°C and lysate was carefully removed. Protein concentration was measured using Bio-Rad DC™ Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, California USA) with bovine serum albumin as standard. Absorbance of sample lysates was measured at A750 on BioTek™ Synergy™ H4 Hybrid Microplate Reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Massaschusetts, USA). 40-50 μg of protein was prepared in SDS-buffer, heated in water bath for 5 minutes at 99°C and analysed by SDS-PAGE using Any-kD Mini-PROTEAN TGX Stain-Free™ gels (Bio-Rad, California, USA) in a 2-minute run for sample clean-up purposes, before staining with Coomassie Blue R-250. The visible band was carefully excised from the gel and divided in 1×1 mm pieces before reduction, alkylation, and digestion with trypsin. Peptides were concentrated and eluted using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions, dried, and analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrapole Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Massaschusetts, USA) as previously described

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw data were analysed using FragPipe (v. 19) and searched against the RUDB’s using MSFragger (Supplementary Table S4). Both RUDBs was supplemented with common contaminant protein entries, such as human keratin, and decoy protein entries based on reverse sequences for estimation of false discovery rates (FDR ) . For LFQ, using IonQuant, the Match-between-runs (MBR) feature was enabled. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications, while carbomidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen as digestive enzyme, max missed cleavages allowed was set to one and matching tolerance levels for both MS and MS/MS were 20 ppm. The results were filtered to 1% FDR and quantification was done using IonQuant including normalization between samples and the feature ‘match between runs’ to maximize protein identifications. Perseus (v. 1.6.2.3) was used for downstream analysis. A protein group was considered valid if it was quantified in at least 2 of 4 replicated in at least one diet (CTL, COS, HPO, MAP).

### Publication Abstract
Protozoa comprise a major fraction of the microbial biomass in the rumen microbiome, of which the entodiniomorphs (order: Entodiniomorphida) and holotrichs (order: Vestibuliferida) are consistently observed to be dominant across a diverse genetic and geographical range of ruminant hosts. Despite the apparent core role that protozoal species exert, their major biological and metabolic contributions to rumen function remain largely undescribed in vivo. Here, we have leveraged (meta)genome-centric metaproteomes from rumen fluid samples originating from both cattle and goats fed diets with varying inclusion levels of lipids and starch, to detail the specific metabolic niches that protozoa occupy in the context of their microbial co-habitants. Initial proteome estimations via total protein counts and label-free quantification highlight that entodiniomorph species Entodinium and Epidinium as well as the holotrichs Dasytricha and Isotricha comprise an extensive fraction of the total rumen metaproteome. Proteomic detection of protozoal metabolism such as hydrogenases (Dasytricha, Isotricha, Epidinium, Enoploplastron), carbohydrate-active enzymes (Epidinium, Diplodinium, Enoploplastron, Polyplastron), microbial predation (Entodinium) and volatile fatty acid production (Entodinium and Epidinium) was observed at increased levels in high methane-emitting animals. Despite certain protozoal species having well-established reputations for digesting starch, they were unexpectedly less detectable in low methane emitting-animals fed high starch diets, which were instead dominated by propionate/succinate-producing bacterial populations suspected of being resistant to predation irrespective of host. Finally, we reaffirmed our abovementioned observations in geographically independent datasets, thus illuminating the substantial metabolic influence that under-explored eukaryotic populations have in the rumen, with greater implications for both digestion and methane metabolism.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Protozoa, Metaproteomics, Rumen, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås, Norway

### Submitter
Thea Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Phiilip B. Pope
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås, Norway


