### Accession
PXD002705

### Title
E.coli NrdR Expression and LC-MSMS

### Description
Transcription factors regulate the geneexpression for ordered cellular metabolism, and its change implicated to virulence in several bacterial pathogens including E. coli causing gastroenteritis and colon cancer. Novel transcription regulator NrdR known for regulating ribonucleotide reductase (RNRs) expression for dNTP synthesis is recently implicated to bacterial chemotaxis and cell adhesion. However, NrdR deletion shows no effect on the bacterial growth or virulence in infected flies, and the corresponding transcriptiomic studies indicate to upregulation of RNRs alone. However, this data limited only to the deletion strain and inadequate to draw biological implications when the repressor is active. Here, we have performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of both deletion and overexpression of NrdR. In addition, we have profiled the bacterial fate with the aid of biochemical assays and at physiological level. Our results demonstrate that increased NrdR expression brings a significant change in bacterial morphology, has fitness defect and cannot withstand stress conditions. The fitness defect in stress condition can be attributed to the depletion of proteins in cellular integrity pathway detected from proteome analysis, which is also evidenced by deprived bacterial cell. This also has a negative consequence on its efficiency in colonizing to human epithelial cells. Further corroborating these as direct effects NrdR overexpression causes a significant decrease in global protein expression, primarily in proteins belonging to carbohydrate and amino acid metabolic pathways. Our results increases the understanding on how bacterial cells can infiltrate and colonize in host cells and can thus caters to the broad interest of bacteriologists.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation f E. coli Cell Extract for Global Protein Profiling: The WT, NrdR-deletion (ΔNrdR) and NrdR-over-expression (OE-NrdR) E. coli strains were grown with agitation at 37°C in LB media in the presence of 0.5 mM IPTG and absence of antibiotics. At mid-exponential phase (OD600 of 0.47) the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The fresh cell pellet was then subjected to crude cell extract preparation as previously described.22 In brief, the cells were suspended in modified ice-cold breakage buffer (300 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 10% glycerol and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). To digest nucleic acids, 20 units of DNase I (Sigma) and 20 units of RNase (Ambion) were added, and samples were incubated for 15 min on ice. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) at a final concentration of 1 mM was added to the extract, and then subjected to three rounds of quick freeze-thaw cycles and further lysis by sonification at 20% amplitude with an interval of 1 sec on/3sec off using a Bronson sonifier. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation at 3000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The protein concentrations were determined to be approximately 7 mg/ml from the total cell lysate by Bradford assay, and protein samples were then subjected to further enzymatic digestion. Tryptic Digestion, TMT Labeling and LC-MS/MS: Enzymatic digestions of 20 µl of E. coli cell lysates from WT, ΔNrdR and OE-NrdR strains (approximately 7 mg/ml) were performed as described in the standard protocol (Thermo Scientific, TMT mass tagging and sample preparation).23 In brief, individual samples were suspended in 20 µl reduction buffer (200 mM DTE, 8 M urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Samples were further reduced with buffer containing 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. The reduced samples were digested first with Lys-C protease for 4 h and then with trypsin for 16 h at a ratio of 1 U for 50 µg of protein sample. The reaction was quenched by adding 1% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%.  The individual samples were dried in a Speed-Vac and dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid. The acidified samples were purified using pre-equilibrated C18 Zip-Tip columns (Merck Millipore), and bound peptides were eluted in 30 µl of buffer containing 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The individual samples were dried by Speed-Vac, and final concentrations of approximately 5 µg/ml from each sample was dissolved in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), an equilibration buffer for TMT (Tandom Mass Tagging) labeling (Thermo). The three mass tags of TMT 126, 127 and 128 from the SixPlex kit (TMT6) were labeled for WT, ΔNrdR and OE-NrdR peptides, respectively, at a ratio of 1:1.7. The individually labeled samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h, and the reaction was quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 20 min to ensure complete quenching and to abolish further reaction. The individually labeled peptide samples were mixed and purified using C18 Zip-Tip columns as described previously. The eluted samples were dried and suspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile/1% (v/v) formic acid in water prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For the quantitative proteomics analysis the peptide samples were subjected to LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). The sample loading, fractionation and high resolution LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described in the standard operation guidelines by Thermo Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for quantitative proteomics, the detected peptide fragment peak lists were processed with Proteome Discoverer, v. 1.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific). The search was performed with the Mascot algorithm (v. 2.4) against the UniProt E. coli database. Only those peptides with IonScores exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit were considered to be accurately identified. Hits against the protein contaminants such as keratin and trypsin were discarded. Each candidate was scored based on relative abundance (RA) in the preparation compared to the control sample. Proteins that were identified repeatedly were pooled together and normalized so that the sample mean = 1 (because the sample ratio is 1:1). To determine the general function of proteins in E. coli, we referred to the annotated data from UniProt (www.uniprot.com).

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) play an important role in the synthesis of dNTPs and their expression is regulated by the transcription factors, NrdR and Fur. Recent transcriptomic studies using deletion mutants have indicated a role for NrdR in bacterial chemotaxis and in the maintenance of topoisomerase levels. However, NrdR deletion alone has no effect on bacterial growth or virulence in infected flies or in human blood cells. Furthermore, transcriptomic studies are limited to the deletion strain alone, and so are inadequate for drawing biological implications when the NrdR repressor is active or abundant. Therefore, further examination is warranted of changes in the cellular proteome in response to both NrdR overexpression, as well as deletion, to better understand its functional relevance as a bacterial transcription repressor. Here, we profile bacterial fate under conditions of overexpression and deletion of NrdR in E. coli. Biochemical assays show auxiliary zinc enhances the DNA binding activity of NrdR. We also demonstrate at the physiological level that increased nrdR expression causes a significant reduction in bacterial growth and fitness even at normal temperatures, and causes lethality at elevated temperatures. Corroborating these direct effects, global proteome analysis following NrdR overexpression showed a significant decrease in global protein expression. In parallel, studies on complementary expression of downregulated essential genes polA, eno and thiL showed partial rescue of the fitness defect caused by NrdR overexpression. Deletion of downregulated non-essential genes ygfK and trxA upon NrdR overexpression resulted in diminished bacterial growth and fitness suggesting an additional role for NrdR in regulating other genes. Moreover, in comparison with NrdR deletion, E. coli cells overexpressing NrdR showed significantly diminished adherence to human epithelial cells, reflecting decreased bacterial virulence. These results suggest that elevated expression of NrdR could be a suitable means to retard bacterial growth and virulence, as its elevated expression reduces bacterial fitness and impairs host cell adhesion.

### Keywords
E.coli, Nrdr, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Transcription repressor, Over-expression, Infection and virulence, Bacterial viability

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Naveen Vankadari

### Lab Head
Dr Chwan-Deng Hsiao
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


