### Accession
PXD039464

### Title
small pluripotent stem cell proteome

### Description
A simplified and effective approach for the isolation of small pluripotent stem cells derived from human peripheral blood

### Sample Protocol
SBSCs were first cultured in matrigel-coated (Corning, New York, United States) plates and in DMEM (Gibco Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) in order to be cleared up by components found in blood . How long for? SBSCs (n=4) were then lysed in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) and 50 mM HEPES  pH 8.0 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA). Sample homogenization was performed using tip probe sonication (Misonix – S-4000 Ultrasonic Liquid Processor). Lysates were quantified by microBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) and normalized samples (10 μg protein) were prepared for proteomic analysis as previously described (Claridge et al., 2021), using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method. Tryptic peptides for one-shot analyseis were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate NCS-3500RSLC nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with nanospray ion source in data-dependent acquisition analysis and positive mode

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data was processed using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) (v1.6.14.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda . Tandem mass spectra were searched as a single batch against the Hhomo Ssapien database (UniProt, UP000005640, Jun 2022; 79,684) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme (C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with  2 missed cleavage sites. Match between runs options were enabled, with the matching time window set to 1 min, with label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) performed. False discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM, protein, and site levels were each 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Pluripotent stem cells are key players in regenerative medicine. Embryonic pluripotent stem cells, despite their significant advantages, are associated with limitations such as their inadequate availability and the ethical dilemmas in their isolation and clinical use. The discovery of very small embryonic-like (VSEL) stem cells addressed the aforementioned limitations, but their isolation technique remains a challenge due to their small cell size and their efficiency in isolation. Here, we report a simplified and effective approach for the isolation of small pluripotent stem cells derived from human peripheral blood. Our approach results in a high yield of small blood stem cell (SBSC) population, which expresses pluripotent embryonic markers (e.g., Nanog, SSEA-3) and the Yamanaka factors. Further, a fraction of SBSCs also co-express hematopoietic markers (e.g., CD45 and CD90) and/or mesenchymal markers (e.g., CD29, CD105 and PTH1R), suggesting a mixed stem cell population. Finally, quantitative proteomic profiling reveals that SBSCs contain various stem cell markers (CD9, ITGA6, MAPK1, MTHFD1, STAT3, HSPB1, HSPA4), and Transcription reg complex factors (e.g., STAT5B, PDLIM1, ANXA2, ATF6, CAMK1). In conclusion, we present a novel, simplified and effective isolating process that yields an abundant population of small-sized cells with characteristics of pluripotency from human peripheral blood.

### Keywords
Human, Stem cell, Sbsc, Proteome, Blood

### Affiliations
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute


