### Accession
PXD031794

### Title
An unconventional integrin b3 and CD103 heterodimer improves the anti-tumor  immunity of tissue-resident T cells

### Description
Current cancer immunotherapies promote recovery of CD103+ tissue-resident  memory T cells (Trm) population of the tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes (TILs).  However, not all treated patients exhibit improved anti-tumor immunity and survival,  likely due to the immunophenotypical diversity among the CD103+ Trm TILs. Utilising  multifaceted proteomics approaches and patients’ clinical analyses, we discovered an  unusual subset of CD8+ Trm TILs expressing non-canonical integrin β3 early during T  cells activation. The integrin β3 surprisingly heterodimerises with CD103 on T cells,  leading to unconventional granulysin-mediated cytotoxicity, elevated alternative  bioenergy usage and efficient T cell migration, with minimal overall exhaustion.  Importantly, early-stage non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) patients with enriched  presence of integrin β3+CD103+ Trm TILs exhibited better clinical prognosis, with  improved T cell immunophenotype, hence confirming the beneficial role of this unusual  subset of Trm TILs. These unconventional anti-tumor T cell features provide new  avenues and future opportunities for designing better translational immunotherapy  strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation Paired CD103+ and CD103- cancer-specific (SSX-2-specific and  NY-ESO-1-specific) T cell clones were activated for 3 hours or 6 hours with 10ul  aCD3/CD28 (StemCell Technologies) at 37°C, with no activation T cells as  normalisation control. 1M cells were used per treatment in order to extract sufficient  amount/concentration of proteins. To retain proteins and prevent secretion of  molecules outside the cells, 0.7µg/ml Monensin and 1µg/ml Brefeldin A (BD  Biosciences) were added per sample. After T cells activation, cells were washed with  PBS thoroughly three times. Each cell pellet was then lysed with 1% NP cell lysis  buffer (ThermoFisher), with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich) and 1mM  phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, PMSF (ThermoFisher) on ice for 1 hour. Cell solution  was vortex every 10 minutes intervals during the ice incubation. Following that, cell  solution was microcentrifuged at 13,000rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant  containing the proteins were transferred into new tubes and snap freeze with dry ice. Samples digestion Samples were thawed and proteins were denatured in 8M urea for  30 minutes. Solution reduction was performed with 10mM tris(2- carboxyethyl(phosphine) (TCEP) for 30 minutes at room temperature before  undergoing alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide for another 30 minutes at room  temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted to 1.5mM urea with 50mM  triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before the proteins were digested with 1.5µg  trypsin, incubated overnight at 37°C. Overnight digested samples were then cleaned  on SOLA HRP C18 and speedvaced to dryness. Samples containing the dried  peptides were then reconstituted in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 5% formic  acid. LC-MS/MS Samples were then analysed using Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher  Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Briefly, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMapC18; 300µm x 5mm, 5µm  particle size, Thermo Fischer) and separated on a 50cm-long EasySpray column  (ES803, Thermo Fischer) with a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% dimethyl  sulfoxide, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min flow rate over 120 min. Eluted peptides were  then analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid platform (instrument control  software v3.3). Data were acquired in data-dependent mode, with the advance peak  detection (APD) enabled. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 k  resolution over a m/z range 400 -1500, AGC target of 4e5 and S-lens RF of 30.  Fragment ion spectra (MS/MS) were obtained in the Ion trap (rapid scan mode) with a  Quad isolation window of 1.6, 40% AGC target and a maximum injection time of 35ms,  with HCD activation and 28% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Enriched proteins analyses The fold change values of each protein at 3 and 6 hours  were calculated by normalising the raw data of the proteins with the raw data of 0  hours dataset. TGF-b1 fold-change values of the T cell clones were then used to filter  out any proteins that have fold-change values below that of the TGF-b1. This is  because we have shown previously that only the CD103+ T cell clones are able to  produce TGF-b1. Any proteins with fold-change values above that of TGF-b1 is the  likeliest to be exclusively enriched on any of the T cell clones. STRING and NCBI  Gene Ontology databases were used to narrow down any proteins that are known to  be associated with innate and adaptive immunity, viral infections, bacterial infections  or cancer.  Mechanisms and pathways analyses Protein lists from proteomics 3/0 hours and 6/0  hours were filtered to select only upregulated proteins. Protein to gene names were  converted to Entrez IDs (org.Hs.eg.db version 3.11.4) before using as input for overrepresentation analysis (clusterProfiler version 3.16.0, ReactomePA version 1.32.0)  to find REACTOME pathways with enriched genes (with P value cut off 0.01  and P adjusted value cut off 0.05). The resulting output was used to create a geneconcept network. Barplots were constructed for selected pathways using log2 fold  change values for specific genes found in pathways (ggplot2 version 3.3.2).  Circular barplots were constructed to show overlapping pathways found in SSX-2 and  NY-ESO-1 clones as well as the number of genes found in each pathway.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xcr1, Granulysin, Itgb3, Amino acids, Cancer immunotherapy, Tissue-resident, Cancer-specific t cells

### Affiliations
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, OX3 7FZ, U.K.
Nuffield Department of Medicine

### Submitter
Svenja Hester

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Tao Dong
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, OX3 7FZ, U.K.


