### Accession
PXD019271

### Title
TGF-Beta-induced Dact1 Biomolecular Condensates Repress Wnt Signaling via Multivalent Protein-Protein Interactions

### Description
Isolation and characterization of Dact1 biomolecular condensates with and without Wnt stimulation in breast cancer bone metastatic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Breast cancer bone metastatic cells were treated with Wnt3a or control media isolated from L cells for 24 hours, then trypsinized, washed in PBS, treated with Superase RNAse, and sonicated to release mCherry-Dact1 labeled molecular condensates. Particles were brought to 1% Triton X100 and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, then sorted with a FACSaria and prepared for data-dependent mass spectrometry analysis (DDA-MS) by SDS lysis, S-Trap (Protifi) desalting, and trypsin digest.  Peptides were eluted as a single fraction and 2 micrograms were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate nRSLC coupled to a ThermoFisher Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. For the MS1 scan, the scan range was set to 350-1800 m/z, AGC of 3e6, max injection time of 30ms, and resolution of 120,000. The top 10 ions were subjected to collision-induced fragmentation for MS2 analysis at 15,000 resolution, AGC of 1e5, and max injection time of 150ms.  Three biological replicates for both WNT-treated and control conditions were analyzed, for a total of six samples.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra were exported and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific), using the Sequest HT algorithm to match identified peptides against a FASTA file containing human protein sequences and common contaminants (UniProt). Analysis allowed for maximum of 2 missed cleavages, minimum length of 6 amino acids, precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and cysteine carbamidomethylation, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic loss of methionine with N-terminal acetylation. Matched spectra were validated by Percolator, and only peptides with highest confidence were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Frodo, Tgf-ß, Bone metastisis, Phase separation, Beta catenin, Dact1, Wnt, Biomolecular condensates, Dapper

### Affiliations
Cristea lab, Princeton University
Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Katelyn Cook

### Lab Head
Dr Cristea, Ileana
Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


