### Accession
PXD010137

### Title
Sucrose metabolism in haloarchaea: reassessment using genomics, proteomics and metagenomics

### Description
We used quantitative proteomics (8-plex iTRAQ labeling) to investigate pathways and enzymes potentially important for sucrose metabolism in the halophilic archaeon Halohasta litchfieldiae. The data provided insights into the dynamics of the Hht. litchfieldiae proteome in response to sucrose, advancing the understanding of sucrose and fructose metabolism in haloarchaea.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in media with and without sucrose to mid-logarithmic and stationary phase. Proteins were prepared from whole cell extracts and supernatant fractions following PMID: 20039705 with minor modifications. Quantitative proteomics was performed using 8-plex iTRAQ labeling to enable comparisons of protein abundance between cells grown with (pyruvate and sucrose as carbon souce) and without sucrose (pyruvate only as carbon souce). Samples were analyzed using TripleTOF 5600 + hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Foster City, USA), and the acquisition of data was performed in information-dependent acquisition mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched against peptides with ProteinPilot software 4.5 (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA) using local Hht. litchfieldiae protein FASTA database to identify proteins. All technical replicates for 8-plex labelling experiments were merged into a single sample file for each fraction during protein abundance analysis. A subset of the data comparing the cells grown with and without sucrose at mid-logarithmic phase were used in this project. Only proteins identified based on a minimal of 2 peptides were considered for further comparative analysis. Data were considered statistically significant when p was less than 0.05 and the error factor was less than 2. The weighted average mean and standard deviation of differential abundance between iTRAQ reporter ion ratios were calculated following PMID: 17676663. Protein annotation was performed following PMID: 19404327.

### Publication Abstract
The canonical pathway for sucrose metabolism in haloarchaea utilizes a modified Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway (EMP), in which ketohexokinase and 1-phosphofructokinase phosphorylate fructose released from sucrose hydrolysis. However, our survey of haloarchaeal genomes determined that ketohexokinase and 1-phosphofructokinase genes were not present in all species known to utilize fructose and sucrose, thereby indicating that alternative mechanisms exist for fructose metabolism. A fructokinase gene was identified in the majority of fructose- and sucrose-utilizing species, whereas only a small number possessed a ketohexokinase gene. Analysis of a range of hypersaline metagenomes revealed that haloarchaeal fructokinase genes were far more abundant (37 times) than haloarchaeal ketohexokinase genes. We used proteomic analysis of <i>Halohasta litchfieldiae</i> (which encodes fructokinase) and identified changes in protein abundance that relate to growth on sucrose. Proteins inferred to be involved in sucrose metabolism included fructokinase, a carbohydrate primary transporter, a putative sucrose hydrolase, and two uncharacterized carbohydrate-related proteins encoded in the same gene cluster as fructokinase and the transporter. Homologs of these proteins were present in the genomes of all haloarchaea that use sugars for growth. Enzymes involved in the semiphosphorylative Entner-Doudoroff pathway also had higher abundances in sucrose-grown <i>H. litchfieldiae</i> cells, consistent with this pathway functioning in the catabolism of the glucose moiety of sucrose. The study revises the current understanding of fundamental pathways for sugar utilization in haloarchaea and proposes alternatives to the modified EMP pathway used by haloarchaea for sucrose and fructose utilization.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Our ability to infer the function that microorganisms perform in the environment is predicated on assumptions about metabolic capacity. When genomic or metagenomic data are used, metabolic capacity is inferred from genetic potential. Here, we investigate the pathways by which haloarchaea utilize sucrose. The canonical haloarchaeal pathway for fructose metabolism involving ketohexokinase occurs only in a small proportion of haloarchaeal genomes and is underrepresented in metagenomes. Instead, fructokinase genes are present in the majority of genomes/metagenomes. In addition to genomic and metagenomic analyses, we used proteomic analysis of <i>Halohasta litchfieldiae</i> (which encodes fructokinase but lacks ketohexokinase) and identified changes in protein abundance that related to growth on sucrose. In this way, we identified novel proteins implicated in sucrose metabolism in haloarchaea, comprising a transporter and various catabolic enzymes (including proteins that are annotated as hypothetical).

### Keywords
Fructose metabolism; archaea; sugar catabolism; microbial physiology; metabolic pathway; pathway reconstruction

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences,  UNSW Sydney,  Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

### Submitter
Timothy Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Cavicchioli
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences,  UNSW Sydney,  Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


