### Accession
PXD017104

### Title
Human BRS3 receptor activation LC-MSMS

### Description
Bombesin-like receptor 3 (BRS3), an orphan G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR), plays important roles in our biological system while the exact mechanisms behind are less known. To get insights of biological effects on BRS3 activation, we utilized quantitative proteomics approach to explore the dynamic protein profiling during its stimulus. At different time points after stimulation, the protein profiling in HEK 293 cells with overexpressed BRS3 (HEK 293-BRS3) were analyzed by nano-LC−MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular proteins were extracted and then digested overnight at 37 ℃ by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) through using FASP approach as previous described.Briefly, 30 µg proteins were used for each treatment and three repeats were prepared. Digested peptides were dissolved in 10 μL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid in water). Equal amounts of peptides (measured by Nanodrop at 280 nm) were injected to Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts). They were first loaded onto a 2 cm × 75 μm fused silica capillary column packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 200 C18-AQ (3 µm, 200 Å, Dr. Maisch), then trapped peptides were eluted to a 22 cm × 75 μm fused silica pulled-tip capillary column packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile). A flow rate of 300 nL/min and 120 min gradient was applied as follows: 5% B (0-5 min), 5-22% B (6-95 min), 22-32% B (96-110 min), 32-90% B (111-113 min), 90% B (114-120 min). MS Scan range was from 350 to 2000 m/z with the resolution of 60,000. The 12 most intensive ions from the full scan were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%) in the LTQ ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set as 60 s and mass isolation window of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur software. The raw data were submitted for database search by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) software against with the UniProt Human database (release 2017_11_28, 20244 entries). The maximum of missed cleavages was set as two, and trypsin was selected for protein digestion. The mass tolerance values for precursor and fragment ions were 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Both maximum peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to 1%. The criteria of at least 2 unique peptides, p<0.05, and FDR less than 1% at the protein level were used for protein identification. Label-free quantification was performed by Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Quantile normalization was performed to ensure each sample has the same distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Bombesin-like receptor 3 (BRS3), an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), plays important roles in our biological system while the exact mechanisms behind it are less known. To get insights of the biological effects upon BRS3 activation, we utilized quantitative proteomics approach to explore the dynamic protein profiling during the stimulation by its ligand. At different time points after stimulation with BRS3 surrogate agonist, the protein profiling in BRS3 overexpressed HEK 293 cells BRS3 (HEK 293-BRS3) was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS. In total, 1593 cellular proteins were confidently identified and quantified, including 146 proteins dysregulated at multiple time points and 319 proteins only altered at one time point. Data analysis indicated that BRS3 activation could regulate cell death, survival, and protein synthesis, particularly mRNA translation. Key signaling pathways were revealed for BRS3 signal transduction. In particular, 21 of our identified proteins are involved in the rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway. The promotion of mTOR was further confirmed through monitoring its indicative targets upon BRS3 activation. Upon the inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin, cell proliferation was dramatically reversed. Our proteomics data collectively demonstrate that BRS3 activation will lead to cascades of signal transduction and promote cell proliferation. The developed strategy might be utilized to discover the roles of other GPCRs and improve our understanding of their unknown functions.

### Keywords
Human brs3 lc-msms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China

### Submitter
lijie dong

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Xiao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China


