### Accession
PXD001246

### Title
Synechocystis 6803 LC-MS/MS -  Systematically Ranking the Tightness of Membrane Association for Peripheral Membrane Proteins

### Description
Identification of the membrane and the soluble proteins in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803

### Sample Protocol
The membrane and the soluble fractions were separated by differential centrifugation. Proteins in each fractions were digested using the FASP protocol, off-line fractionationed by high pH RP-LC, and identified by LC-MS/MS using LTQ-Orbitrap elite

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed by the software MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 . MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the decoy Synechocystis proteome sequences downloaded from CyanoBase (genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase/Synechocystis).

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale quantitative evaluation of the tightness of membrane association for nontransmembrane proteins is important for identifying true peripheral membrane proteins with functional significance. Herein, we simultaneously ranked more than 1000 proteins of the photosynthetic model organism Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 for their relative tightness of membrane association using a proteomic approach. Using multiple precisely ranked and experimentally verified peripheral subunits of photosynthetic protein complexes as the landmarks, we found that proteins involved in two-component signal transduction systems and transporters are overall tightly associated with the membranes, whereas the associations of ribosomal proteins are much weaker. Moreover, we found that hypothetical proteins containing the same domains generally have similar tightness. This work provided a global view of the structural organization of the membrane proteome with respect to divergent functions, and built the foundation for future investigation of the dynamic membrane proteome reorganization in response to different environmental or internal stimuli.

### Keywords
Soluble, Membrane, Synechocystis

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Genetics and Developmental biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yingchun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
Institute of Genetics and Developmental biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


