### Accession
PXD003123

### Title
Proteome profiling of Rhodobacter capsulatus wild type and a ΔmodABC mutant in response to molybdenum

### Description
The diazotrophic bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus is able to synthesize two nitrogenases, a molybdenum-dependent and an alternative Mo-free iron-only nitrogenase, enabling growth with molecular dinitrogen (N2) as sole nitrogen source. The Mo response of the wild type and a mutant lacking the high-affinity molybdate transporter, ModABC, were analyzed by proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
R. capsulatus wild-type (referred to as “Rc_WT”) and ΔmodABC (referred to as Rc_438) strains were grown under nitrogenase-derepressing conditions in RCV minimal medium with or without addition of 10 µM Na2MoO4. 10 ml cultures were grown in triplicates or quadruplicates to early logarithmic phase prior to harvesting cells by centrifugation using an Eppendorf 5415R centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Cells were washed three times with 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) buffer and resuspended in 0.5 ml 50 mM TEAB buffer. Cells were disrupted by ultrasonication in a Vial Tweeter instrument (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Subsequently, samples were centrifuged (30 min, 14 000 rpm, 4°C) to remove cell debris, before 0.4 ml of the supernatants were subjected to methanol/chloroform precipitation. First, 0.8 ml methanol, 0.2 ml chloroform and 0.3 ml water were added prior to vortexing of the samples and centrifugation (2 min, 14 000 rpm, 20°C). Afterwards, upper phases were discarded. Second, 0.8 ml methanol were added, samples were vortexed, and centrifuged (2 min, 14 000 rpm, 20°C). Subsequently, methanol was removed and discarded. Protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 70 µl 50 mM TEAB buffer and protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). After addition of 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, USA), cysteines were reduced and alkylated by addition of 2.5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma Aldrich) for 60 min at 60°C and 5 mM IAA (iodoacetamide, Sigma-Aldrich) for 25 min at 25°C in the dark, respectively. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, USA) was added with a protease to substrate ratio of 1:100 and tryptic digestion was carried out for 5 h at 37°C with mild shaking. For precipitation of RapiGest, 2 µl of TFA (trifluoroacetic acid; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, Netherlands) was added and the samples were centrifuged thrice at 4° and 16,000 x g. A total amount of 750 ng of each sample containing 50 fmol PhosB peptides as Hi3 quantitation standard (Waters) was injected on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Samples were loaded and eluted from a reversed-phase C18 column (column length, 250 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 1.7 µm; pore size, 130 Å; heated to 40°C) using the following gradient of solvent A (0.1% FA (formic acid, Biosolve) in A. dest.) and B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, Biosolve) with a flow of 350 nL/min: initial to 36 min, constant 1% B, 36-120 min, linear to 20% B; 120-180 min, linear to 30% B; 180-240 min, linear to 60% B. The nanoUPLC column was coupled online to a Synapt G2-S HDMS ESI/ToF mass spectrometer (Waters). Spectra were recorded in positive ionization mode and resolution mode over a mass range of 50 to 1800 m/z with 1.5 s/scan using the MSE technology and a trap collision energy ramp of 14-30 V. The following parameters were used for the NanoLockSpray source: capillary voltage, 1.9 kV; sampling cone voltage, 20 V; source temperature, 100°C; desolvation temperature, 200°C; cone gas flow; 50 L/h; desolvation gas flow, 600 L/h. Leucine enkephalin serving as lock mass analyte was fed through the lock spray channel (lock mass capillary voltage, 3.0 kV).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the ProteinLynxGlobalServer 2.5.2 (PLGS; Waters) software. Mass spectra were processed using the following parameters: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS ToF resolution, automatic; lock mass window, 0.25 Da; low energy threshold, 50 counts; elevated energy threshold, 15 counts; intensity threshold, 750 counts. A non-redundant version of the Rhodobacter capsulatus database (NCBI BioProject accession PRJNA47509) containing 3637 protein entries (including sequences of the PhosB standard, trypsin and keratin) was used for protein identification using the following parameters: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimal fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimal fragment ion matches per protein, 6; minimal peptide matches per protein, 3; maximum protein mass, 300 kDa; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N and Q, and oxidation M; false positive rate, 4%; calibration protein PhosB standard; calibration protein concentration for Hi3 quantitation, 50 fmol. For each run, the measured total protein load on column was calculated and used for normalization

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhodobacter capsulatus molybdenum lc-ms proteomics mse

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie Universitätsstraße 150 44780 Bochum Raum: ND 06/748 Tel.: +49 234 32 23102
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Sina Schäkermann

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Elisabeth Bandow
Ruhr-Universität Bochum AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie Universitätsstraße 150 44780 Bochum Raum: ND 06/748 Tel.: +49 234 32 23102


