### Accession
PXD010437

### Title
CPTAC High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma SWATH-MS

### Description
Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) is a DIA method whose use in proteomic studies has increased considerably within the past five years. SWATH-MS acquires a complete and permanent digital record for all the detectable MS/MS spectra of a sample using DIA. After their generation, the SWATH-MS maps can be used for iterative analyses of candidate proteins.  As with any analytical methodology that has potential widespread use, several studies have been conducted to optimize and evaluate the performance of SWATH-MS. The present dataset was acquired from 103 tissue samples of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma collected and processed in the context of the CPTAC initiative and analyzed via bottom-up SWATH mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The tumor specimens were obtained through The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Biospecimen Core Resource, and they were previously genomically characterized (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Nature 2011). As described by Zhang et. al (Cell, 2016), the biospecimens were obtained from newly diagnosed patients with ovarian serous adenocarcinoma who were undergoing surgical resection and did not receive prior treatment, including chemotherapy or radiotherapy, for their disease. Frozen tissue specimens were extracted and used for subsequent proteomic analysis. Approximately 50 mg of each tumor tissue specimen was sonicated in 1.5 mL of 8 M urea, 0.8 M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with 12 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at RT in the dark. After dilution 1:4 with deionized water, proteins were digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:50 enzyme:protein, weight/weight) for 12 h at 37 °C. This was followed by the addition of an aliquot of the same amount of trypsin and incubation overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH <3, de-salted using strong cation exchange and C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried using a Speed-Vac. SWATH-MS measurements were conducted using a Sciex 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer interfaced with an Eksigent ekspert nanoLC 425 cHiPLC system. Peptides (1 µg) were loaded onto a 6 mm x 200 µm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm, 120 Å trap column followed by separation on a 75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm, 120 Å Nano cHiPLC column using a 120 min method (90 min gradient from 3-35% B – 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. To create the spectral library for the SWATH-MS data analysis, each sample was run individually (1 µg peptides per injection) using a data-dependent data acquisition (DDA) method wherein MS spectra were acquired across a range of 400-1800 m/z followed by the acquisition of MS/MS spectra of the top 30 most intense precursor ions with a charge state of z = 2-5. The spectral library was also comprised of mass spectrometry data acquired from a fractionated (48 fractions) pool of peptides from all 103 tumors. Each of the 48 fractions from the pooled sample was analyzed using the same DDA method described above. SWATH data of the individual tumors were acquired using a variable window strategy wherein the sizes of the precursor ion selection windows were inversely related to m/z density. The average window width for precursor ion selection was 12 m/z with a range of 6-25 m/z. The collision energy was optimized for each window according to the calculation for a charge 2+ ion centered in the window with a spread of 5 eV. The MS accumulation time was 250 ms and the MS/MS accumulation time for fragment ions accumulated in high sensitivity mode was 50 ms, resulting in a total duty cycle of approximately 3.5 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry measurements obtained from the TripleTOF 5600+ in DDA and SWATH mode were converted to mzXML file format using msconvert (ProteoWizard v3.0.8851). DDA measurements from all 103 samples and 48 fractions of a pooled sample were searched with X!Tandem (2013.06.25.1), OMSSA (2.1.9) and Comet (2015.02 rev. 3). Identified peptides were processed through the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v.4.7 Polar Vortex rev 0) using PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet scoring (FDR <0.01) and SpectraST. The assay library was built according to Schubert et al. (Nature Protocols 2015) using a set of 113 common internal retention time standards (ciRTs).  SWATH data was analyzed using OpenSWATH from OpenMS (v.1.10.0) with the previously described sample-specific assay library. FDR was controlled using PyProphet (v.0.0.19) allowing for a peptide-FDR of 1% and protein-FDR of 1% as described by Rosenberger et al (Nature Methods 2017). Runs were aligned for improved quantification using TRIC (msproteomicstools master branch from GitHub commit c10a2b8).

### Publication Abstract
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) established a harmonized method for large-scale clinical proteomic studies. SWATH-MS, an instance of data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomic methods, is an alternate proteomic approach. In this study, we used SWATH-MS to analyze remnant peptides from the original retrospective TCGA samples generated for the CPTAC ovarian cancer proteogenomic study. The SWATH-MS results recapitulated the confident identification of differentially expressed proteins in enriched pathways associated with the robust Mesenchymal high-grade serous ovarian cancer subtype and the homologous recombination deficient tumors. Hence, SWATH/DIA-MS presents a promising complementary or orthogonal alternative to the CPTAC proteomic workflow, with the advantages of simpler and faster workflows and lower sample consumption, albeit with shallower proteome coverage. In summary, both analytical methods are suitable to characterize clinical samples, providing proteomic workflow alternatives for cancer researchers depending on the context-specific goals of the studies.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Swath, Dia, Cancer, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, D-BIOL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Betty Friedrich

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, D-BIOL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


