### Accession
PXD005700

### Title
Tripartite symbiosis formed by Pisum sativum, rhizobia and mycorrhiza: Implications for the symbionts, the host plant and the pathogenic fungi, part 1

### Description
The lower needs for chemical fertilisers make the Pisum Sativum well suited for sustainable agricultural systems. During the past decades, yield losses were mainly due to pathogenic infestation, with Ascochyta blight as the most severe disease. In this fungal disease complex Didymella pinodes, as the most aggressive pathogen, has been examined intensively. Despite the great number of varieties, no resistance was yet found and several strategies were developed to avoid infestation. In recent years enhanced resistance to pathogens due to previous infestation by symbiotic microorganisms was discovered in several plants. However, only little attention was drawn on the implications of P. Sativum´s symbionts (Rhizobia, Mycorrhiza) on the disease severity as well as the effects of the pathogen on the symbiotic interactions. Hence, here the implications of the pathogenic infestation on the tripartite symbiosis of P. Sativum on a molecular (proteomics, metabolomics) and physiological level, and moreover, the potential of the root symbionts to enhance resistance against Didymella pinodes are investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosol and plasma membrane extraction About 25 mg fresh weight of the ground samples were used for extraction with 1 mL of freshly prepared and pre-cooled extraction buffer (MeOH:CHCl3:H2O, 2.5:1:0.5). Samples were kept on ice for 8 min with regular agitation before centrifugation (4 min, 14,000 g, 4 °C). The supernatant was transferred to a new tube containing 500 μL ultrapure water and shaken thoroughly. After centrifugation (4 min, 14,000 g, 4 °C) the upper phase, containing polar metabolites, was split into two aliquots and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The remaining plant material was kept for further extraction of proteins (Section 2.3.2.2).  Integrative protein extraction Proteins were extracted from the plant material pellet (2.4.1) using trizol (TRI Reagent®, Sigma-Aldrich) according to Carrillo et al. [43], with minor modifications. The plant material left over from metabolite extraction was sonicated in 800 μL trizol reagent. For phase separation of phenolic and water soluble compounds 160 μL of chloroform was added prior centrifugation (15 min, 12,000 g, 4 °C). The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 240 μL EtOH were added to facilitate pelleting of the insoluble leaf material by centrifugation (5 min, 7000 g, 4 °C). The supernatant was transferred and proteins were precipitated overnight with five times of the initial volume in − 20 °C cold acetone containing 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol. The precipitate was pelleted (10 min, 4000 g, 4 °C), subsequently the supernatant removed and the protein pellet dissolved in 700 μL urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8).  Plasma membrane preparation The fresh leaves of one plant (2–4 g) were homogenized in breaking buffer (0.1 M HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.33 M sucrose, 5 mM DTT, 1.5% PVPP, 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.5). The homogenate was centrifuged for 30 min at 30,000 g to pelletise the microsomal fraction, consisting of membranes derived from different vesicles. The supernatant (fraction with the cytosol) was precipitated and dissolved in urea buffer as described for the integrative protein extraction. Plasma membranes in the microsomal fraction were purified by use of an aqueous two phase partitioning optimized for Pisum leaves according to Luthje et al. [50]. Protein digestion Protein concentration was determined via Bradford assay [49] and a BSA standard calibration line. A volume corresponding to 100 μg (integrative extraction and cytosolic fraction) and 20 μg (plasma membrane) proteins was transferred and LysC (1:100 vol/vol, 5 h, 30 °C, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was added for initial digestion. Samples were diluted with trypsin buffer (10% ACN, 100 mM AmBic, 1 mM CaCl2, 5 mM DTT) to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated over night at 37 °C with Poroszyme immobilized trypsin beads (1:10, vol/vol; Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The digest was applied on C18-SPEC 96-well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) and washed twice with 250 μL water. The sample flow-through and the first wash step were kept for second desalting step with graphite. Peptides were eluted from C18-spec-plates with 500 μL of 100% MeOH. Proteins from the flow through and the first wash step were desalted with 10 mg graphite in spin columns (MobiSpin Column F, MoBiTec) according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo scientific, Pierce® graphite spin columns). Eluates from graphite and C18 desalting were subsequently merged, split into two technical aliquots, and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Nano ESI LC–MS/MS Peptides were dissolved in 100 μL 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and 1 μg of each sample were applied randomly on a reverse phase C18 column. Integrative extracted peptides (3 biological and 2 technical replicates) were loaded on a 15 cm × 50 μm column (PepMap®RSLC, Thermo scientific, 2 μm particle size) and separated during a 90 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL min− 1. MS measurement was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 10,000. Cytosolic peptides (3 biological and 2 technical replicates) and plasma membrane peptides (3 biological replicates) were applied on a 15 cm × 100 μm column (Supelco Ascentis® Express Peptide ES-C18, 2.7 μm particle size) for separation during a 90 min gradient with a flow rate of 400 nL min− 1. MS measurement was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1600 m/z, max. 9 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 10,000.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were identified with Peaks (in the according Publication, all seps were done with MaxQuant; Due to ful submission type the Peaks output was chosen). Identification parameters were adapted to the respective instrument (Orbitrap Elite/Orbitrap XL): first  main search tolerance 6 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.8 Da, intensity threshold 500. All files were searched with maximum 3 of the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-term. Maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. A revert decoy db was used to set a cut-off at a FDR of 0.01 (at PSM and protein level). A minimum of 5 amino acids was required for identification of a peptide and at least two peptides necessary for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhizobia, Pisum sativum, Mycorrhiza, Didymella pinodes, Micribial symbionts, Induced systemic resistance

### Affiliations
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Reinhard Turetschek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna


