### Accession
PXD031456

### Title
Translational reprogramming in response to accumulating stressors ensures critical threshold levels of Hsp90 for mammalian life

### Description
The cytosolic molecular chaperone Hsp90 is essential for eukaryotic life. It is involved in multiple branches of proteostasis and as a molecular capacitor in morphological evolution. Although reduced Hsp90 levels cause phenotypic variations and correlate with aging, whether eukaryotic cells and organisms can tune Hsp90 levels to alleviate physiologically accumulated stress is unknown. To begin to explore this question, we investigated whether and how mice adapt to the deletion of three out of four alleles encoding cytosolic Hsp90, one Hsp90β allele being the only remaining one. Here we have analysed the proteome of mouse tissues (brain, liver, muscle) corresponding to different Hsp90 genotypes, as well as HEK293 cell clones that were knock-out for Hsp90α/β.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse whole tissue MS sample preparation: snap-frozen tissues (130-420 mg) were resuspended in excess of chilled (-20 °C) 80% methanol and homogenized by shaking in the presence of ceramic beads on a FastPrep system for 3 cycles of 20 s pulses. After a short centrifugation, the solvent supernatants were removed, and the beads with homogenized tissues were dried. The pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM DTT) in a ratio of 100 μl per 10 mg of initial tissue weight and were shaken again in the FastPrep system as described above. Then 300 μl solutions were mixed 1:1 (v/v) with lysis buffer, heated at 95 °C for 10 min, and used for all subsequent steps. Samples were digested following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak, N. A.,et al Nat. Methods 11, 319-324 (2014). Briefly, 100 μg of proteins (based on tryptophan fluorescence quantitation84) were diluted 1:1 (v/v) in water, chloroacetamide (at the final concentration of 32 mM) was added, and samples were incubated at 25 °C for 45 min in the dark to alkylate cysteine residues. EDTA was added to the samples at the final concentration of 3 mM, and samples were digested with 1 μg of Trypsin/LysC (Promega) for 1 hr at 37 °C, followed by the identical second digestion. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX microelution plate; Waters Corp.) by centrifugation. Peptides were eluted in 250 μl of 80% acetonitrile, 19% water, 1% NH3. All eluates after SCX desalting were dried, dissolved in 200 μl of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, and 2 μl solutions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. In the case of brain samples, peptides were separated into three fractions during SCX desalting process. Peptides were eluted with 125 mM and 500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% acetonitrile, followed by the final elution in 80% acetonitrile, 19% water, 1% NH3. All eluates were dried and dissolved as described above, and 4 μl of samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Whole cell proteome MS sample preparation: Three biological replicates of WT and Hsp90α/β KO HEK293T cells were processed as reported earlier for the WT and Hop KO HEK293T cells (Bhattacharya, K. et al. Nat. Commun. 11, 5975 (2020)).  LC-MS/MS analyses of processed samples were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom-packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 μm particles; Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 140 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur 4.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining scan cycle time between 0.6-1.5 s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data of mouse tissue samples and human cell lines were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0 and 1.6.3.4, respectively)85 incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox, J. et al Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367-1372 (2008) ; Cox, J. et al. J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794-1805 (2011). The UniProt mouse reference proteome (RefProt) database of November 2019 (55’431 sequences) and human RefProt database of October 2017 (71’803 sequences) were used, supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin (cleavage at K, R amino acid residues) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. iBAQ87 values were used for quality control assessments. Protein groups labeled as reverse hits, only identified by site, and potential contaminants were removed. LFQ values88 were further used for quantitation after log2 transformation. For the whole tissue or cell proteome experiments, from the relevant MS datasets, only protein groups were kept for the subsequent analyses that met the criteria of at least 2 unique peptides. For the brain dataset, we considered 3 unique peptides as the cut-off.  To compare the Hsp90 interactome profiles of WT and Hsp90 mutant mouse tissues, Hsp90 interactors were filtered out from the whole tissue proteomic datasets of brain (267 interactors), liver (163 interactors), and muscle (84 interactors) using data from our own web server (https://www.picard.ch/Hsp90Int/index.php, initially reported in ref.89). A heatmap of the calculated average fold change of the LFQ values of each genotype as compared to WT was constructed using the “expression heatmaps” tool available from: http://www.heatmapper.ca/. Fold change values were ranked with respect to the values obtained with tissues of the 90αKO90βHET genotype.

### Publication Abstract
The cytosolic molecular chaperone Hsp90 is essential for eukaryotic life. Although reduced Hsp90 levels correlate with aging, it was unknown whether eukaryotic cells and organisms can tune the basal Hsp90 levels to alleviate physiologically accumulated stress. We have investigated whether and how mice adapt to the deletion of three out of four alleles of the two genes encoding cytosolic Hsp90, with one Hsp90&#x3b2; allele being the only remaining one. While the vast majority of such mouse embryos die during gestation, survivors apparently manage to increase their Hsp90&#x3b2; protein to at least wild-type levels. Our studies reveal an internal ribosome entry site in the 5' untranslated region of the Hsp90&#x3b2; mRNA allowing translational reprogramming to compensate for the genetic loss of Hsp90 alleles and in response to stress. We find that the minimum amount of total Hsp90 required to support viability of mammalian cells and organisms is 50-70% of what is normally there. Those that fail to maintain a threshold level are subject to accelerated senescence, proteostatic collapse, and ultimately death. Therefore, considering that Hsp90 levels can be reduced &#x2265;100-fold in the unicellular budding yeast, critical threshold levels of Hsp90 have markedly increased during eukaryotic evolution.

### Keywords
Hsp90α, Senescence, Hsp90β, Proteostasis, Stress adaptation, Development., Aging, Stress response, Natural selection

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Département de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Département de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève


