### Accession
PXD025391

### Title
A3G-Vif-CBFB-CRL5 Cross-Linking with DSSO

### Description
Here we use an optimization cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) pipeline for the structural characterization of a dynamic HIV-host protein complex.  Using DSSO-based XL-MS analysis, residue-protein proximity restraints based on functional genetics, and integrative modeling, we define the structure of the HIV-1 Vif protein bound to restriction factor APOBEC3G (A3G), the Cullin-5 E3 ring ligase (CRL5), and the cellular transcription factor Core Binding Factor Beta (CBFβ). Using a XL-MS3 methodology, we identify 132 inter-linked peptides and integrate the data with atomic structures of the subunits and mutagenesis data, and computed an integrative structure model of the heptameric A3G-CRL5-Vif-CBFβ complex. The resulting model ensemble quantifies the dynamic heterogenity of the A3G C-terminal domain, as well as CUL5 flexibility, and defines the interface between Vif and A3G.  Our model can be used to rationalize previous structural, mutatagenesis, and functional data not included in modeling. The experimental and computational approach described here is generally applicable to other challenging host-pathogen protein complexes and provides new visualization tools for characterizing cross-linking data.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were expressed and purified using in vitro bacterial expression systems and previously reported purification methods. Protein complexes were reconstituted and cross-linked with increasing amounts of DSSO for 30min at 37C.  Cross-linked proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and digested in gel with either trypsin or chymotrypsin.  Peptide samples were analyzed by two similar LC-MS3 methods. For each method, a single acquisition cycle consisted of either 9 or 11 scan events as follows: 1) one full MS1 scan in the orbitrap (350–1500 m/z, 120,0000 resolution, AGC target of 1×106, max injection time of 100 ms); 2) two data-dependent MS2 scans in the orbitrap (15,000 resolution, AGC target of 5×104, max injection time of 500 ms) with normalized collision energy set at 22% on the top two precursor ions; and 3) either three or four MS3 scans in the ion trap (ion count target 104, max injection time of 50 ms) with normalized collision energy set at 35% on the top 3 or 4 ions from each MS2 scan. Precursors with charge state 4 and above were sampled for MS2 and dynamically excluded for 20 seconds (tolerance of 10 ppm), with charge state and dynamic exclusion turned off for MS3.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was extracted using MSConvert to provide mgf files for MS2 and MS3 levels.  The MS3 spectra was searched by a locally installed version of ProteinProspector (5.10.17), run from a computational cluster.  Each file was searched against a full human database downloaded from Uniprot and the tagged version of each protein subunit, concatenated to a equal length randomized database.  A total of 5 variable modifications was allowed and included DSSO-remnant masses, acetylation protein N terminal and lysine, deamidation of N, oxidation of M, met loss of protein N terminal, and Gln to pyro-Glu.  Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.8 Da, with an allowance of 5 missed cleavages. Searched data was formatted for XLTools submission and processing.  XLTools integrates MS2 spectra, MS3 spectra, and MS3 search result data to identify cross-linked peptides including dead-end, intra-linked, and inter-linked data.  Using scripts developed for this paper, we summarized and quantified the unique linkages, which were then scored for integrative modeling.

### Publication Abstract
Structural analysis of host-pathogen protein complexes remains challenging, largely due to their structural heterogeneity. Here, we describe a pipeline for the structural characterization of these complexes using integrative structure modeling based on chemical cross-links and residue-protein contacts inferred from mutagenesis studies. We used this approach on the HIV-1 Vif protein bound to restriction factor APOBEC3G (A3G), the Cullin-5 E3 ring ligase (CRL5), and the cellular transcription factor Core Binding Factor Beta (CBF&#x3b2;) to determine the structure of the (A3G-Vif-CRL5-CBF&#x3b2;) complex. Using the MS-cleavable DSSO cross-linker to obtain a set of 132 cross-links within this reconstituted complex along with the atomic structures of the subunits and mutagenesis data, we computed an integrative structure model of the heptameric A3G-Vif-CRL5-CBF&#x3b2; complex. The structure, which was validated using a series of tests, reveals that A3G is bound to Vif mostly through its N-terminal domain. Moreover, the model ensemble quantifies the dynamic heterogeneity of the A3G&#xa0;C-terminal domain and Cul5 positions. Finally, the model was used to rationalize previous structural, mutagenesis and functional data not used for modeling, including information related to the A3G-bound and unbound structures as well as mapping functional mutations to the A3G-Vif interface. The experimental and computational approach described here is generally applicable to other challenging host-pathogen protein complexes.

### Keywords
Apobec3g, Hiv vif, Xl-ms, Integrative modeling, Dsso

### Affiliations
QBI COVID-19 Research Group (QCRG), San Francisco, CA, USA Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA

### Submitter
Robyn Kaake

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
QBI COVID-19 Research Group (QCRG), San Francisco, CA, USA Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA


