### Accession
PXD001769

### Title
A Circular RNA Controls Ribosomal RNA Maturation and Atherosclerosis in Humans

### Description
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are broadly expressed in eukaryotic cells, but their role in human health and disease remains obscure. Here, we show that circular antisense non-coding RNA in the INK4 locus (circANRIL), which is transcribed at a locus of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease on chromosome 9p21, confers athero-protection by controlling ribosomal RNA (rRNA) maturation and modulating pathways of atherogenesis. At the molecular level, circANRIL competes with precursor rRNA (pre-rRNA) for binding to pescadillo homolog 1 (PES1), an essential 60S-preribosomal assembly factor, thereby impairing exonuclease-mediated pre-rRNA processing and ribosome biogenesis. As a consequence, circANRIL induces nucleolar stress and p53 activation, resulting in the induction of apoptosis and inhibition of proliferation, which are key athero-protective cell functions within the arterial wall. Collectively, these findings identify circANRIL as a prototype of a circRNA regulating ribosome biogenesis and conferring athero-protection, thereby unveiling a therapeutic potential of certain circRNAs in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
N-peptide mediated pulldown of circANRIL-bound proteins. Pulldown of circANRIL-BoxB (Supplementary Fig. 7;22) was performed with the N-terminal domain (amino acids 1–22) of the bacteriophage λ transcriptional antiterminator protein N (N-peptide) coupled to d-desthiobiotin (DTB, Intavis Peptide Services) in nuclear and cytoplasmatic extracts according to49. Steptavidin beads (Dynabeads MyOne, Life Technologies) were prewashed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and blocked with 1 mg tRNA/ml and 1 mg BSA/ml in LN-buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 % NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT). Cellular lysates (1mg total protein) were incubated with 100µl streptavidin beads overnight at 4°C in 1000 µl LN-buffer, 100µg tRNA/ml, 1 U RNasin/ml and 10 % glycerin. After washing with 5x with LN-buffer, 3x with LN-buffer, 500mM NaCl and 2x with LN-buffer containing 250mM LiCl instead of NaCl, circANRIL-BoxB-bound proteins were eluted with eluted with 100 µL Urea buffer (2M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 5 µg/µL trypsin and LysC. After alkylation with 5 mM IAA, proteins were proteolytic digested with trypsin and LysC for 24h. Peptides were acidified, loaded on SDB-RPS material and eluted and dried as described50. Peptides were resuspended in buffer A* (2 % ACN, 0.1% TFA) and were briefly sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510) before mass-spectrometric analyses.   PulseSILAC. CircANRIL over-expressing and control cells were attenuated in “light” medium (Silantes) for 3 passages. After seeding and adhesion for 1 h, cells were switched to “medium” (SILAC-Lys4-Arg6-Kit, Silantes) and “heavy” medium (SILAC-Lys8-Arg10-Kit, Silantes) and incubated for 24 h and 48 h (Fig. 5a). After washing with PBS, cell were lysed in SDC buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 10min at 95ºC, sonicated and diluted 1:1 with ddH2O. Sample preparation was done as described50 before mass-spectrometric analyses.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data acquisition and data analyses 2 µg of peptides from circANRIL-BoxB pull-down experiments were loaded for 30 minute gradients separated on a 20 cm column with 75µm inner diameter in-house packed with 3 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). 2 µg of peptides from pulseSILAC experiments were loaded for 100 minute gradients separated on a 40 cm column with 75µm inner diameter in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse phase chromatography was performed at 60ºC with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (RNA pull-down) or to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (pulseSILAC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear gradient. Operational parameters were real-time monitored by the SprayQC software51. Raw files were analysed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.0 or version 1.5.0.38 )52 and peak lists were searched against the H. sapiens Uniprot FASTA database (Version 2014/4) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine53. Label-free quantification was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm54 integrated into MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulse-silac, Lc-ms/ms, Circanril rna, Rna pulldowns

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Teupser
Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377 Munich, Germany


