### Accession
PXD025245

### Title
Transcriptional activity and epigenetic regulation of transposable element in the symbiotic fungus Rhizophagus irregularis

### Description
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form mutualistic relationships with most land plant species. AM fungi have long been considered as ancient asexuals. Long-term clonal evolution would be remarkable for a eukaryotic lineage and suggests the importance of alternative mechanisms to promote genetic variability facilitating adaptation. Here, we assessed the potential of transposable elements (TEs) for generating genomic diversity. The dynamic expression of TEs during Rhizophagus irregularis spore development suggests ongoing TE activity. We find Mutator-like elements located near genes belonging to highly expanded gene families. Characterising the epigenomic status of R. irregularis provides evidence of DNA methylation and small RNA production occurring at TE loci. Our results support a potential role for TEs in shaping the genome, and roles for DNA methylation and small RNA-mediated silencing in regulating TEs. A well-controlled balance between TE activity and repression may therefore contribute to genome evolution in AM fungi.

### Sample Protocol
20 mg of each ground spore sample was resuspended in 1x LDS Buffer and 100 mM DTT and incubated at 70°C for 10 min. Proteins were separated on a 10 % NuPage NOVEX Bis-Tris gel (Thermo) for 8 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo). The gels were fixated, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Sigma) and afterwards destained with water. In-gel digestion and desalting on C18 StageTips were performed as previously described. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) via the nanoflex electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a 25 cm reversed-phase capillary with a 75 μm inner diameter packed in-house with Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides were eluted during a 208 min gradient from 2 to 40 % acetronitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a constant flow rate of 225 nl/min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated with a top 10 data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
For raw file peak extraction and the identification of protein groups the MS raw files were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43; 70) against the following three databases from UniProt: UP000236242 (Rhizophagus irregularis), UP000059680 (O. sativa subsp. japonica) and UP000007305 (Zea mays). The database searches were performed with MaxQuant standard settings with additional protein quantification using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (71, 72) and the match between runs option was activated. The data was further analyzed in R (version 3.6.2) using an in-house script. In short, from the identified protein groups known contaminants, reverse entries, protein groups only identified by site or with no unique or less than two peptides were filtered out and excluded from the analysis. Missing LFQ values were imputed at the lower end of values within each sample and data plotted using the ggplot2 and pheatmap packages.

### Publication Abstract
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form mutualistic relationships with most land plant species. AM fungi have long been considered as ancient asexuals. Long-term clonal evolution would be remarkable for a eukaryotic lineage and suggests the importance of alternative mechanisms to promote genetic variability facilitating adaptation. Here, we assessed the potential of transposable elements for generating such genomic diversity. The dynamic expression of TEs during <i>Rhizophagus irregularis</i> spore development suggests ongoing TE activity. We find <i>Mutator</i>-like elements located near genes belonging to highly expanded gene families. Whole-genome epigenomic profiling of <i>R. irregularis</i> provides direct evidence of DNA methylation and small RNA production occurring at TE loci. Our results support a model in which TE activity shapes the genome, while DNA methylation and small RNA-mediated silencing keep their overproliferation in check. We propose that a well-controlled TE activity directly contributes to genome evolution in AM fungi.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; fungi

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


