### Accession
PXD039298

### Title
Immunization with lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase CbpD induces protective immunity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia

### Description
Bacterial lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are understudied in the context of infection disease. We demonstrated that Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPMO CbpD is a virulence determinant in pneumonia. Moreover, Mice immunized with CbpD generate robust antibody responses that provide protection against lethal lung infection

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and peptide purification were done using an S-trap micro column.  Peptides were labeled with TMT using the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo scientific).  Samples were first fractionated by high salt-reverse phase chromatography (Stein et al., 2013) using an Ultimate 3000 offline HPLC.  Peptides were fractionated using a 2-80 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 140 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The separated peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. MS1 data were collected at 60k resolution over an m/z range at 375-1575 using a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS data were collected at 45K resolution at maximum injection time 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) with the integrated Andromeda search engine. MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus (2021) and P. aeruginosa database. Perseus (version 1.6.10.43) was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> (PA) CbpD belongs to the lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs), a family of enzymes that cleave chitin or related polysaccharides. Here, we demonstrate a virulence role of CbpD in PA pneumonia linked to impairment of host complement function and opsonophagocytic clearance. Following intratracheal challenge, a PA &#x394;CbpD mutant was more easily cleared and produced less mortality than the wild-type parent strain. The x-ray crystal structure of the CbpD LPMO domain was solved to subatomic resolution (0.75&#xc5;) and its two additional domains modeled by small-angle X-ray scattering and Alphafold2 machine-learning algorithms, allowing structure-based immune epitope mapping. Immunization of naive mice with recombinant CbpD generated high IgG antibody titers that promoted human neutrophil opsonophagocytic killing, neutralized enzymatic activity, and protected against lethal PA pneumonia and sepsis. IgG antibodies generated against full-length CbpD or its noncatalytic M2+CBM73 domains were opsonic and protective, even in previously PA-exposed mice, while antibodies targeting the AA10 domain were not. Preexisting antibodies in PA-colonized cystic fibrosis patients primarily target the CbpD AA10 catalytic domain. Further exploration of LPMO family proteins, present across many clinically important and antibiotic-resistant human pathogens, may yield novel and effective vaccine antigens.

### Keywords
Lpmo, Pnemonia, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Cbpd

### Affiliations
Division of Host-Microbe Systems & Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics, UC San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Nizet
Division of Host-Microbe Systems & Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics, UC San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.


