### Accession
PXD000955

### Title
Highly accurate protein complex retrieval by affinity enrichment MS rather than affinity purification MS

### Description
Protein-protein interactions are fundamental to the understanding of biological processes. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) is one of the most promising methods for their investigation. Previously, complexes were purified as much as possible, frequently followed by identification of individual gel bands. However, today mass spectrometers are highly sensitive, and powerful quantitative proteomics strategies are available to distinguish true interactors from background binders. Here we describe a high performance affinity enrichment-mass spectrometry (AE-MS) method for investigating protein-protein interactions, in which no attempt at purifying complexes to homogeneity is made. Instead, we developed analysis methods that take advantage of specific enrichment of interactors in the context of a large amount of unspecific background binders. We perform single-step affinity enrichment of endogenously expressed GFP-tagged proteins and their interactors in budding yeast, followed by single-run, intensity-based label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis. Each pull-down contains around 2000 background binders, which are reinterpreted from troubling contaminants to crucial elements in a novel data analysis strategy. Firstly, the background serves for accurate normalization. Secondly, interacting proteins are not identified by comparison to a single untagged control strain, but instead to the other tagged strains. Thirdly, potential interactors are further validated by their intensity profiles across all samples. We demonstrate the power of our AE-MS method using several well-known and challenging yeast complexes of various abundances. AE-MS is not only highly efficient and robust, but also cost effective, broadly applicable and feasible to perform in any laboratory.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains originating from the Yeast-GFP Clone Collection (Huh WK, Falvo JV, Gerke LC, Carroll AS, Howson RW, Weissman JS and O'Shea EK (2003) Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast. Nature 2003 Oct 16; 425(6959):686-91.) were grown under standard culture conditions. Single-step IPs were essentially performed as described before (Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A and Mann M (2010) Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC transgenomics reveals in vivo protein interactions. J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17; 189(4):739-54. doi: 0.1083/jcb.200911091.) using anti-GFP antibodies coupled to magnetic microbeads. Bound proteins were eluted by digestion with trypsin and analyzed in single runs by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap classic using a top5 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant version 1.4.0.6. The derived peak list was searched with Andromeda against the reference yeast proteome downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) on 03-20-2013, with a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The match between runs option was also enabled with a match time window of 0.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data was performed using the in-house developed Perseus software (version 1.4.2.30).

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions are fundamental to the understanding of biological processes. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) is one of the most promising methods for their investigation. Previously, complexes were purified as much as possible, frequently followed by identification of individual gel bands. However, todays mass spectrometers are highly sensitive, and powerful quantitative proteomics strategies are available to distinguish true interactors from background binders. Here we describe a high performance affinity enrichment-mass spectrometry method for investigating protein-protein interactions, in which no attempt at purifying complexes to homogeneity is made. Instead, we developed analysis methods that take advantage of specific enrichment of interactors in the context of a large amount of unspecific background binders. We perform single-step affinity enrichment of endogenously expressed GFP-tagged proteins and their interactors in budding yeast, followed by single-run, intensity-based label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis. Each pull-down contains around 2000 background binders, which are reinterpreted from troubling contaminants to crucial elements in a novel data analysis strategy. First the background serves for accurate normalization. Second, interacting proteins are not identified by comparison to a single untagged control strain, but instead to the other tagged strains. Third, potential interactors are further validated by their intensity profiles across all samples. We demonstrate the power of our AE-MS method using several well-known and challenging yeast complexes of various abundances. AE-MS is not only highly efficient and robust, but also cost effective, broadly applicable, and can be performed in any laboratory with access to high-resolution mass spectrometers.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Yeast, Interaction proteomics, Ae-ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany


