### Accession
PXD022412

### Title
Gephyrin interacts with the K-Cl co-transporter KCC2 to regulate its surface expression and function in cortical neurons

### Description
The K+-Cl- co-transporter KCC2, encoded by the Slc12a5 gene, is a neuron-specific chloride extruder that tunes the strength and polarity of GABAA receptor-mediated transmission. Besides its canonical ion-transport function, KCC2 also regulates spinogenesis and excitatory synaptic function through interaction with a variety of molecular partners. KCC2 is enriched in the vicinity of both glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses, the activity of which in turn regulates its membrane stability and function. KCC2 interaction with submembrane actin cytoskeleton via 4.1N is known to control its anchoring in the vicinity of glutamatergic synapses on dendritic spines. However, the molecular determinants of KCC2 clustering near GABAergic synapses remain unknown. Here, we use proteomics to identify novel KCC2 interacting proteins in adult rat cortex. We identify both known and novel candidate KCC2 partners, including some involved in neuronal development and synaptic transmission. These include gephyrin, the main scaffolding molecule at GABAergic synapses. Gephyrin interaction with endogenous KCC2 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation from rat brain extracts. We show that gephyrin stabilizes plasmalemmal KCC2 and promotes its clustering, notably but not exclusively near GABAergic synapses, thereby controlling KCC2-mediated chloride extrusion. This study identifies gephyrin as a novel KCC2 anchoring molecule that regulates its membrane expression and function in cortical neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Infected rat cortices expressing a Flag tagged KCC2 (bait) were dissected, homogenized by sonication in co-immunoprecipitation buffer containing (in mM): 50 Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 NaCl, 1 EDTA, 1 % Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors and solubilized by rotation. After centrifugation, protein of the supernatant was measured and 10 mg of proteins (preys) were incubated overnight with anti-Flag magnetic beads. After two short washes with co-immunoprecipitation buffer containing 1 % Triton X100, beads were shortly washed twice and then overnight with detergent-free co-immunoprecipitation buffer. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by rotating beads in elution buffer containing 250 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 1 % SDS, 20 % Glycerol and bromophenol blue. Eluates were transferred in a new tube where SDS and beta-mercapto-ethanol were added for denaturation (1h at 37 °C). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Protein Staining Solution. Gel lanes were cut into 5 gel pieces and destained with 50 mM TEABC/50 % acetonitrile and three washes in 100 % acetonitrile. Proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin. After completing the digestion step, peptides were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in formic acid (0.1 %, buffer A), separated and analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Orbitrap technology, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.5.1). Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synapse, Neuron, Chloride transport, Interactomics, Scaffold protein

### Affiliations
Institut du Fer a Moulin, Inserm-Sorbonne Université UMR-S 1270, Paris, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Jean- Christophe Poncer
Institut du Fer a Moulin, Inserm-Sorbonne Université UMR-S 1270, Paris, France


