### Accession
PXD029718

### Title
Proteome analysis of kidney organoid cells during TNFa stimulation

### Description
Kidney organoids are a valuable and innovative model to understand genetic diseases, kidney development and transcriptomic dynamics. However, their proteome has not been analyzed so far. Here, we analyzed the organoid proteome after treatment of organoids with 5ng/mL TNFalpha for 24h and 48h compared with vehicle control (VC). Incubation of organoids (day 25 of differentiation) with TNFalpha led to an activation of NFkappaB signaling, and, interestingly, secretion of cytokines and complement components, alongside with extracellular matrix components. Interestingly, this signaling system directly links inflammatory signaling, production of cytokines and complement; and production of extracellular matrix. Thus, we provide a repository of kidney organoid proteins that revealed the potential to model pathophysiological pathways beyond genetic diseases. Organoids were grown according to the Freedman protocol (Freedman, Brooks et al. 2015, Czerniecki, Cruz et al. 2018). The IPSCs were differentiated for a three-week period until first spheroids from. We started TNFa stimulation at day 25, with the 24h stimulation ending on day 26 and the 48h stimulation ending on day 27.  We chose day 25 because it lies centrally in the day 21 to day 29 window, where we observe reproducible spheroids with limited off-target differentiation of organoids, which becomes an issue after day 29.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of 20 spheroids were lysed using 1:1 4% SDS/0.1M HEPES pH 7.4/5mM EDTA, complemented with protease inhitor cocktail (Roche) and denaturation at 95 °C for 5min. 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM CAA were used for reduction/alkylation of the samples. 50µg aliquots were purified with paramagnetic, mixed 1:1 hydrophobic:hydrophilic SP3 beads (Weng, Demir et al., MCP, 2019). Purified proteins were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 and digested over night at 37 °C with trypsin (Serva) in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Samples were acidified with 2% formic acid and peptides were purified using in-house made stage-tips.  Samples were separated on an Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoHPLC coupled on-line to an Exploris480 orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo). The HPLC was operated in a two-column setup with an Acclaim 5mm C18 cartridge pre-column (Thermo) and an ionopticks aurora 25cm column with integrated emitter tip. Separation was performed at 400 nL/min in a heated column oven at 50 °C (Sonation) with the following gradient of solvents A (H2O + 0.1% FA) and B (ACN + 0.1% FA): 120 min from 2-30% B and a high-organic washout at 90% B for 9 min followed by a re-equilibration to the starting conditions (2% B). The mass spectrometer was operated with the FAIMS device at standard resolution with a total carrier glas flow of 3.8 L/min at three CVs: -40, -55 and -75V. The Orbitrap resolution for the MS1 full scan was set to 120k, where as the MS2 scans were recorded with 1.5s cycle time for -40V CV and 0.75s cycle time for -55/-70V FAIMS CVs at an orbitrap esolution of 15k. Dynamic exclusion mode was set to custom with a 40s exclusion window and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm each.

### Data Protocol
Raw FAIMS data was converted into MzXML files with the FAIMS_MzXML_Generator tool (v1.0.7639, Hebert et al., 2018, Anal Chem) and queried with MaxQuant v 1.6.7.0 (FDR = 1%, match between runs = on) using the UniProt reference proteome database for human (May 2020, canonical only, 20600 entries) and default settings for orbitrap instruments. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was activates with default settings. The data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tnfa, Cytokine, Tnfalpha, Shotgun lc ms/ms, Human kidney organoids

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C
Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine
Markus Rinschen Lab

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C


