### Accession
PXD044177

### Title
Secretome analysis of Pancreatic Cancer Spheroid with myeloid cell infiltration

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most hypoxic, lethal, and treatment resistant cancers. Due to its desmoplastic and hypoxic nature along with the abundance of myeloid cell infiltration and scare T cell infiltration, PDAC is considered a cold tumor. Using MiaPaCA-2 as a PDAC spheroid model with hypoxic core grown in serum-free defined media and immune cell infiltration, we assessed the modulation of PDAC secretome and characterized immunomodulatory factors secreted.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media of MiaPaCa2 spheroids and immune cell infiltration were collected at day 5 after tumor spheroid formation and on day 8 after U937 cell infiltration. Protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail were added after collection. Secretomes were processed at 4°C with centrifugation of 300 RCF for 10 minutes to remove cells, followed by 2,000 RCF for 10 minutes to remove dead cells. Supernatants were then passed through 0.2uM flitter to remove additional cells and cell debris. Finally, supernatants were concentrated using ultrafiltration at Amicon Ultra 3kDa MWCO. Supernatant was collected for 10% SDS-PAGE gel fractionation before in-gel digestion for LC-MS/MS analysis. For in-gel digestion and desalting, 10% SDS-PAGE gel fractionation was first performed by cutting each lane into 5 fractions with fraction 1 (F1) being the smallest MW and F5 the largest MW. All gels were subsequently cut into ~1mm2 size, before proceeding to in-gel digestion.   Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis in an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer as previously described [17, 28-30]. Each sample was injected in triplicate into EASY-Spray™ column (75um x 10cm ID Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18, 3um, 100 A°).

### Data Protocol
Raw output files from LC-MS/MS were processed using Proteome Discoverer™ software version 2.1.1.21. Protein identification was done by mapping against the UniProt KnowledgeBase (UniProtKB) Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded on 6 Feb 2017, 1,586,247 sequences and 61,972,042 residues) and using SEQUEST-HT and Mascot search engines. For target false discovery rate (FDR), a semi-supervised machine learning – Percolator was used with q-value <0.01 strict and <0.05 relaxed validation on identified peptides. Quantification of identified protein within the sample uses exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) and spectral area.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pdac, Pancreatic cancer, Miapaca2, Lc-ms/ms, Spheroid

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Apple Tay

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Lundqvist
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology


