### Accession
PXD003404

### Title
Labeo rohita (Rohu) plasma MALDI-TOF MS/MS

### Description
Arsenic (As) is a toxic environmental contaminant and potential human carcinogen. Chronic intake of arsenic-contaminated water leads to arsenicosis that is a major public health problem in many parts of the world, including India and Bangladesh. Thus, the early detection of arsenic toxicity will greatly benefit patients. However, the detection of arsenicosis needs to be done early before onset of severe symptoms in which case the tools used for detection have to be both sensitive and reliable. In this context, the present study investigated plasma proteome changes in arsenic-exposed Labeo rohita, with the aim of identifying biomarkers for arsenicosis. Changes in the plasma proteome were investigated using gel-based proteomics technology. Using quantitative image analysis of the 2D protein profiles, unique protein spots were identified from the plasma proteome by MALDI-TOF-TOF-MS. Unique proteins identified included Apolipoprotein-A1 (Apo-A1), α-2 macroglobulin-like protein (A2ML), and transferrin. Highly up-regulated protein spots identified in plasma from arsenic-exposed fish were liver-specific, including Apo-A1, and A2ML consistent with liver damage. It is proposed that a combination of these proteins could serve as useful biomarkers of hepatotoxicity and chronic liver disease due to arsenic exposure.

### Sample Protocol
An exposure study was carried out with Labeo rohita with different concentrations of arsenic. The blood samples were collected from the caudal vein of the anaesthetized fishes after completion of the exposure period. The blood samples were centrifuged and the plasma was collected. Plasma proteins were separated by 2-D GE. plasma was mixed with rehydration buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 50 mM DTT, 0.2% Bio-Lyte 5/8 ampholyte, and 0.001% bromophenol blue) and applied to the immobilized pH gradient (IPG) gel strip (pH 5-8, 7 cm; Bio-Rad). The IPG gel strips were allowed to rehydrate for 12-15 h at room temperature.  The first dimension IEF run was performed using a Protean IEF Cell (Bio-Rad) at a current of 50 μA/strip and the following voltage gradient: 250 V for 20 min, 4000 V for 2 h and 4000 V for 10,000 VHr with a final reading of 14000 VHr. The focused IPG gel strips were equilibrated with the equilibration buffers I and II (equilibration buffer I: 0.375 M Tris-HCl at pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 20% v/v glycerol, 2% SDS, 130 mM DTT and equilibration buffer II: 0.375 M Tris-HCl at pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 20% v/v glycerol, 2% SDS, 135 mM iodoacetamide). The second dimension separation was performed on 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide hand cast gels with a 5% (w/v) stacking gel in a mini-Protean 3 electrophoresis cell (Bio-Rad).  Gel images were acquired using an ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare) running LabScan version 6.0. Image analysis of the 2D protein profiles was carried out using PD Quest (version 7.2.0) (Bio-Rad). Each experimental condition was represented by three independent biological replicates. Student's t-test was performed with a 95% significance level to identify those proteins with significant differences in abundance between the control and exposed fish plasma proteomes. Selected protein spots were analysed by MALDI-TOD MS/MS for protein identification. Trypsin was used for peptide digestion and peptides were analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS using a 5800 Proteomics Analyzer (AB Sciex, USA). The samples were analysed using a ﬁrst run of standard TOF-MS. The system was set to perform a second run of  MS/MS focused on the 20 most intensive peaks of the ﬁrst MS (excluding peaks known to be trypsin). The laser was set to ﬁre 400 times per spot in MS mode and 2000 times per spot in MS/MS mode. Laser intensity was 2800 J (MS) and 3900 J (MS/MS). A mass range of 800–4000 amu with a focus mass of 2100 amu was used.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, peptide masses from trypsin digests derived using the MALDI-TOF/TOF MS. Taxonomy set to Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) using the MASCOT sequence matching software (Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com). The MASCOT search parameters were as follows: peptide mass accuracy was 100 ppm, and protein modifications were cysteine as S-carbamidomethyl derivative and oxidation of methionine allowed. The default search parameters used were enzyme, trypsin; max. missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); peptide tolerance, + 0.4 Da; fragment mass tolerance, +0.4 Da; protein mass, unrestricted; and instrument, default.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic (As) is a toxic environmental contaminant and potential human carcinogen. Chronic intake of arsenic-contaminated water and food leads to arsenicosis, a major public health problem in many parts of the world. Early detection of arsenic toxicity would greatly benefit patients; however, the detection of arsenicosis needs to be done early before onset of severe symptoms in which case the tools used for detection have to be both sensitive and reliable. In this context, the present study investigated plasma proteome changes in arsenic-exposed Labeo rohita, with the aim of identifying biomarkers for arsenicosis. Changes in the plasma proteome were investigated using gel-based proteomics technology. Using quantitative image analysis of the 2D proteome profiles, 14 unique spots were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS and/or LC-MS/MS which included Apolipoprotein-A1 (Apo-A1) (6 spots), &#x3b1;-2 macroglobulin-like protein (A2ML) (2 spots), transferrin (TF) (3 spots) and warm-temperature acclimation related 65kDa protein (Wap65). The proteome data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003404. Highly abundant protein spots identified in plasma from arsenic-exposed fish i.e. Apo-A1 (&gt;10-fold), A2ML (7-fold) and Wap65 (&gt;2-fold) indicate liver damage. It is proposed that a combination of these proteins could serve as useful biomarkers of hepatotoxicity and chronic liver disease due to arsenic exposure.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof ms/ms, Plasma, Labeo rohita

### Affiliations
ICAR-Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore
ICAR- Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Fishery Resource and Environmental Management Division, Biochemistry Laboratory, Proteomics Unit, Barrackpore- 700120. Ph- +919230618153

### Submitter
Bimal Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Bimal Prasanna Mohanty
ICAR- Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Fishery Resource and Environmental Management Division, Biochemistry Laboratory, Proteomics Unit, Barrackpore- 700120. Ph- +919230618153


