### Accession
PXD025773

### Title
Proteomic response of rat hippocampus under chronic unpredicted mild stress reveals insights into susceptibility and insensitivity to depression

### Description
We used a chronic unpredicted mild stress (CUMS) protocol to separate depression-susceptible and stress-insensitive rat subgroups. Differential proteomes in the hippocampus were analyzed based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling combined with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the hippocampal proteins were extracted, digested, and labeled with iTRAQ-6plex reagents in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptides were then fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC. The resulting fractions were dissolved, loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC.

### Data Protocol
In order to identify the proteins, we analyzed the resulting MS/MS data using the Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0) and searched against the Uniprot_rat database (32,983 sequences). We defined proteins with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) ratios of >1.15, or <0.87, coupled with p <0.05 as the differentially expressed proteins. The interaction network of the differentially expressed proteins was constructed using STRING 11.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Depression, Proteome, Chronic unpredicted mild stress, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Qing Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Tian
Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


