### Accession
PXD001436

### Title
Metaproteome, Deep Lake, Antarctica

### Description
Deep Lake is a hypersaline system in Antarctica  (68°33’36.8S, 78°11’48.7E) that is so saline it remains liquid at –20°C (DeMaere et al 2013). The lake is dominated by haloarchaea, comprising a low-complexity community that differs greatly to warm-hot latitude hypersaline systems, is hierarchical structured, and supports a high level of intergenera gene exchange. Metaproteomics was performed on biomass that was collected in the austral summer of 2008 by sequential size fractionation (20 – 3 µm, 3 – 0.8 µm, 0.8 – 0.1 µm). The data were integrated to obtain a systems level view of the active host-virus interactions occurring in this novel aquatic Antarctic system.   DeMaere MZ, Williams TJ, Allen MA, Brown MV, Gibson JA, Rich J, Lauro FM, Dyall-Smith M, Davenport KW, Woyke T, Kyrpides NC, Tringe SG, Cavicchioli R (2013) High level of intergenera gene exchange shapes the evolution of haloarchaea in an isolated Antarctic lake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 16939-16944

### Sample Protocol
Biomass from Deep Lake was captured at five different depths by sequential filtration on 3, 0.8 and 0.1 µm filters resulting in 15 distinct samples (5 depths x 3 filters). Protein extraction, sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed following PMID: 20237513 with only slight modifications.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched against peptides with Mascot Daemon and the Mascot server (version 2.3; Matrix Science, Thermo, London, UK) using a composite databases consisting of: (1) a Deep Lake metagenome data and (2) the genomes of 4 Deep Lake isolates (tADL, Halorubrum lacusprofundi, DL31, DL1). All technical replicates of a sample were merged into a single sample file during Mascot analysis. Peptide and protein validation and further analysis was performed using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA)

### Publication Abstract
Despite knowledge that viruses are abundant in natural ecosystems, there is limited understanding of which viruses infect which hosts, and how both hosts and viruses respond to those interactions-interactions that ultimately shape community structure and dynamics. In Deep Lake, Antarctica, intergenera gene exchange occurs rampantly within the low complexity, haloarchaea-dominated community, strongly balanced by distinctions in niche adaptation which maintain sympatric speciation. By performing metaproteomics for the first time on haloarchaea, genomic variation of S-layer, archaella and other cell surface proteins was linked to mechanisms of infection evasion. CRISPR defense systems were found to be active, with haloarchaea responding to at least eight distinct types of viruses, including those infecting between genera. The role of BREX systems in defending against viruses was also examined. Although evasion and defense were evident, both hosts and viruses also may benefit from viruses carrying and expressing host genes, thereby potentially enhancing genetic variation and phenotypic differences within populations. The data point to a complex inter-play leading to a dynamic optimization of host-virus interactions. This comprehensive overview was achieved only through the integration of results from metaproteomics, genomics and metagenomics.

### Keywords
Hypersaline, Metaproteomics, Antarctica, Haloarchaea, Deep lake

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences The University of NSW Sydney NSW 2052 Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Bernhard Tschitschko

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Rick Cavicchioli
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences The University of NSW Sydney NSW 2052 Australia


