### Accession
PXD040477

### Title
Targeting USP2 regulation of VPRBP-mediated degradation of p53 and PD-L1 for cancer therapy

### Description
Here, we identify the USP2 (ubiquitin specific peptidase 2)-VPRBP (viral protein R binding protein) axis as a new pathway for p53 regulation. Like Mdm2 (Mouse double minute 2), VPRBP is a potent repressor of p53 but VPRBP stability is controlled by USP2.  Interestingly, the USP2-VPRBP axis is also involved in PD-L1 (programmed death-ligand 1) regulation. Strikingly, in immunocompetent mouse models, the combination of a small-molecule USP2 inhibitor and anti-PD1 monoclonal antibody leads to complete regression of the tumors expressing wild-type p53.   In contrast to Mdm2, knockout of the USP2 gene in mice has no obvious effect in normal tissues. Moreover, no obvious toxicity is observed upon the USP2 inhibitor treatment in vivo as Mdm2-mediated regulation of p53 remains intact. These data demonstrate that USP2 is a promising target to induce potent tumor suppression without obvious toxicity. Our study reveals a new strategy for p53-based therapy by circumventing the toxicity issue. 

### Sample Protocol
293 cells stably express USP2 with S-protein-Flag-Streptavidin binding peptide were harvest and lysis by BC100 cell lysis buffer (20 mM Tris.Cl PH 7.3, 100 mM NaCl,10% Glycerol,0.2 mM EDTA,0.2% Triton X-100,Protease Inhibitor cocktail). Cell lysate were incubate with Streptavidin beads overnight then washed with BC100 for 4 times. And eluted by Biotin. Add S-protein beads to the elution buffer for 2nd round IP overnight. Wash S-protein beads with BC100 for 4 times and elute with Glycin-HCL PH2.8. The elutes were digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Identified protein and peptide data was exported to Microsoft Excel for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Since Mdm2 (Mouse double minute 2) inhibitors show serious toxicity in clinic studies, different approaches to achieve therapeutic reactivation of p53-mediated tumor suppression in cancers need to be explored. Here, we identify the USP2 (ubiquitin specific peptidase 2)-VPRBP (viral protein R binding protein) axis as an important pathway for p53 regulation. Like Mdm2, VPRBP is a potent repressor of p53 but VPRBP stability is controlled by USP2. Interestingly, the USP2-VPRBP axis also regulates PD-L1 (programmed death-ligand 1) expression. Strikingly, the combination of a small-molecule USP2 inhibitor and anti-PD1 monoclonal antibody leads to complete regression of the tumors expressing wild-type p53. In contrast to Mdm2, knockout of Usp2 in mice has no obvious effect in normal tissues. Moreover, no obvious toxicity is observed upon the USP2 inhibitor treatment in vivo as Mdm2-mediated regulation of p53 remains intact. Our study reveals a promising strategy for p53-based therapy by circumventing the toxicity issue.

### Keywords
Irf1, Usp2 inhibitors, Vprbp, Usp2, Mdm2 and tumor suppressor, Pd-l1, Pd-1, P53

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology and Institute for Cancer Genetics Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons Columbia University
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER

### Submitter
huan li

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Gu
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology and Institute for Cancer Genetics Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons Columbia University


