### Accession
PXD012907

### Title
Alterations of redox and iron metabolism accompany development of HIV latency

### Description
Metabolic alterations, such as oxidative stress, are hallmarks of HIV-1 infection. However, their influenceon the development of viral latency, and thus on HIV-1 persistence during antiretroviral therapy (ART),have just begun to be explored. We analyzed omics profiles ofin-vitroandin-vivomodels of infection byHIV-1 and its simian homolog SIVmac. We found that cells survive retroviral replication by upregulatingantioxidant pathways and intertwined iron import pathways. These changes are associated withremodeling of the redox sensitive promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies (PML NBs), an importantconstituent of nuclear architecture and a marker of HIV-1 latency. We found that PML is depleted inproductively infected cells and restored by ART. Moreover, we identified intracellular iron as a key linkbetween  oxidative  stress and PML depletion, thus supporting iron metabolism modulators aspharmacological tools to impair latency establishment.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed using the Single‐Pot Solid‐Phase‐enhanced Sample Preparation approach SP3, as described elsewhere. In brief, 2 µL of a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic carboxylate coated paramagnetic beads (SeraMag Speed Beads, #44152105050250 and #24152105050250, GE Healthcare) were added to 30 µg protein of each sample. Acetonitrile was added to achieve a final concentration of 50% organic solvent. Bound proteins were washed with 70% ethanol and 100% acetonitrile. Beads were resuspended in 5 µL 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonate buffer containing 0.6 µg Trypsin (SERVA) and 0.6 µg LysC (Wako). Digestion was carried out for 16h at 37°C in a PCR cycler. Recovered peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid / 5% DMSO and stored at  20°C prior MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) equilibrated in solvent A. Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1 min, 5-30% solvent B within 91 min, 30-50% solvent B within 17 min, followed by washing at 95% for 10 min. For library generation the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 350-1300 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. A data-independent acquisition method was employed for protein quantification. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The MS1 scan was acquired from 400-1220 m/z at a resolution of 140,000. MSMS scans were acquired for 10 DIA windows at a resolution of 35,000. The AGC target was set to 3e6 charges. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 4. Stepped normalized collision energy was set to A, B, C = 23.5%, 26%, 28.5%. The MSMS spectra were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data of the pooled library samples were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was disabled. For DIA quantification raw data were processed with Spectronaut Pulsar X (version 11) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the previously generated library. The maximum of major group Top N was set to 6, the decoy method to inverse and the data filtering was set to Qvalue.

### Publication Abstract
HIV-1 persists in a latent form during antiretroviral therapy, mainly in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, thus hampering efforts for a cure. HIV-1 infection is accompanied by metabolic alterations, such as oxidative stress, but the effect of cellular antioxidant responses on viral replication and latency is unknown. Here, we show that cells survive retroviral replication, both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo in SIVmac-infected macaques, by upregulating antioxidant pathways and the intertwined iron import pathway. These changes are associated with remodeling of promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies (PML NBs), an important constituent of nuclear architecture and a marker of HIV-1 latency. We found that PML NBs are hyper-SUMOylated and that PML protein is degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in productively infected cells, before latency establishment and after reactivation. Conversely, normal numbers of PML NBs were restored upon transition to latency or by decreasing oxidative stress or iron content. Our results highlight antioxidant and iron import pathways as determinants of HIV-1 latency and support their pharmacologic inhibition as tools to regulate PML stability and impair latency establishment.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress; hiv-1 latency; sivmac; nrf2; iron; transferrin receptor-1; promyelocyticleukemia protein; nuclear bodies

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Center for Integrative Infectious Diseases (CIID) Integrative Virology Heidelberg University Clinic Im Neuenheimer Feld 344 69120 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Lusic
Center for Integrative Infectious Diseases (CIID) Integrative Virology Heidelberg University Clinic Im Neuenheimer Feld 344 69120 Heidelberg


