### Accession
PXD000395

### Title
Chromosome 11-Centric Human Proteome Project

### Description
For the analysis of chromosome 11-centric human proteome, we analyzed the human brain hippocampal proteome.  The samples from brain tissues were extensively off-gel fractionated by 12 fractions and  analyzed by a high resolution mass spectrometer, Orbitrap XL ETD  with collision induced dissociation,  after LC separation using C18 column.

### Sample Protocol
The files were obtained from proteomic preparation steps, protein extraction, cellular fractionation, reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion, and OFFGEL fractionation in peptide level, and proteomic analysis step using a nanoLC-LTQ Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with both CID and ETD MS/MS modes. The LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometry was operated in a data-dependent mode during the chromatographic separation. The MS acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of full scans was 60 000 at m/z 400; six data-dependent MS/MS scans were acquired by CID per one full scan; CID scans were acquired in LTQ with 10 ms activation time; 2+ and more charge state; 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) in CID; and 2.0 Da isolation window CID. Preciously fragmented ions were exclude for 60 s for all MS/MS scans. The MS1 mass scan range was 400–2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained using LC–MS/MS were converted into *.ms2 and *.mgf files using RAWExtractor v. 1.9 (Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA) and MM File Conversion Tools v. 3.9 (MassMatrix Database Search Engines, Cleveland, OH). They were searched against three different search engines: SEQUEST (IP2, San Diego, CA), MASCOT v 2.3.0 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA), and MS-GF+ v. 9949 (open source, https://bix-lab.ucsd.edu/display/CCMStools/Home), with modified parameters (precursor ion tolerance = 50 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = 0.8 Da, missed cleavage = 3, modification = carbamidomethyl cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (variable), and enzyme (trypsin)). For peptide validation, a 1% FDR at the peptide spectral match and/or peptide level was used.

### Publication Abstract
The goal of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is to fully provide proteomic information from each human chromosome, including novel proteoforms, such as novel protein-coding variants expressed from noncoding genomic regions, alternative splicing variants (ASVs), and single amino acid variants (SAAVs). In the 144 LC/MS/MS raw files from human hippocampal tissues of control, epilepsy, and Alzheimer's disease, we identified the novel proteoforms with a workflow including integrated proteomic pipeline using three different search engines, MASCOT, SEQUEST, and MS-GF+. With a &lt;1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, the 11 detected peptides mapped to four translated long noncoding RNA variants against the customized databases of GENCODE lncRNA, which also mapped to coding-proteins at different chromosomal sites. We also identified four novel ASVs against the customized databases of GENCODE transcript. The target peptides from the variants were validated by tandem MS fragmentation pattern from their corresponding synthetic peptides. Additionally, a total of 128 SAAVs paired with their wild-type peptides were identified with FDR &lt;1% at the peptide level using a customized database from neXtProt including nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (nsSNP) information. Among these results, several novel variants related in neuro-degenerative disease were identified using the workflow that could be applicable to C-HPP studies. All raw files used in this study were deposited in ProteomeXchange (PXD000395).

### Keywords
Pe fraction, Human brain hippocampus tissues, Offgel fractionation, Chromosome 11

### Affiliations
Division of Mass Spectrometry Research
Korea Basic Science Institute

### Submitter
Kyung-Hoon Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Jinyoung Kim
Korea Basic Science Institute


