### Accession
PXD014938

### Title
MKPV (aka MuCPV) and related chapparvoviruses are nephro-tropic and encode novel accessory proteins p15 and NS2.

### Description
Mouse kidney parvovirus (MKPV) is a member of the provisional Chapparvovirus group that causes renal disease in immune-compromised mice, with a disease course reminiscent of polyomavirus-associated nephropathy in immune-suppressed kidney transplant patients. Here we map four MKPV transcripts, created by alternative splicing, to a common transcription initiation region, and use mass spectrometry to identify “p10” and “p15” as novel chapparvovirus accessory proteins produced in MKPV-infected kidneys. p15 and a splicing dependent putative accessory protein NS2 are conserved in all near-complete tetrapod chapparvovirus genomes currently available (from mammals, birds and a reptile). In contrast, p10 may be encoded only by viruses with >60% amino acid identity to MKPV. We show that MKPV is kidney-tropic and that the bat chapparvovirus DrPV-1 and a primate chapparvovirus,CKPV, are also found in the kidneys of their hosts. We propose, therefore, that chapparvoviruses with >60% VP1 amino acid identity to MKPV be classified into a genus Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses dubbed Nephroparvovirus, which is consistent with nomenclature for the genus Erythroparvovirus.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney extracts in RIPA processed by SP3. Peptides separated on PicoFrit column (75um x 300mm) at 300nl/min using 120 min gradient to 30% ACN. MS performed with Thermo QExactive Plus by DDA.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using Peaks Studio X against a database comprised of the Mus musculus proteome (UniProt UP000000589) plus all MKPV ORFs >25 amino acids plus a database of common contaminants; with the following parameter settings. Fixed modifications: none. Variable modifications: propionamide, oxidised methionine, deamidated asparagine. Enzyme: semi-trypsin. Number of allowed missed cleavages: 3. Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm. MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse kidney parvovirus (MKPV) is a member of the provisional genus Chapparvovirus that causes renal disease in immune-compromised mice, with a disease course reminiscent of polyomavirus-associated nephropathy in immune-suppressed kidney transplant patients. Here we map four major MKPV transcripts, created by alternative splicing, to a common initiator region, and use mass spectrometry to identify "p10" and "p15" as novel chapparvovirus accessory proteins produced in MKPV-infected kidneys. p15 and the splicing-dependent putative accessory protein NS2 are conserved in all near-complete amniote chapparvovirus genomes currently available (from mammals, birds and a reptile). In contrast, p10 may be encoded only by viruses with &gt;60% amino acid identity to MKPV. We show that MKPV is kidney-tropic and that the bat chapparvovirus DrPV-1 and a non-human primate chapparvovirus, CKPV, are also found in the kidneys of their hosts. We propose, therefore, that many mammal chapparvoviruses are likely to be nephrotropic.

### Keywords
Mouse, Chapparvovirus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Adult Cancer Program, Faculty of Medicine, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia
University of technology Sydney

### Submitter
Matthew Padula

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J Jolly
Adult Cancer Program, Faculty of Medicine, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia


