### Accession
PXD010964

### Title
Moss secreted peptidome -  Salicylic acid influences the protease activity and posttranslation modifications of the secreted peptides in the moss Physcomitrella patens

### Description
Plant secretome comprise dozens of  secreted proteins and peptide hormones. However, little is known about peptide composition of plant secretome as well as proteases responsible for peptide pools generation. While the majority of studies focuses on the target detection and characterization of specific plant peptide hormones, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the whole extracellular  peptidome, using moss Physcomitrella patens as a model object. We identified hundreds of modified and unmodified endogenous peptides originated from functional and non-functional protein precursors. Plant proteases responsible for shaping the  pool of endogenous peptides were predicted. We showed that salicylic acid (SA) induces peptide production in the secretome.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted peptides were extracted from 400 mL protonemata culture medium (Knop medium with 500 mg/L ammonium tartrate). The culture medium was filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane filter (Millipore), lyophilized and resuspended in 700 μL 5% acetonitrile - 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min, then supernatant was transferred into clean tubes and centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 5 min and the pellet was discarded. Peptides were isolated from the culture medium by solid-phase extraction on reverse-phase DSC-18 cartridges (Discovery DSC-18, Supelco, USA) using 50% and 80% acetonitrile solutions for the elution. The eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile-0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The pool of peptides was isolated by solid-phase extraction in ZipTip Pipette tips (Millipore) using a 50% acetonitrile solution for the elution. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile-0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by mass-spectrometry analysis of all prepared samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched with MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 against a database containing the protein sequences from Phytozome v12.0 merged with chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins and sequences from a database of common contaminant proteins. The MaxQuant protein FDR filter was disabled, while the peptide FDR remained at 1%. The parameter “Digestion Mode” was set to “unspecific”. A maximum of three variable modifications were allowed per peptide for sulfation of Y (mass shift of +79,957 Da), hydroxylation of P (mass shift of + 15.996 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (mass shift of 42.010 Da ). All other parameters were left at default values.

### Publication Abstract
Plant secretome comprises dozens of secreted proteins. However, little is known about the composition of the whole secreted peptide pools and the proteases responsible for the generation of the peptide pools. The majority of studies focus on target detection and characterization of specific plant peptide hormones. In this study, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the whole extracellular peptidome, using moss Physcomitrella patens as a model. Hundreds of modified and unmodified endogenous peptides that originated from functional and nonfunctional protein precursors were identified. The plant proteases responsible for shaping the pool of endogenous peptides were predicted. Salicylic acid (SA) influenced peptide production in the secretome. The proteasome activity was altered upon SA treatment, thereby influencing the composition of the peptide pools. These results shed more light on the role of proteases and posttranslational modification in the "active management" of the extracellular peptide pool in response to stress conditions. It also identifies a list of potential peptide hormones in the moss secretome for further analysis.

### Keywords
Physcomitreella patens, Lc-ms/ms, Sa

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Vadim Govorun
IBCH RAS


