### Accession
PXD025263

### Title
Unique Protein Interaction Networks Define The Chromatin Remodeling Module of The NuRD Complex

### Description
The combination of four proteins and their paralogues including MBD2/3, GATAD2A/B, CDK2AP1, and CHD3/4/5, which we refer to as the MGCC module, form the chromatin remodeling module of the Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex. To date, mechanisms by which the MGCC module acquires paralogue-specific function and specificity have not been addressed. Understanding the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the MGCC subunits is essential in defining underlying mechanisms of gene regulation. Therefore, using pulldown followed by mass spectrometry analysis (PD-MS) we report a proteome-wide interaction network of the MGCC module in a paralogue-specific manner. Our data also demonstrate that the disordered C-terminal region of CHD3/4/5 is a gateway to incorporate remodeling activity into both the ChAHP (CHD4, ADNP, HP1γ) and NuRD complexes in a mutually exclusive manner. We define a short aggregation prone region (APR) within the C-terminal segment of GATAD2B that is essential for the interaction of CHD4 and CDK2AP1 with the NuRD complex. Finally, we also report an association of CDK2AP1 with the Nuclear Receptor Co-Repressor (NCOR) complex. Overall, this study provides insight into the possible mechanisms through which the MGCC module can achieve specificity and diverse biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Label‐free FLAG pulldowns were performed in at least triplicate. Nuclear extracts of transiently transfected Expi293F cells were incubated with 20 μL anti-FLAG beads (Sigma Aldrich) After incubation for 2 h, five washes were performed: 3 washes with a buffer containing (200 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% (v/v) IGEPAL, PH 7.5), and two washes with the same buffer lacking IGEPAL. Affinity-purified proteins were subject to on‐bead trypsin digestion, where 20 μL of digestion buffer (2 M urea freshly dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, 100 ng trypsin, 20 ng LysC (Promega)) was added and then vortexed in 30 °C for 2 h. Next, the beads were collected, and supernatant was transferred into Lobind tubes. Beads were resuspended in 20 μL 2 M urea containing 10 mM IAA in the dark for 20 min. The supernatant was transferred to the previous tube and incubated at 30 °C for 16 h. The following day, tryptic peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) with formic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and desalted using StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dried in a SpeedyVac and dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (3 L) were injected onto a C18 column (35 cm x 75 μm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18AQ particles). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 200 nL/min using a linear gradient of 5–30% buffer B over 30 min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The end-to-end run time was 45 min, including sample loading and column equilibration times. The mass spectrometer was set to a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). In the DDA run, each full scan MS1 was operated as follows: mass scan range was between 300-1600 m/z at resolution of 60,000. The top 15 most intense precursor ions were selected to be fragmented in the Orbitrap via high-energy collision dissociation activation. MS2 scan was operated as follow; mass scan range was between 200-2000 m/z at resolution of 15,000, 1 x 105 AGC target, and 1.4 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) [44] using standard settings. Additional parameters including carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) and methionine oxidation (M) were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively, and LysC, Trypsin, were selected as proteolytic enzymes. The human proteome (Proteome ID UP000005640) was used as the reference proteome. The generated proteingroups.txt table in conjunction with an experimental design text file was used to perform all statistical analyses using LFQ values in R studio as described elsewhere [45]. Perseus algorithm was used to impute the missing values. Proteins that had two missing values were discarded from the analysis [46]. For better data visualisation the output files were further processed. First, all proteins with fold change >2 and statistically significant were kept. Then, proteins including heat shock, ribosomal, keratin or proteins with mitochondrial and cytoplasmic localisation were excluded from the list. To determine the stoichiometry of the subunits, the iBAQ-adjusted intensity values (iBAQ; is an approximate calculation of protein copy numbers by dividing the sum of intensities of all experimentally detected peptides by the number of theoretically observable peptides for each protein) for MTAs were averaged and then intensity values for known NuRD components were divided by the MTA value and multiplied by 2 because based on published X-ray crystal structure two molecules of HDAC1 and two molecules of MTA1 make the core of the NuRD complex [18]. Due to high sequence similarity between paralogues (i.e., RBBP4 is 92% identical to RBBP7) we first considered each set of paralogues as a single group. NetworkAnalyst tool was used for network visualisation of the unique and shared interactors. Of note, LFQ and iBAQ are two different quantification algorithms; iBAQ is an approximate calculation of protein copy numbers and is the best at determining ratio changes within samples not across samples. Whereas LFQ is the best representative of ratio changes between samples.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of four proteins and their paralogues including MBD2/3, GATAD2A/B, CDK2AP1 and CHD3/4/5, which we refer to as the MGCC module, form the chromatin remodelling module of the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex. To date, mechanisms by which the MGCC module acquires paralogue-specific function and specificity have not been addressed. Understanding the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the MGCC subunits is essential for defining underlying mechanisms of gene regulation. Therefore, using pulldown followed by mass spectrometry analysis (PD-MS), we report a proteome-wide interaction network of the MGCC module in a paralogue-specific manner. Our data also demonstrate that the disordered C-terminal region of CHD3/4/5 is a gateway to incorporate remodelling activity into both ChAHP (CHD4, ADNP, HP1&#x3b3;) and NuRD complexes in a mutually exclusive manner. We define a short aggregation-prone region (APR) within the C-terminal segment of GATAD2B that is essential for the interaction of CHD4 and CDK2AP1 with the NuRD complex. Finally, we also report an association of CDK2AP1 with the nuclear receptor co-repressor (NCOR) complex. Overall, this study provides insight into the possible mechanisms through which the MGCC module can achieve specificity and diverse biological functions.

### Keywords
Chahp complex, Ncor complex, Nurd complex, Aggregation protein region, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
The centenary institute of cancer medicine
PROFESSOR JOHN RASKO, AO BSc(Med), MBBS(Hons), PhD, MAICD, FFSc(RCPA), FRCPA, FRACP, FAHMS  Head of Department, Cell & Molecular Therapies, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,  Professor, Faculty of Medicine & Health, The University of Sydney, Head, Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary Institute.  Level 2, Building 89, Missenden Road, CAMPERDOWN NSW 2050, AUSTRALIA  Tel 02 95656160 | Fax 02 9565 6101 | j.rasko@centenary.org.au‌

### Submitter
mehdi Sharifi tabar

### Lab Head
Dr John Rasko
PROFESSOR JOHN RASKO, AO BSc(Med), MBBS(Hons), PhD, MAICD, FFSc(RCPA), FRCPA, FRACP, FAHMS  Head of Department, Cell & Molecular Therapies, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,  Professor, Faculty of Medicine & Health, The University of Sydney, Head, Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary Institute.  Level 2, Building 89, Missenden Road, CAMPERDOWN NSW 2050, AUSTRALIA  Tel 02 95656160 | Fax 02 9565 6101 | j.rasko@centenary.org.au‌


