### Accession
PXD028286

### Title
Reprograming of Proteasomal Degradation by Branched Chain Amino Acid Metabolism

### Description
Branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) play an important role in energy and protein regulation. Defects in BCAA metabolism are linked to numerous pathologies, including diabetes, neurodegeneration, and premature aging. Isovaleric acidemia is a metabolic disease caused by defective leucine breakdown and an abnormal accumulation of isovaleric acid in the body fluids; however, the cytotoxic effects caused by excess isovaleric acid remained unclear. Here, we provide a regulatory connection between BCAA metabolism and the ubiquitin/proteasome-system (UPS) in Caenorhabditis elegans. Multi-omic analysis identified that worms lacking the isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase IVD-1 exhibit reduced expression of regulatory proteasome subunits and defects in ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Conversely, proteasomal protein degradation was supported by the branched chain amino transferase BCAT-1. Adding extra isovaleric acid to the growth medium triggered UPS defects, implying a causative role of perturbed proteostasis in isovaleric academia.

### Sample Protocol
Synchronized worms by egg-prep were harvested at day 1 of adulthood after washing with M9 at least twice to remove bacteria and flash frozen with liquid nitrogen before storing at -80°C, 4 replicates were collected in independent experiments. Worm pellets were supplemented with urea buffer (8 M in 50 mM TEAB + 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail), sonicated, centrifuged for 15 min at 20000 x g and protein content was quantified with Pierce BCA protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Samples were diluted to have 50 µg of proteins, DTT and chloracetamide were added to a final concentration of 5 mM and 40 mM respectively. Peptide digestion was conducted with lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) and, after diluting the samples to a final urea concentration of 1.2 M, with trypsin protease.  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 91.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 17.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. DDA library runs were acquired from distinct pools of the sample groups. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.0 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s. For the acquisition of the samples the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode. For MS1 and MSMS scans the maximum IT was restricted to 60 ms and the AGC target was set to 1e6 charges. The MS1 scan was acquired from 400-1220 m/z at a resolution of 35,000. MSMS scans were acquired in in DIA mode using 25 x 24 m/z windows covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1000 at a resolution of 17,500. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 3. Stepped normalized collision energy was set to 27%. The MSMS spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
A spectrum library was generated by searching a UniProt UP000001940 C. Elegans fasta file (26754 entries) with PulsarX in Spectronaut 13 (1). DDA runs of high pH reversed phase HPLC fractionated protein digests and in gel digests of SDS page separated protein lysates were used for library generation. Protein identifications were filtered for q values below 0.01 and normalized log2 intensities were exported for subsequent statistical analysis using Perseus 1.6.1.1 (2)   (1) Extending the limits of quantitative proteome profiling with data-independent acquisition and application to acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues. Bruderer R, Bernhardt OM, Gandhi T, Miladinović SM, Cheng LY, Messner S, Ehrenberger T, Zanotelli V, Butscheid Y, Escher C, Vitek O, Rinner O, Reiter L. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 May;14(5):1400  (2) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans; ubiquitin; leucine catabolism; branched chain amino acid (bcaa); bcat; ivd; isovaleric acidemia

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne ,Institute of Genetics, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Hoppe
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne ,Institute of Genetics, Cologne, Germany


