### Accession
PXD006263

### Title
Targeting metabolic reprogramming by influenza infection for therapeutic intervention

### Description
Influenza infection is a worldwide health and financial burden posing a significant risk to the immune-compromised, obese, diabetic, elderly, and pediatric populations. We identified increases in glucose metabolism in the lungs of pediatric patients infected with respiratory pathogens. Using quantitative mass spectrometry we found metabolic changes occurring after influenza infection in primary human respiratory cells, and validated infection associate increases in c-Myc, glycolysis, and glutaminolysis. We confirmed these findings with a metabolic drug screen and high throughput titering that identified the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 as a regulator of infectious virus production. BEZ235 treatment ablated the transient induction of c-Myc, restored PI3K/mTOR pathway homeostasis measured by 4E-BP1 and p85 phosphorylation, and reversed infection-induced changes in glucose and glutamine metabolism.   Importantly, BEZ235 reduced infectious progeny but had no effect on viral entry or the early stages of viral replication.  In a lethal infection model, BEZ235 significantly increased survival while reducing viral titer and respiratory distress. Here we show metabolic reprogramming of host cells by influenza virus exposes targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
NHBE cells were treated with BEZ235 (10µM) for 4 hours and infected with CA04 (MOI 1 pfu for 17 hours) in two separate experiments. Cell lysates were collected on ice, homogenized in ammonium bicarbonate with protease inhibitors (Roche), FASP digested and high pH RP fractionated.

### Data Protocol
Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, followed by 3 sec LTQ-MS/MS scans. All samples were run in triplicate. Post-acquisition analysis of raw MS data were performed within the mass informatics platform Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The spectra were identified through searches against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 11_30_2016 with 42054 entries). The searching parameters were the following: full tryptic cleavage with two missed cleavage sites; oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications; peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Influenza is a worldwide health and financial burden posing a significant risk to the immune-compromised, obese, diabetic, elderly, and pediatric populations. We identified increases in glucose metabolism in the lungs of pediatric patients infected with respiratory pathogens. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we found metabolic changes occurring after influenza infection in primary human respiratory cells and validated infection-associated increases in c-Myc, glycolysis, and glutaminolysis. We confirmed these findings with a metabolic drug screen that identified the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 as a regulator of infectious virus production. BEZ235 treatment ablated the transient induction of c-Myc, restored PI3K/mTOR pathway homeostasis measured by 4E-BP1 and p85 phosphorylation, and reversed infection-induced changes in metabolism. Importantly, BEZ235 reduced infectious progeny but had no effect on the early stages of viral replication. BEZ235 significantly increased survival in mice, while reducing viral titer. We show metabolic reprogramming of host cells by influenza virus exposes targets&#xa0;for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Pet scan, Influenza, Proteomics, Respiratory viral infection, Bez235, Metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Tennessee, Health Science Center, Department of Pediatrics
UTHSC

### Submitter
Svetlana Rezinciuc

### Lab Head
Dr Heather Smallwood
University of Tennessee, Health Science Center, Department of Pediatrics


