### Accession
PXD023647

### Title
Protein disulfide isomerase ERp57 protects early muscle denervation in experimental ALS

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive fatal neurodegenerative disease that affects motoneurons. Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) have been described as a causative genetic factor for ALS. Mice overexpressing ALS-linked mutant SOD1 develop ALS symptoms accompanied by histopathological alterations and protein aggregation. Protein disulfide isomerase family member ERp57 is one of the main up-regulated proteins in tissue of ALS patients and mutant SOD1 mice, whereas point mutations in ERp57 were described as possible risk factors. ERp57 catalyzes disulfide bond formation and isomerization in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), constituting a central component of protein quality control mechanisms. However, the actual contribution of ERp57 to ALS pathogenesis remains to be defined. Here, we studied the consequences of overexpressing ERp57 in ALS onset and progression of mutant SOD1G93A mice. The double transgenic SOD1G93A/ERp57WT mice presented improved motor performance, in addition to delayed deterioration of electrophysiological activity of affected muscles compared to single transgenic SOD1G93A littermates at early symptomatic stage. The overexpression of ERp57 reduced mutant SOD1 aggregation, but only at disease end-stage. Instead, the neuroprotective effects of ERp57 were correlated with preserved muscle innervation. Importantly, proteomic analysis revealed that the overexpression of ERp57 increases the levels of synaptic proteins in the spinal cord. Taken together, our results suggest that ERp57 operates as a disease modifier at early stages by maintaining motoneuron connectivity.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were euthanized using CO2. Lumbar spinal cord was dissected on ice and immediately stored at -80°C. Tissues  were homogenized in TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) with proteases and phosphatases inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich). Protein fractions were sonicated for 15 sec and quantified using BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher). For each sample, 10 μg of lysate was precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and diluted to final volume in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo) for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C with 0.5 μg trypsin (Thermo). After digestion, the peptides from each sample were reacted for 1 h with the appropriate tandem mass tag (TMTpro 16plex) isobaric reagent (Thermo) in 40% (v/v) anhydrous acetonitrile and quenched with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h. Samples with different TMT labels were pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated on a SpeedVac and debris removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 18,000 g.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate 3000 nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). MudPIT experiments were performed by 10 ml sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 30, …, 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) and a final step of 90% buffer C/10% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v) and each step followed by a gradient from buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to buffer B. Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.2 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with the following settings: eluted peptides were scanned from 375 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. Precursor ions from full scans were fragmented under TopSpeed setting using a cycle time of 3 s, by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 29%, isolation window of 0.4 m/z, a resolution of 30,000 using TurboTMT option, normalized ACG target 200%, maximum IT 120 ms, and scanned with first mass at 110 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo). Spectra were searched using SEQUEST against a UniProt mouse proteome  database (accessed on Nov. 2019). The database was curated to remove redundant protein and splice-isoforms, and common contaminants were added. Searches were carried out using a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences using Percolator node for filtering and the following settings: 20 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 6 amino acid minimum peptide length, trypsin cleavage (2 missed cleavage events), static Cys modification of 57.0215 (carbamidomethylation), variable Met oxidation, and static N-terminal and Lys modification of 304.207 (TMTpro 16plex), FDR 0.01, and a minimum of 2 peptide IDs per protein. Normalization of TMT reporter ion intensities was carried out based on total peptide abundance in each channel, and subsequently, TMT intensity ratios for each identified protein were calculated between sample groups: non-Tg (n = 4), ERp57WT-Tg (n = 4), SOD1G93A-Tg (n = 4) and SOD1G93A/ERp57WT-Tg (n = 3). TMT intensities were log2-transformed to calculate abundance differences. Significance was assessed by a multiple two-tailed unpaired t-tests using the FDR approach and two-stage step-up method of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli with Q = 5% in Graphpad Prism 8.4

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive fatal neurodegenerative disease that affects motoneurons. Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) have been described as a causative genetic factor for ALS. Mice overexpressing ALS-linked mutant SOD1 develop ALS symptoms accompanied by histopathological alterations and protein aggregation. The protein disulfide isomerase family member ERp57 is one of the main up-regulated proteins in tissue of ALS patients and mutant SOD1 mice, whereas point mutations in ERp57 were described as possible risk factors to develop the disease. ERp57 catalyzes disulfide bond formation and isomerization in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), constituting a central component of protein quality control mechanisms. However, the actual contribution of ERp57 to ALS pathogenesis remained to be defined. Here, we studied the consequences of overexpressing ERp57 in experimental ALS using mutant SOD1 mice. Double transgenic SOD1<sup>G93A</sup>/ERp57<sup>WT</sup> animals presented delayed deterioration of electrophysiological activity and maintained muscle innervation compared to single transgenic SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> littermates at early-symptomatic stage, along with improved motor performance without affecting survival. The overexpression of ERp57 reduced mutant SOD1 aggregation, but only at disease end-stage, dissociating its role as an anti-aggregation factor from the protection of neuromuscular junctions. Instead, proteomic analysis revealed that the neuroprotective effects of ERp57 overexpression correlated with increased levels of synaptic and actin cytoskeleton proteins in the spinal cord. Taken together, our results suggest that ERp57 operates as a disease modifier at early stages by maintaining motoneuron connectivity.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Erp57, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Mutant sod1, Neuromuscular junction

### Affiliations
Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile  Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, USA
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Madison Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Claudio Hetz & Danilo B. Medinas
Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile  Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, USA


