### Accession
PXD003550

### Title
Proteome analysis of adipose-derived stem cells cultured under clinically relevant conditions in a wound healing perspective

### Description
There is a large body of evidence supporting the beneficial role of adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in tissue repair and regeneration. These effects appear to be mainly mediated by paracrine signaling pathways and enhanced during hypoxia. Mass spectrometry (MS) represents a valuable tool for proteomic profiling of cultured ASCs, which may help revealing the identity of the factors secreted by the cells under different conditions. However, serum starvation essentially required to obtain samples compatible with secretome analysis by MS can have significant influence on ASCs. Here, we present a novel and optimized culturing approach based on the use of a clinically relevant serum-free formulation, which was used to assess the effect of hypoxia on the ASC proteomic profile.

### Sample Protocol
Human ASCs from three human donors were expanded in StemPro® MSC SFM XenoFree medium. Cells were cultured for 24 h in serum- and albumin-free supplements in either normoxic (20%) or hypoxic (1%) atmosphere, after which cells and conditioned medium was collected, subfractionated and analyzed using MS. Prior to analysis the secreted proteins were further subdivided into a secretome (MW>30 kDa) and a peptidome fraction (3 kDa>MW>30 kDa). Secretome From each sample, a volume corresponding to 25 µg protein was transferred to an Eppendorf tube and 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer pH 8.5 was added to a total volume of 100 µL. The proteins were reduced by addition of 2 µl 0.5 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Next, the proteins were alkylated by addition of 8 µl 0.5 M chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and incubation for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Trypsin (0.5 µg) was added to each sample, and the proteins were digested over night at 37°C. The enzymatic procedure was stopped by addition of 5 µl 100% formic acid. Protein digests were dried by vacuum centrifugation and desalted on PorosR3 nanocolumns and resuspended in 30 µL of a solution containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptidome The lower molecular weight proteins (>30kDa-3kDa) were concentrated in YM-3kDa spinfilter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) by centrifugation at 14.000g at 4°C. The retained fraction (100 µL) was processed as described for the secretome samples.  Proteome For the proteome analysis of the cells, a total of 25 µL of protein lysate in modified RIPA buffer was mixed with reducing sample buffer (2x Laemmeli, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and isolated by reducing sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  (SDS-PAGE)(Biorad Any kD Mini-PROTEAN® TGX). The electrophoresis was stopped when the protein had entered 1.5 cm into the running gel according to the applied prestained protein marker (SeeBlue Plus2 pre-stained standard, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The protein load on each gel lane were comparable. The protein was visualized by Coomassie blue (SimplyBlue SafeStain, Invitrogen) and 50% of each band excised and in-gel digested. Mass Spectrometry Analysis The protein concentrations in the samples were normalized using A280 on a NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA), and 5 µg total peptide material was analyzed per LC-MS analysis of the low and higher MW proteins. A total of 20% of each gel-band was used for each of the biological replicates  The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nanopump module. The system was coupled online with an emitter for nanospray ionization (New objective picotip 360-20-10) to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptide material was loaded onto a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm x 2 cm) and separated using a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm) at 40°C. The sample was eluted with a gradient of 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN), which was increased to 8% solvent B on a 5 minutes ramp gradient and subsequently to 30% solvent B on a 70 minutes ramp gradient for the proteome samples and 30 min for the secretome samples, at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, selecting up to 12 precursor ions based on highest intensity for HCD fragmenting.

### Data Protocol
The reproducibility and variation of the amounts of peptide per sample were determined using Progenesis QJ for Proteomics (NonLinear/Waters, UK). A label-free quantitation by normalized XIC was performed of the trypsin digested samples by searching the data-files using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 against the Homo sapiens Uniprot reference proteome database (UPID5640; april 2015). All standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl (C) as a static modification and Oxidation (M) was included as variable modifications. All proteins are reported <1% false discovery rate (FDR), to ensure only high-confidence protein identifications. The result file from MaxQuant was analyzed in Perseus v1.5.1.6. Initially, all reverse hits were removed from further analysis, and the data was log2-transformed. Two unique peptides or more were required for a protein identification and quantitation to ensure high-quality quantitation. Scatter plots were inspected biological replicate wise. No replicates were removed due to low reproducibility. To further identify replicate outliers, a principle component analysis (PCA) was performed using the all measured protein abundances in all replicates as input. For the purpose of conducting PCA missing values (i.e. proteins where a quantitation value was not obtained for a given replicate analysis) were replaced with values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8), to simulate signals from low abundant proteins (Deeb et al. 2012).  MS measurements were grouped preservation-method wise, and two-sided t-tests were performed to identify statistically significantly changing proteins. The statistical tests were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using permutation-based FDR, and the parameters were chosen to provide sufficient input in the subsequent analysis (FDR=0.05, s0=0.1 and 250 randomizations). The genes coding for the significantly different expressed proteins found by MS were analyzed for statistical over-representation (enrichment) of Gene Ontology (GO) categories in terms of biological process using Cytoscape (version 3.3.0) with the Biological Networks Gene Ontology plug-in (BINGO, version 3.0.3)(Maere et al. 2005; Shannon et al. 2003). An adjusted p-value of 0.05 was used as threshold for significance after correcting for multiple testing by Benjamini and Hochberg FDR correction. Overrepresentation was computed from hypergeometric test. The dataset for each donor was compared against a reference set of complete Homo Sapiens GO annotations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum-free culture, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Adipose-derived stem cells, Secretome

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Mass spectrometry Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 3B 9220 Aalborg
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Mass spectrometry Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 3B 9220 Aalborg


