### Accession
PXD000592

### Title
Mouse Core Acrosomal Matrix LC-MSMS

### Description
Some molecular and cellular mechanisms of fertilization are still not completely described. The role of the acrosomal matrix (AM), the particulate compartment within the acrosome, is one of them. Here, we proposed that amyloids, highly ordered protein aggregates, by their physical and chemical properties could contribute to AM roles in fertilization. Purified AM were exposed to a two-step extraction to sequentially strip off soluble proteins. The remaining insoluble material (core) was subjected to a mass spectrometry analysis. Preparation of samples for MS analysis: Three different approaches were used to optimize identification of peptides in the AM core.  For in-gel digestion, core samples were resuspended in 13.2mM SA pH3 containing 8M urea and 100 mM DTT and incubated for 1 hr at RT.  Proteins were separated on a hand casted 12% polyacrylamide Tris-glycine gel. After silver staining, visible bands were cut from the gel, destained and washed with ddH2O (2 X 5 min) then with 50% ethanol (2 X 5 min) before stored at -20 degrees C. Gel pieces were tryptically digested in 25mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37 degrees C overnight with trypsin.  For in-solution digestion, core samples were resuspended in 13.2mM SA pH3/ 8M urea/ 100mM DTT and incubated for 1 h at RT followed by 15 min at 70 degrees C. Iodoacetamide was added to 10mM and proteins were alkylated by incubation for 15 min at RT in the dark. Samples were added to a pre-rinsed spin filter and centrifuged at 14,000 X g.  Samples were washed with 9M urea then with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested with trypsin in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight.  After digestion, samples were spin at 14,000 X g and washed 2 times with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The retentate was transferred to a new tube and air dried. For on-membrane digestion, the samples were dotted on nitrocellulose membrane and digested by trypsin. Briefly, core samples were resuspended and treated as for in-solution digestion. Then, samples were dotted by gravity on the membrane. Wells were rinsed with 20mM SA pH3 followed by TBS. Dots were cut and air-dried. After the protein digestion with trypsin in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate the membranes were dissolved with acetone and the precipitated peptides were air-dried. All digested peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. MS data acquisition: Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) analysis of peptides was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS interfaced with a 2D nanoLC system. Protein and Peptide Identification: MS/MS spectra were extracted using the ProteoWizard Toolkit. The spectra were analyzed using the GPM Manager with X!Tandem to search against a home made mouse database containing 213,054 nonredundant protein sequences created by using mouse sequences from Ensembl database (files Mus_musculus.GRCm38.73.pep.all & Mus_musculus.GRCm38.73.pep.abinitio) and from NCBI database (file nr downloaded on 09/19/2013) . Search was performed using fully tryptic enzyme specificity (See deposited MS data for details). Peptides and proteins that have an expectation value of log10 (e) <= -2 were included in the results. Curated results were obtained by keeping only proteins with at least one mouse-specific matching peptide (peptide match = 100% identities and 100% coverage on a unique mouse protein and <100% identities and/or <100% coverage on human proteins). In addition, trypsin-like proteins were kept if at least one peptide was not matching on exogenous pig trypsins.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The acrosomal matrix (AM) is an insoluble structure within the sperm acrosome that serves as a scaffold controlling the release of AM-associated proteins during the sperm acrosome reaction. The AM also interacts with the zona pellucida (ZP) that surrounds the oocyte, suggesting a remarkable stability that allows its survival despite being surrounded by proteolytic and hydrolytic enzymes released during the acrosome reaction. To date, the mechanism responsible for the stability of the AM is not known. Our studies demonstrate that amyloids are present within the sperm AM and contribute to the formation of an SDS- and formic-acid-resistant core. The AM core contained several known amyloidogenic proteins, as well as many proteins predicted to form amyloid, including several ZP binding proteins, suggesting a functional role for the amyloid core in sperm-ZP interactions. While stable at pH 3, at pH 7, the sperm AM rapidly destabilized. The pH-dependent dispersion of the AM correlated with a change in amyloid structure leading to a loss of mature forms and a gain of immature forms, suggesting that the reversal of amyloid is integral to AM dispersion.

### Keywords
Acrosomal matrix, Spermatozoa, Mouse, Proteome, Amyloid, Sds-resistant, Acrosome

### Affiliations
TTUHSC
Cell Biology and Biochemistry Lubbock, TX, USA


### Submitter
Benoit Guyonnet

### Lab Head


