### Accession
PXD008146

### Title
secretome of human chondrocytes and adipose mesenchymal stem cells

### Description
Objective: Assuming that mesenchymal stem cells adapt to the osteoarthritic joint environment to exert a chondroprotective effect, we aimed at investigating the molecular response set up by MSCs after priming by OA chondrocytes in cocultures.  Design: We used primary human OA chondrocytes and adipose stem cells (ASCs) in mono- and cocultures and performed a high throughput secretome analysis. Among secreted proteins differentially induced in cocultures, we identified thrombospondin-1 (THBS1) as a potential candidate that could be involved in the chondroprotective effect of ASCs. Results: Secretome analysis revealed significant induction of THBS1in ASCs/chondrocytes cocultures at the mRNA and protein levels. Interestingly, we showed that THBS1 was up-regulated at late stages of MSC chondrogenic differentiation while recombinant THBS1 exerted a prochondrogenic effect on MSC. However, down-regulation of THBS1 in ASCs did not revert OA chondrocyte phenotype by decreasing hypertrophic and inflammatory markers.  Nevertheless, down-regulation of THBS1 in ASCs reduced their immunosuppressive activity while recombinant THBS1 exerted an anti-inflammatory role on T lymphocytes. THBS1 function was evaluated in vivo in the collagenase-induced OA (CIOA) model by comparing ASCs expressing siTHBS1 and control ASCs. The OA protective effect of ASCs was reversed when THBS1 was down-regulated in ASCs indicating that THBS1 plays a role in the therapeutic effect of ASCs Conclusions: Our data gather some evidence that THBS1 exerts a pro-chondrogenic and anti-inflammatory function in vitro, which could partially explain a chondroprotective effect of ASCs in OA.

### Sample Protocol
Chondrocyte and ASC monocultures (106 cells/60 mm petri dish) or cocultures (5×105 each cell type/60 mm petri dish) were maintained in αMEM containing 2% platelet lysate overnight. Three different cell samples were used. They were then washed 5 times with PBS to eliminate platelet lysate and 2.5 mL of minimal medium were added. After 48h, supernatants from cocultures and chondrocyte or ASC monocultures were centrifuged (300 g, 5 min), filtered (0.22µm) and stored at -80°C until secretome analysis. Secretome analysis was performed on coculture supernatants and on mixed monoculture supernatants. The rationale for mixing monoculture supernatants was to accurately compare levels of proteins secreted by each cell type in non-induced conditions to those secreted in cocultures upon crosstalk. Proteins were concentrated by TCA-NLS precipitation and quantified by Lowry method (Bio-rad DC) as already described [15]. Reduced/alkylated protein samples were separated on gel Nupage 4-12% and stained by Coomassie blue (Instant Blue, Invitrogen), cut into bands and digested with trypsin. After extraction, peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry on NanoLC/ESI LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS/MS. Results were analyzed by consulting protein data bases with Mascot Daemon software and proteins were validated with Prosper software. Spectral counting approach (score) was used to compare cocultures and mixed monocultures conditions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched in a Human database from UniprotKB (2012). The Mascot Daemon software (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to perform database searches, using the Extract_msn.exe macro provided with Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peaklists. Peaklists were submitted to Mascot database searches. ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Peptide variable modifications allowed during the search were: acetyl (Protein N-ter), oxidation (M), whereas carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. To calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), the search was performed using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Validation was performed with an in-house developed module associated to MFPaQ. Quantification of proteins was then performed using the label-free module implemented in the MFPaQ v4.0.0 software

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Human, Adipose, Chondrocyte

### Affiliations
IRMB - INSERM U1183
Inserm U1183 Institut de Médecine Régénératrice et Biothérapies (IRMB Equipe 1 France

### Submitter
marie maumus

### Lab Head
Dr Danièle Noel
Inserm U1183 Institut de Médecine Régénératrice et Biothérapies (IRMB Equipe 1 France


