### Accession
PXD008722

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of human heart samples collected in vivo reveal the remodeled protein landscape of dilated left atrium without atrial fibrillation.

### Description
Genetic and genomic research has greatly advanced our understanding of heart disease; yet a comprehensive map of the protein landscape of living human hearts is still lacking.  Here we set out to identify the molecular basis of functional differences between human cardiac chambers by comprehensive protein expression quantification from samples collected in vivo by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Cardiac biopsies of right atria (RA), left atria (LA) and left ventricle (LV) were obtained from seven humans undergoing open chest surgery and analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry. We identify hundreds of proteins with a chamber specific expression pattern, supporting the different functional roles of the cardiac chambers, enabling identification of chamber specific drug targets, and offering novel links between genomic data and the mechanisms of disease.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue biopsies were homogenized, tissue lysates incubated for 2h at 4°C, sonicated and supernatants collected. Sample protein was precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubation on ice, followed by centrifugation. Supernatants were discarded and protein resuspended in Guanidine-HCl buffer (Gnd-HCl; 6MGnd-HCl, 50mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 5mM NaF, 5mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1mM Na-orthovanadate, containing 1x Roche complete protease inhibitor). Disulfide bridges were reduced and cysteine moieties alkylated by addition of 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 15min. From each sample, up to 1mg protein was digested in-solution by addition of endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100, 1h), followed by dilution (1:12 with 50mM Tris-HCl pH8) and digestion with trypsin (1:100, 16h) at 37°C, 750rpm. Samples were acidified and soluble fractions desalted and concentrated on C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 60% ACN, and organic solvents subsequently evaporated by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were pre-fractionated into 12 fractions by micro-flow reverse-phase ultrahigh pressure chromatography at high pH for increased proteome coverage. Fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) by searching MS/MS spectra against an in-silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt protein entries (downloaded on 6.8.2016). Raw files originating from fractionated samples of the same tissue biopsy were grouped for the search (resulting in 7 biological replicates for 3 cardiac chambers). The MS/MS spectra were searched with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-termini and Gln->pyro-Glu as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages and six variable modifications was allowed and minimum Andromeda score required for modified peptides was set to 25. Due to the similarity of the samples the match-between-runs option was enabled with default parameters. False-discovery rate cutoffs were set to 1% on peptide, protein and site decoy level (default), only allowing high-quality identifications to pass. All peptides were used for protein quantification, and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant with fast LFQ option enabled. All other parameters were kept at default.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic and genomic research has greatly advanced our understanding of heart disease. Yet, comprehensive, in-depth, quantitative maps of protein expression in hearts of living humans are still lacking. Using samples obtained during valve replacement surgery in patients with mitral valve prolapse (MVP), we set out to define inter-chamber differences, the intersect of proteomic data with genetic or genomic datasets, and the impact of left atrial dilation on the proteome of patients with no history of atrial fibrillation (AF).We collected biopsies from right atria (RA), left atria (LA) and left ventricle (LV) of seven male patients with mitral valve regurgitation with dilated LA but no history of AF. Biopsy samples were analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS), where peptides were pre-fractionated by reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatography prior to MS measurement on a Q-Exactive-HF Orbitrap instrument. We identified 7,314 proteins based on 130,728 peptides. Results were confirmed in an independent set of biopsies collected from three additional individuals. Comparative analysis against data from post-mortem samples showed enhanced quantitative power and confidence level in samples collected from living hearts. Our analysis, combined with data from genome wide association studies suggested candidate gene associations to MVP, identified higher abundance in ventricle for proteins associated with cardiomyopathies and revealed the dilated LA proteome, demonstrating differential representation of molecules previously associated with AF, in non-AF hearts.This is the largest dataset of cardiac protein expression from human samples collected <i>in vivo</i> It provides a comprehensive resource that allows insight into molecular fingerprints of MVP and facilitates novel inferences between genomic data and disease mechanisms. We propose that over-representation of proteins in ventricle is consequent not to redundancy but to functional need, and conclude that changes in abundance of proteins known to associate with AF are not sufficient for arrhythmogenesis.

### Keywords
['Heart', 'Gwas', 'Human', 'Tissue', 'Dilated cardiomyopathy', 'Biopsies', 'Mitral valve disease', 'Hypertrophy']

### Affiliations
['Cardiac Proteomics, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark', 'University of Copenhagen']

### Submitter
['Nora Linscheid']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Cardiac Proteomics, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark', 'email': 'alicia.lundby@sund.ku.dk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Alicia Lundby', 'id': '201130100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['heart']
characteristics[cell type]: ['cardiac']
characteristics[disease]: ['dilated left atria']
characteristics[organism part].1: ['left cardiac atrium' 'heart left ventricle' 'right cardiac atrium']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002523']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable']
comment[modification parameters].3: ['NT=Gln->pyro-Glu;TA=Q;AC=UNIMOD:28;PP=Any N-term;MT=variable']
comment[modification parameters].4: ['NT=Gln->pyro-Glu;TA=E;AC=UNIMOD:27;PP=Any N-term;MT=variable']
factor value[organism part]: ['left cardiac atrium' 'heart left ventricle' 'right cardiac atrium']

