### Accession
PXD036520

### Title
Proteomic profiling of tissue-engineered, small-diameter vascular grafts implanted into the ovine carotid artery

### Description
Albeit vascular prostheses for the replacement of large arteries (e.g. aorta) are commercially available for decades, small-diameter vascular grafts (e.g., for coronary artery bypass graft surgery) still remain an unmet clinical need. Biostable polymers commonly used for the fabrication of aortic prostheses (e.g., poly(ethylene terephthalate) or expanded poly(tetrafluoroethylene)) have insufficient haemocompatibility to withstand thrombosis at low blood flow characteristic of small arteries (e.g., coronary artery). Hence, researchers endeavor to develop a biodegradable, tissue-engineered vascular graft (TEVG) to avoid the use of autologous blood vessels, such as saphenous vein or internal mammary artery, as conduits during the bypass surgery. Although a number of promising prototypes have been designed to date, none of them passed the pre-clinical trials successfully. Implantation into the ovine or porcine arteries is associated with thrombosis, neointimal hyperplasia, and aneurysms within one-year postoperation, precluding further clinical translation of TEVGs. Among the reasons of such impediment is that pathophysiology of TEVG implantation remains unclear and the molecular events occurring in the TEVG upon its implantation have not been properly investigated hitherto. Here, we for the first time performed a proteomic profiling of the TEVGs (n = 12) implanted into the ovine carotid arteries for one year and suffered from thrombosis to identify the signatures of TEVG failure in an unbiased manner. Contralateral intact ovine carotid arteries (n = 12) have been selected as a control group.

### Sample Protocol
Biodegradable TEVGs (4 mm diameter, ≈400 μm thickness and 4 cm length) were fabricated using emulsion electrospinning (Nanon-01A, MECC) from poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV, 403105): poly(ε-caprolactone) (5:10%)/chloroform solution using the following parameters: 23 kV voltage, 0.5 mL/h feed rate, 2 mm rotating drum diameter, and 150 mm tip-to-collector distance. To increase the biocompatibility of such TEVGs, VEGF, bFGF, and SDF-1α were dissolved in phosphate buffered saline to 10 µg/mL concentration and then added to PHBV/PCL/chloroform solution (1:20), with the final concentration of 500 ng/mL. TEVGs with the combination of VEGF, bFGF, and SDF-1α were two-layered, with the inner layer fabricated using 27G needle and containing VEGF (500 ng/mL) and the outer layer prepared utilizing 22G needle and containing bFGF and SDF-1α (500 ng/mL each). To increase the haemocompatibility of the TEVGs, we first immobilised a PVP hydrogel at their luminal surface by incubating the prostheses in 5% alcoholic PVP for 30 min, drying at room temperature and sterile conditions for 24 h, and irradiating in the argon atmosphere by a linear particle accelerator (ILU-10, 50 kGy, electron energy 5 mEV, beam power 50 kW). Grafts were then incubated in a 0.1 mol/L glycine solution (pH = 2.6) of heparin (125 IE/mL) and iloprost (0.2 μg/mL) for 30 min and dried at room temperature (20–24 °C) and sterile conditions for 24 h. For experiments, we used female Edilbay sheep of 42–45 kg body weight which were received from the Animal Core Facility of the Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases (Kemerovo, Russia). In total, we implanted 12 PHBV/PCL[VEGF-bFGF-SDF]Hep/Ilo TEVGs. Anaesthesia was induced with zoletil and maintained by artificial ventilation with sevoflurane with the constant control of heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation. Upon achieving access to the carotid artery and intravenous infusion of heparin (5000 IU), we clamped the artery, excised a 4 cm segment, performed end-to-end implantation of a vascular prosthesis using the twisted seam, and conducted the wound closure. At 12 months postoperation, sheep were sacrificed. At the site of the implantation, the TEVG was excised and cut into four segments of the equal length. Upon the excision, BHVs were immersed into the physiological saline and transferred to the laboratory for the gross examination. The thrombotic segments of TEVGs and intact contralateral carotid arteries were homogenised (FastPrep-24 5G, MP Biomedicals; Lysing Matrix S Tubes, 116925050-CF, MP Biomedicals) in T-PER buffer supplied with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Upon the initial centrifugation at 14 000 × g for 10 minutes, supernatant was additionally centrifuged at 200 000 × g for 30 minutes to sediment insoluble ECM proteins. Quantification of total protein was conducted using BCA Protein Assay Kit and Multiskan Sky microplate spectrophotometer in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. For shotgun proteomics, proteins were cleaned from components of lysis buffer by acetone precipitation and resuspended in 8M Urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  The samples (10 μg) were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in 5 mM DTT with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C with 300 ng of trypsin (ratio 1:50; “Trypsin Gold”, Promega). Finally, the samples were evaporated, dissolved in water (“LC-MS” grade) with 0.1% formic acid and desalted with Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ C18 Spin Tips according to manufacturer recommendations. Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by HPLC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with nanoElute UHPLC chromatograph (Bruker Daltonics). UHPLC was performed in the one-column separation mode with Aurora separation emitter column with nanoZero technology (C18, 250x0.75 mm, 1.7 µm, 120A; IonOptics) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 55 °C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (“LC-MS” grade). The gradient was from 2% to 18% phase B for 35 min, then to 25% for 10 minutes, for 37% for 5 minutes with subsequent wash with 85% phase B for 10 min. Before each sample separation columns were equilibrated with 4 column volumes. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionisation with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180 °C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with 1.1 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.6 to 1.60 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in FragPipe (v. 18.0) according to default LFQ-MBR workflow using Ovis aries (sheep) reference proteome (UP000002356; downloaded 08/08/2022) with protein contaminants database. The search parameters were: parent and fragment mass error tolerance 10 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, two possible missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification by MaxLFQ method was used for further analysis in R (version 4.1.2).

### Publication Abstract
Implementation of small-diameter tissue-engineered vascular grafts (TEVGs) into clinical practice is still delayed due to the frequent complications, including thrombosis, aneurysms, neointimal hyperplasia, calcification, atherosclerosis, and infection. Here, we conjugated a vasodilator/platelet inhibitor, iloprost, and an antimicrobial cationic amphiphilic drug, 1,5-bis-(4-tetradecyl-1,4-diazoniabicyclo [2.2.2]octan-1-yl) pentane tetrabromide, to the luminal surface of electrospun poly(&#x3b5;-caprolactone) (PCL) TEVGs for preventing thrombosis and infection, additionally enveloped such TEVGs into the PCL sheath to preclude aneurysms, and implanted PCL<sup>Ilo/CAD</sup> TEVGs into the ovine carotid artery (n = 12) for 6 months. The primary patency was 50% (6/12 animals). TEVGs were completely replaced with the vascular tissue, free from aneurysms, calcification, atherosclerosis and infection, completely endothelialised, and had clearly distinguishable medial and adventitial layers. Comparative proteomic profiling of TEVGs and contralateral carotid arteries found that TEVGs lacked contractile vascular smooth muscle cell markers, basement membrane components, and proteins mediating antioxidant defense, concurrently showing the protein signatures of upregulated protein synthesis, folding and assembly, enhanced energy metabolism, and macrophage-driven inflammation. Collectively, these results suggested a synchronised replacement of PCL with a newly formed vascular tissue but insufficient compliance of PCL<sup>Ilo/CAD</sup> TEVGs, demanding their testing in the muscular artery position or stimulation of vascular smooth muscle cell specification after the implantation.

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Ovis aries, Sheep, Shotgun proteomics, Vascular grafts

### Affiliations
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine,Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anton G. Kutikhin
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine,Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation


