### Accession
PXD033611

### Title
Global analysis of neuropeptides in cestodes identifies Attachin, a SIFamide homolog, as a stimulant of parasite motility and attachment

### Description
Many anthelmintics target the neuromuscular system, in particular by interfering with signalling mediated by classical neurotransmitters. Although peptidergic signalling has been proposed as a target of novel anthelmintics, current knowledge of the neuropeptide complement of many helminths is still limited, especially for parasitic flatworms (cestodes, trematodes and monogeneans). In this work, we have characterised the neuropeptide complement of the model cestode Hymenolepis microstoma. Peptidomic characterization of adults of H. microstoma validated many of the neuropeptide precursor (npp) genes previously predicted in silico, and identified novel neuropeptides that are conserved in parasitic flatworms. Most neuropeptides from parasitic flatworms lack significant similarity to those from other animals, confirming the uniqueness of their peptidergic signalling. Analysis of gene expression of ten npp genes by in situ hybridization confirmed that all of them are expressed in the nervous system and identified cryptic features, including the first evidence of dorsoventral asymmetry, as well as a new population of peripheral neurosecretory cells that appears to be conserved in the trematode Schistosoma mansoni. Finally, we characterised in greater detail Attachin, an experimentally validated SIFamide homolog. Although its expression is largely restricted to the longitudinal nerve cords and cerebral commissure in H. microstoma, it shows widespread expression in the larval nervous system of Echinococcus multilocularis and Mesocestoides corti. Exogenous addition of a peptide corresponding to the highly conserved C-terminus of Attachin stimulated motility and attachment of M. corti larvae. Altogether, this work provides a robust experimental foothold for the characterization of peptidergic signalling in parasitic flatworms.

### Sample Protocol
The analysed samples comprised adults of H. microstoma from in vivo infections. The worms were washed extensively with phosphate buffered saline, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and kept at -80 ºC or below until further processing. Five independently generated samples were analysed: “adult 1” (One full adult worm with eggs), “adult 2” (ten adults without gravid segments, to avoid contamination with eggs), “scolex 1” and “scolex 2” (pools of anterior ends of 9 to 12 worms, including the scolex (head), neck and first segments), and a “general pool”  (mix of full adults and anterior ends, totalling approximately 1 g of biological material). To all samples, 10 ml of extraction solvent (90% methanol/9% water/1% acetic acid, precooled at  80 °C) was added, followed by manual homogenization using a glass pestle tissue grinder, keeping the sample cooled on dry ice throughout the entire process. The homogenate was then sonicated four times 15 s (Branson Ultrasonic SLPe, 80% amplitude), with intermittent 30 s cooling on dry ice. After centrifugation (2100g, 12 min.), the pellet was discarded and the methanol was evaporated using a Thermo Savant SpeedVac vacuum concentrator until 1 ml remained. Samples were delipidated three times using 2 ml n-hexane, recovering the aqueous layer each time. Finally, samples were cleaned and concentrated using Pierce C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions, but using formic acid for acidification instead, and eluting the peptides with 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. All samples were dried to completion using the SpeedVac concentrator and redissolved in 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid and stored at 4 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled online to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The UHPLC was equipped with a guard pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 75µm x 20 mm, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). The solvent flow was set to 300 nL/min with a 75 min linear gradient from 4% to 36% acetonitrile, always containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were injected in the mass spectrometer using its nano-electrospray ion source. MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner (Top10 method, dynamic exclusion 10 s), always selecting the most abundant precursor ions with charges [+2, +5] from a full MS survey scan for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Full MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6, a maximum injection time of 256 ms and scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z. For the MS/MS fragmentation scans, resolution was set at 17,500 at m/z 200, AGC at 1e6, a maximum injection time of 64 ms, and normalized collision energy of 25.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were analysed using PEAKS Studio X+ (v10.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). For de novo searches, parent mass error was set at 10 ppm, with a fragment mass error of 0.04 Da. Enzyme was set to “none” and the following variable posttranslational modifications were taken into account: oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da), pyroglutamation of N-terminal glutamic acid (-18.01 Da) or glutamine (-17.03 Da), C-terminal amidation (-0.98 Da) and half of a disulfide bridge on cysteine (-1.01 Da). For PEAKS DB searches, the same error tolerances and posttranslational modifications were applied. Here, the enzyme parameter was again set to “none” and digest mode to “unspecific”. The databases that were used as a search space for PEAKS DB included WBPS1 and WBPS14 versions of the predicted proteome of H. microstoma (Tsai et al., 2013 and Olson et al., 2020 respectively), downloaded from Wormbase Parasite (Howe et al., 2017). In addition we included the predicted amino acid sequences of H. microstoma npp genes identified by tblastn and confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in Koziol et al. (2016). A false discovery rate of < 1% was applied to MS/MS peptide identifications, and .csv files containing the detected peptide sequences and database IDs were exported. Selection of candidate neuropeptides was based on presence of a signal sequence in the precursor (as predicted with SignalP 4.1), peptides being flanked by canonical processing sites (mono- or dibasic residues such as Lys, Arg, Lys-Arg, Arg-Arg, Arg-Lys or Lys-Lys) and typical post-translational modifications observed in neuropeptides (N-terminal pyroglutamation of Gln or Glu, conversion of a C-terminal Gly into an amide, or peptide cyclization by disulfide bridge formation between Cys residues).

### Publication Abstract
Many anthelmintics target the neuromuscular system, in particular by interfering with signaling mediated by classical neurotransmitters. Although peptidergic signaling has been proposed as a novel target for anthelmintics, current knowledge of the neuropeptide complement of many helminth groups is still limited, especially for parasitic flatworms (cestodes, trematodes, and monogeneans). In this work, we have characterized the neuropeptide complement of the model cestode Hymenolepis microstoma. Peptidomic characterization of adults of H. microstoma validated many of the neuropeptide precursor (npp) genes previously predicted in silico, and identified novel neuropeptides that are conserved in parasitic flatworms. Most neuropeptides from parasitic flatworms lack significant similarity to those from other animals, confirming the uniqueness of their peptidergic signaling. Analysis of gene expression of ten npp genes by in situ hybridization confirmed that all of them are expressed in the nervous system and identified cryptic features, including the first evidence of dorsoventral asymmetry, as well as a new population of peripheral peptidergic cells that appears to be conserved in the trematode Schistosoma mansoni. Finally, we characterized in greater detail Attachin, an SIFamide homolog. Although its expression is largely restricted to the longitudinal nerve cords and cerebral commissure in H. microstoma, it shows widespread localization in the larval nervous system of Echinococcus multilocularis and Mesocestoides corti. Exogenous addition of a peptide corresponding to the highly conserved C-terminus of Attachin stimulated motility and attachment of M. corti larvae. Altogether, this work provides a robust experimental foothold for the characterization of peptidergic signaling in parasitic flatworms. Cover Image for this issue:&#xa0;https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15418.

### Keywords
Peptidergic, Tapeworm, Motility, Sucker, Sifamide, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Sección Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.

### Submitter
Sven Van Bael

### Lab Head
Dr Uriel Koziol
Sección Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.


