### Accession
PXD024009

### Title
Effects of the IDH1 R132H mutation on the energy metabolism: a comparison between tissue and corresponding primary glioma cell cultures

### Description
The R132H mutation in the metabolic enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) is the most important prognostic factor for survival of glioma patients. This resulted in many studies investigating the effects of this mutation, including those on energy metabolism. This led to the discovery of a panel of enzymes mainly involved in glutamate anaplerosis and aerobic glycolysis that change in abundance as a result of the IDH1 mutation. To further study these changes and investigate the therapeutic value of inhibitors of IDH1 R132H-associated metabolic pathways, appropriate glioma models are required that mimic in vivo metabolism as good as possible. To investigate how metabolism is affected by in vitro cell culture, we here compared surgically obtained snap frozen glioma tissues with their corresponding primary glioma cell culture models with a previously developed targeted mass spectrometry proteomic assay. We determined the relative abundance of a panel of metabolic enzymes. Results confirmed increased glutamate use and decreased aerobic glycolysis in resected IDH1 R132H glioma tissue samples. However, these metabolic profiles were not reflected in the paired glioma culture samples. Analysis of orthotopic glioma xenograft samples with and without the IDH1 mutation revealed metabolic profiles that more closely resembled clinical counterparts. We suggest that culture conditions and tumor microenvironment play a crucial role in maintaining the in vivo metabolic situation in cell culture models. For this reason, new models that more closely resemble the in vivo microenvironment, such as 3-dimensional cell co-cultures or organotypic multicellular spheroid models, need to be developed and investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Cryosections of 5 µm were cut at -20 °C, stained with H&E and reviewed by a certified pathologist to determine the tumor cell percentage. Only samples with a minimum of 50% tumor cell content were included for analysis. For the proteomics analysis, consecutive 10 µm sections were cut corresponding to a total of approximately one square centimeter of tissue surface. The sections were stored at -80 °C until H&E staining and trypsin digestion. For the primary cell cultures, the cells from one 90% confluent T75 culture flask were dissociated with Accutase, centrifuged in an Eppendorf tube, washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline and subsequently stored at -80 °C until digestion. For digestion, 100 µL of lysis buffer containing 7.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) with 5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) was added to each sample. The samples were then disrupted by a sonication probe for 2 minutes at 70% amplitude (Branson, Ultrasonic, Danbury, CT), afterwards the samples were incubated in a Thermomixer for 10 minutes at 80 °C (Eppendorf Thermomixer comfort). Then, 5 µL 100 mM DTT was added followed by a 20 minutes incubation at 60 °C. Next 5 µL 375 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) was added and the samples were incubated protected from light at room temperature. Then 900 µL of -20 °C acetone was added followed by centrifugation with an Eppendorf centrifuge at maximum speed for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and 80 µL of digestion buffer was added containing 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 5% v/v acetonitrile and 0.5% w/v SDC, the pellet was dissolved and 2 µg of trypsin (1:100 ratio; Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation) was added to each sample. The samples were then incubated overnight followed by acidification with 80 µL 1% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were centrifuged at 20,200 RCF for 10 minutes at 4 °C, then the supernatant was transferred to another tube. The samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.1% v/v TFA and measured on a nano-LC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). The total protein content was calculated based on intensity of the absorbance at 214 nm over the span of a 15 minutes gradient. The samples were normalized based on this integrated UV_VIS intensity value and then stored at 4 °C until further use. A Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, Pierce™) was performed according to the manufactures recommendation to determine the total amount of peptides in the samples.

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Eclipse was used in combination with a nano-LC system, using a 90-minute gradient. The MS system was used with a FAIMS device (FAIMS Pro Interface, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The CVs (compensation voltages) of the device were set to -45, -60, -75, and -90 with a cycle time of 1 second (17). A static spray voltage of 2200 V was used, and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 305 °C. For the parent scan the resolving power of the Orbitrap was 120,000 and a scan range of 375-1500 m/z was applied. The AGC was 400,000 and the injection time was 50 ms. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z, HCD was used with an NCE of 30%, and the ion trap was operated in rapid scanning mode for the MS/MS scans with an AGC of 10,000 and an injection time of 35 ms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Glioma, Proteomics, Idh1 r132h mutation, Cell cultures

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam


