### Accession
PXD017837

### Title
Characterization of Bovine Dry Secretions and their Proteome from the End of Lactation Through Day 21 of the Dry Period

### Description
The dry period in cow are critical to mammary health and the success of the next lactation.  The expression of proteins the dry period progresses need to be characterized to provide information on involution and immune functions during the dry period. Total protein and lactoferrin concentrations rose significantly by days 10 and 21 after cessation of lactation.  Using the day 21 dry secretions we examined their ability to inhibit bacterial growth.  Bacterial growth inhibition was not correlated with lactoferrin for 4 coliforms tested nor for all 7 mastitis pathogens. Label free mass spectroscopy was used to quantify changes in whey proteins from milk/dry secretions collected on days 0, 3,10, and 21 of the dry period.  776 proteins were identified. 109 proteins were upregulated at one or more times in the dry period.  The most significate enriched GO functional terms for the up-regulated proteins were immune function and stress related.  68 proteins were down regulated in the dry period.  The most significant enriched GO functional terms for the down-regulated proteins were stress and immune function related.  12 proteins were significantly correlated with coliform growth.  The dry secretion composition changes we found provide information for understanding the dry period. The sample code for the MS raw files is as follows.  The 3 technical replicates are denoted as a letter A, B and C.  The number following is the cow identification number for 11 cows used.  The final two-digit number after the underscore is the day sampled where _01 = day 1, _03 = day 3, _10 = day 10 and _21 = day 21 of dry period.  For example, A1313_01 is technical replicate A for cow 1313 collected on day 1.  B1313_03 is technical replicate B for cow 1313 collected on day 3.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and treatments:  Eleven multiparous and confirmed pregnant Holstein cows were used in the study. All animal protocols and procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at the National Animal Disease Center, USDA/ARS. The cows were 307 ± 12 DIM at the start of the experiment and producing 15 kg or less of milk on the last day of lactation  Dry off milk /dry secretion sample collection preparation:  Cows on experiment were fed a standard lactation diet and 1 week prior to dry off, feed was slowly reduced until they were at 40% of full feed on the day prior to dry-off (day 0).  On day 0 they were switched to a dry cow maintenance diet plus grass hay and they ceased to be milked.  Day 0 samples were aseptically collected and all four quarters were treated intramammary with ToMORROW (Boehringer Ingelheim, Missouri, USA) and teats were sealed with T-Hexx (Huvepharma, Peachtree GA)  Single quarter dry cow secretion samples were collected aseptically, from the same quarter, on day 0, 3, 10, and 21 post dry-off. Where needed the teat sealant was peeled off and reapplied after sample collection. A maximum of 50 mL of dry secretion was collected from a single quarter.  The samples were plated overnight and evaluated visually for any infection.  All cows were free of infection throughout the study as evaluated by bacterial culture of every sample on the day it was collected.  Samples were brought straight to the lab on ice and centrifuged at 10,000 x g at 4 °C for 20 min to product skim samples.  This skim milk/dry secretion was then centrifuged in a 50.2 Ti rotor 150,000 x g at 4 °C for 60 min. The supernatant (crude whey) was carefully removed and saved for further processing.  Crude whey was depleted of immunoglobulin's and non-micelle casein to increase depth of proteome discovery. To do this seventy μl of suspended protein G gel (Thermo Scientific Pierce Protein Biology Products, Rockford, IL) was pelleted at 3000 x g for 30 s in a 1.5 ml tube and the supernatant discarded. Five hundred μl of whey was added to the protein G gel pellet and gently mixed overnight at 4 °C. The protein G gel treated whey was centrifuged at 3000 x g for 30 s and the supernatant transferred to a 1.5 ml ultracentrifuge tube. This immunoglobulin-depleted whey was adjusted to 60 mM calcium with CaCl2, incubated for 30 min on ice and centrifuged at 150,000 x g for 1 h at 4 °C to remove non-micelle casein that had formed micelle casein with added calcium. Gel electrophoresis and coomassie staining confirmed depletion of immunoglobulins and micelle casein from the whey samples (data not shown). This was further confirmed by the lack of immunoglobulins in the whey proteome.   LyC and trypsin digests:  The immunoglobulin/casein depleted whey (100 μg) was digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) using the two-step in-solution digestion protocol outline in manufacturer’s instructions.  The sample were frozen in 20 μg aliquots at -80 °C until needed. Just prior to mass spectroscopy 20 μg of digest was concentrated and desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL) according to manufactures instructions.  The samples were vacuumed dried in a Speedvac and resuspended in 20 μl of 95%H2O: 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid prior to introduction into the mass spectrometer.  Peptide chromatography and mass spectroscopy:  Peptide chromatography used a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RDLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL). The peptide digests were chromatographed on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm column in mobile phase A (95%H2O: 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (5%H2O: 95%acetonitrile and 0.1%formic acid) gradient, 1%B for 15 min, 1%-26% B from 15 to 195 min, 90% B from195 to 210 min, 90% B from  to 220 min at 300nl/min, and back to 1% B from 220 to 275 at 500 nl/min. The analytical column was connected to a Nanospray Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL) on the front end of a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL) mass spectrophotometer. The capillary temperature was set at 275 C and spray voltage optimized using the API stability evaluation software for the LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro. Data dependent method settings were as follows: FTMS was 30,000 resolution from 300 to 2000 m/z followed by MSMS scans at 15,000 resolution, FTMS Top10. Activation was CID using normalized collision energy of 35. Minimal signal required was 5000 and repeat mass exclusion duration of 60 s.  All samples were run in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the mass spectrometer were loaded into MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7.0).  Replicates were not treated as fractions.  Variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), and Phospho (STY).  The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C).  LFQ was used for label-free quantification.  Second peptides and dependent peptides was both searched for using default parameters.  The Bos taurus reference database was downloaded from Uniprot (March 2019).  Data from MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus.  Data rows were filtered to exclude matches based on “Only identified by site” and “Reverse”.  For quantification additional filtering of the data was performed.  Proteins were excluded if at least one animal did not have a positive quantification number in all three replicates for one day.  The median of the technical replicates was then determined.  The data was then transformed into log2.  The last data filtering step was that a protein must have a positive quantification number in six animals for at least one day.  Missing values were then imputed.  A Hawaii plot was generated and differentially expression protein at various days compared to day 0 were determined with a FDR of less than 0.01 Significant GO, KEGG and Reactome terms were are calculated within String v11.

### Publication Abstract
This dataset is a label-free quantitation of proteins milk and dry secretions from the end of lactation through day 21 of the dry period using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The data supplied in this article supports the accompanying publication entitled "Characterization of bovine mammary gland dry secretions and their proteome from the end of lactation through day 21 of the dry period" [1]. The Thermo mass spectrometry raw files and MaxQuant files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset number PXD017837.

### Keywords
Mastitis, Proteome, Bovine dry secretions, Mammary involution, Dairy cow dry period

### Affiliations
USDA/ARS/NADC
Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Unit, National Animal Disease Center, USDA/ARS, Ames IA, 50010 United States

### Submitter
John Lippolis

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy A. Reinhardt
Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Unit, National Animal Disease Center, USDA/ARS, Ames IA, 50010 United States


