### Accession
PXD024641

### Title
rat myocardial left ventricular tissue proteins LC-MSMS

### Description
Rat left ventricular tissue LC-MSMS.Rat left ventricular tissue proteins from different groups were extracted and quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The proteins were then labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT). TMT6/10 (Pierce, USA) with different reporter ions (126-131 Da) were applied as isobaric tags for relative quantification. Then the labeled peptide aliquots were combined for fractionation and further LC-MS analysis. The LC–MS/MS analysis was carried out in Capitbalbio Technology by using Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS detected in Orbitrap analyser. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. The MS/MS data was collected and searched against the Oryctolagus cuniculus database using the Sequest algorithms. A protein with fold change≥1.5, and the presence of least 2 unique peptides with a P value <0.05, was considered to be differentially expressed protein (DEP). Finally, DEPs were analyzed by reference to three key databases: Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Reactome and the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG).

### Sample Protocol
Rat left ventricular tissue proteins from different samples were extracted  and labeled by TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The samples were homogenized with lysis buﬀer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20mM Tris-base, 30mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and protease inhibitors (Roche, Switzerland) on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 15,000g, 4°C for 20 min. The collected supernatant was precipitated with three volumes of ice-cold acetone for 30min. Then the mixture was centrifuged at 15,000g, 4°C for 20 min. The precipitated pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 5M urea, followed by dissolving in four volumes of 40 mM NH4HCO3. Protein concentrations were quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The proteins were then separated on SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). For each sample, 200 μg of protein was deterged, reduced, incubated, and digested. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate after digesting at 37 °C overnight. For each sample, 100 μg of peptide mixture was labeled with TMT reagent.

### Data Protocol
The LC–MS/MS analysis was carried out in Capitbalbio Technology by using Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS detected at a mass resolution of 35,000 at m/z of 400 in Orbitrap analyser. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. The MS/MS data was collected and searched against the Oryctolagus cuniculus database using the Sequest algorithms. A protein with fold change≥1.5, and the presence of least 2 unique peptides with a P value <0.05, was considered to be differentially expressed protein (DEP). Finally, DEPs were analyzed by reference to three key databases: Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Reactome and the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Rat, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, School of Basic Medicine Science, Peking University, China
Key Laboratory of Chinese Internal Medicine of Ministry of Education and Beijing, Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Xiaohong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Jingyan Han
Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, School of Basic Medicine Science, Peking University, China


