### Accession
PXD035774

### Title
Evaluation of binding preference of different microtubes for nanoproteomics sample preparation

### Description
We explored the protein and peptide loss in conventional microtubes during experiment process. We further investigated the binding preferences of different microtubes by the physical characteristics of protein and peptides, such as isoelectric point, hydrophobicity, length, and charge.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration measurement.  For protein concentration measurement, we used BCA and micro-BCA assays. For both assays, BSA stock solution was prepared in the same buffer as test sample used at 1 mg/ml. BSA working solution was made with 100 µl stock solution with 900 µl ddH2O to make a final 100 µg/ml. For 10 µg/ml BSA binding experiment, aliquots of the 100 µg/ml solutions were added to individual test tubes (10 µl), and ddH2O was added to bring the total sample volume to 100 µl. For the 1 µg/ml BSA binding experiment, further 10x dilution was performed the same stated before. The BSA solution was incubated at 37 °C or 4 °C for 24h to allow binding to happen. The same 100 µg/ml BSA solution stored at -20 °C was used to prepare the standard curve right before use. 80 µl solution from each test tube and standard BSA solution was transferred to an microtube. 80 µl freshly made BCA working reagent was added to each N_V tube and incubated at 60 °C water bath for 1h. 120 µl was transferred to 96-well plate to measure absorbance at 562 nm. All liquid transfer was performed with an electronic pipette to minimize variability.  HEK293T cell protein digestion experiment.  50ng/µl HEK293T derived proteins are used for digestion with total 1µg in each replicate. Proteins were reduced with 5mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested at 37°C in 100mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2 with trypsin in a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein). Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to final concentration 5%. Debris was removed by centrifugation.The digestion product is desalted with ziptip step and dried peptides were dissolved with 0.1% formic acid.  HEK293T peptide storage experiment. HEK293T cellderived lyophilized peptides were dissolved in ddH2O at 6.67ng/µl. All test tubes were tested with 5 technical replicates for better statistical power. A total of 20 µlHEK peptides are aliquoted into each microtube for 24h incubation at 37°C. After incubation, the microtubes are quickly centrifuged then aliquot 15 µl (total 100ng) to LC vial for further MS analysis. Control group was performed as directly aliquot 15 µl of the peptide from stock tube to LC vial.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS/MS raw files were searched using MSFragger and the Uniprot human database (January 2019 release) with parameters as below: full tryptic specificity, miss cleavage site maximum 1, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, protein N terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate for protein were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Nonspecific binding between the protein and the container is an often-neglected cause of sample loss in large-scale proteomics sample preparation. In nanoproteomics, due to the small sample size, this absorption loss is no longer negligible, and researchers often adopt low binding plasticware to minimize the sample loss. However, there has been little discussion in the scientific literature on the differences in microtube performance on reducing protein/peptide binding. Therefore, the exact impact of sample loss during the sample preparation is not well understood. Here, we investigated the protein/peptide loss during the nanoproteomics experiment process. Our results showed that there are significant differences in nonspecific binding among the tested microtubes, with a protein recovery rate ranging from less than 10% to over 90% for different microtubes. Interestingly, we found that the storage temperature could also be one of the key factors that contribute to protein recovery from the plastic container. In addition, we investigated the binding preferences of different microtubes by the physical characteristics of the identified proteins and peptides, such as isoelectric point, hydrophobicity, length, and charge. Our findings help to better understand protein/peptide loss in proteomics sample preparation and provide further guidance for researchers in choosing proper containers for their precious sample.

### Keywords
Nanoproteomics, Non-specific binding, Sample loss, Microtube

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chi-cago, IL, 60612, United States
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
Ziwei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Gao
College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chi-cago, IL, 60612, United States


