### Accession
PXD033826

### Title
Structural impact of TM domain mutations on mycobacterial adenylyl cyclase Rv1625c (LiP-MS)

### Description
LiP-MS was used to assess the structural impact of transmembrane domain mutations on the overall conformation of the mycobacterial cycase Rv1625c.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment was conducted in quadruplicates according to the standard LiP-MS protocol for purified proteins used in the Picotti lab. Four conditions were screened: LiP WT, LiP mutant, Trypsin control WT, Trypsin control mutant. Purified Rv1625c was diluted with LiP buffer (1 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.4) with the addition of 0.1% digitonin to a protein concentration of 2 ug/50 uL. Limited proteolysis was conducted with 0.02 ug of proteinase K for 5 minutes at 25°C and the reaction was quenched with a 5 min incubation at 99°C, followed by the addition of sodium deoxycholate. The LiP-step was followed by a tryptic digest and C-18 clean-up. After drying, the peptides were reconstituted in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA with the addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys). Peptides were separated with a 30 min gradient from 3-35% B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 95% ACN, 0.1% FA) on a C18 column and measured on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer in DIA.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed in Spectronaut v15 and further data analysis was conducted in R using the R packages tidyverse, data.table and protti.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> adenylyl cyclase (AC) Rv1625c/Cya is an evolutionary ancestor of the mammalian membrane ACs and a model system for studies of their structure and function. Although the vital role of ACs in cellular signalling is well established, the function of their transmembrane (TM) regions remains unknown. Here, we describe the cryo-EM structure of Cya bound to a stabilizing nanobody at 3.6 &#xc5; resolution. The TM helices 1-5 form a structurally conserved domain that facilitates the assembly of the helical and catalytic domains. The TM region contains discrete pockets accessible from the extracellular and cytosolic side of the membrane. Neutralization of the negatively charged extracellular pocket Ex1 destabilizes the cytosolic helical domain and reduces the catalytic activity of the enzyme. The TM domain acts as a functional component of Cya, guiding the assembly of the catalytic domain and providing the means for direct regulation of catalytic activity in response to extracellular ligands.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Lc-ms/ms, Lip-ms, Protein structure

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


