### Accession
PXD027854

### Title
Enzymatic activity of glycosyltransferase GLT8D1 promotes human glioblastoma cells migration

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor characterized by infiltrative migration of malignant glioma cells into the surrounding brain parenchyma. In this study, our analysis of GBM patient cohorts displayed significant higher expression of Glycosyltransferase 8 domain containing 1 (GLT8D1) compared to normal brain tissue and could be associated with impaired patient survival. Increased in vitro expression of GLT8D1 significantly enhanced migration of two different sphere-forming GBM cell lines. By in silico analysis we predicted the 3D-structure as well as the active site residues of GLT8D1. The introduction of point mutations in the predicted active site reduced its glycosyltransferase activity in vitro and consequently impaired GBM tumor cell migration. Examination of GLT8D1 interaction partners by LC-MS/MS implied proteins associated with cytoskeleton and intracellular transport as potential substrates. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the enzymatic activity of glycosyltransferase GLT8D1 promotes GBM cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
HA-tag pulldown of the GLT8D1-HA from NCH644-overexpressing vs. control (Neo) cells with interacting proteins was performed with Pierce HA-Tag immunoprecipitation (IP)/Co-IP kit according to the manufacturers protocol (Thermo Scientific). Eluted proteins were subjected to subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis of the GLT8D1 interactome.The samples eluted from the anti-HA beads were cleaned up and digested using the SP3-method as described in Hughes et al., 2014. The cleaned-up proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with a Trypsin/LysC over night at 37°C. The peptides were recovered from the SP3 beads, acidified with 1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a 15cm reverse-phase column (Pepmap18, Thermo Scientific) using a gradient to 40% acetonitrile (Merck) Separated peptides were ionized on a Proxeon ion source and directly sprayed into the online-coupled VELOS-OrbiTRAP mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 spectra were recorded with a mass resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap part of the machine. MS2 spectra were recorded in the VELOS. The ten most intense ions with a charge state greater than 1 were selected (target value = 500; monoisotopic precursor selection enabled) and fragmented in the linear quadrupole trap using CID (collision induced dissociation, 35% normalized collision energy). Dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Recorded spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the human Uniprot database, allowing for 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications were set to cysteine carbamylation, and variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation, as well as N-terminal protein acetylation. Each replicate was analyzed separately with the label-free option activated for data quantification (Cox et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor characterized by infiltrative growth of malignant glioma cells into the surrounding brain parenchyma. In this study, our analysis of GBM patient cohorts revealed a significantly higher expression of <i>Glycosyltransferase</i> 8 <i>domain containing 1</i> (<i>GLT8D1</i>) compared to normal brain tissue and could be associated with impaired patient survival. Increased <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> expression of <i>GLT8D1</i> significantly enhanced migration of two different sphere-forming GBM cell lines. By <i>in silico</i> analysis we predicted the 3D-structure as well as the active site residues of GLT8D1. The introduction of point mutations in the predicted active site reduced its glycosyltransferase activity <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and consequently impaired GBM tumor cell migration. Examination of GLT8D1 interaction partners by LC-MS/MS implied proteins associated with cytoskeleton and intracellular transport as potential substrates. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the enzymatic activity of glycosyltransferase GLT8D1 promotes GBM cell migration.

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Glioblastoma, Glt8d1, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
LIH
Luxembourg instititute of health

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Luxembourg instititute of health


