### Accession
PXD032847

### Title
Systematic identification of cell fate regulatory programs using a single-cell atlas of mouse development

### Description
Single-cell genomics is altering our understanding of the Waddington landscape, and provides a more general representation of the state manifold. Yet, the molecular regulations behind the state manifold remain poorly understood. We construct a dynamic cell landscape of mouse lineage differentiation at the single-cell level and thereby reveal both lineage-common and lineage-specific regulatory programs during cell type maturation. We verify lineage-common regulatory programs that are universal during the development of invertebrates and vertebrates. In particular, we identify Xbp1 as an evolutionarily conserved regulator of cell fate determinations across different species. We demonstrate that Xbp1 transcriptional regulation is important for the stabilization of the genetic network for a wide range of cell types. Our results offer genetic and molecular insights into the cell fate decisions and provide resources to advance the understanding of cellular state manifolds.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The protein sample was added with 1 volume of pre-cooled acetone, vortexed to mix, and added with 4 volumes of pre-cooled acetone, precipitated at -20℃ for 2 h. The protein sample was then redissolved in 100 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissMouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to X missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-term were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, #ITT#-#PLEX# was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lineage-common regulator; cell fate decision; cross species

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Lijiang Fei

### Lab Head
Dr Guoji Guo
Zhejiang University


