### Accession
PXD010402

### Title
Interaction-based capture and identification of protein effectors of ppGpp, the master regulator of bacterial growth

### Description
The small nucleotide ppGpp is a conserved regulatory molecule in prokaryotes that tunes growth rate in response to nutrient availability. How ppGpp regulates growth remains poorly defined. In Escherichia coli, ppGpp directly binds RNA polymerase to modulate transcription, but it likely has other targets. Here, we develop a capture-compound mass spectrometry approach to identify more than 50 putative ppGpp targets that control many key cellular processes, including translation, polyamine synthesis, and nucleotide metabolism. We validate several proteins as bona fide ppGpp targets in vivo. In particular, we demonstrate that ppGpp inhibits the enzymes Gsk and PurF to block purine salvage and de novo synthesis, respectively. Our results indicate that downregulating ATP and GTP synthesis is a critical facet of growth control by ppGpp. Collectively, our results provide new insight into ppGpp-based growth control in E. coli and candidates for future exploration. The capture compounds developed will also enable identification of ppGpp targets in other species, including many pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli AT713 was cultured in the SILAC medium containing either regular lysine and arginine (the light medium) or 13C615N2-lysine and 13C615N4-arginine (the heavy medium) to OD600 = 0.50. Cells from 35 mL culture were pelleted, resuspended in 0.5 mL lysis buffer, and lysed by a freezethaw cycle followed by brief sonication. Lysis buffer was 20 mM HEPES-Na 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 10 µg/mL lysozyme. Each lysate was diluted with lysis buffer to 4.5 mg/mL protein, as quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). To setup crosslinking reactions, a crosslinkable ppGpp cocktail was first prepared through mixing equal volumes of 1 mM stocks for compounds 1a-1d and 2a-2d. Then, two reactions were assembled in adjacent wells on a 96-well plate chilled on ice. The effector capture reaction consisted of 540 µg protein from the heavy lysate, 100 µM crosslinkable ppGpp cocktail, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM MnCl2. The control reaction consisted of 540 µg protein from the light lysate, 100 µM crosslinkable ppGpp cocktail, 5 mM native ppGpp, 15 mM MgCl2 and 1.5 mM MnCl2. Final NaCl concentration of both reactions was brought to 300 mM using a concentrated stock. Both reactions were illuminated underneath a 100W, 365-nm UV lamp for 2 minutes and crosslinking was monitored by western blotting. The reactions were then combined and extensively exchanged in a 10kDa-MWCO concentrator into a buffer containing 20 mM HEPESNa and 200 mM NaCl. At this stage, 50 µg protein was saved for input control, and the rest was concentrated to 100 µL, diluted with 400 µL RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100) and incubated overnight with 200 µL MyOne Streptavidin C1 dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4 oC. On the second day, the protein in supernatant (flowthrough) was sampled for Western blotting and then removed, and the dynabeads were washed at 4 oC twice with RIPA buffer, once with 0.1 M Na2CO3, twice with 100 mM Tris 8.0, 5 M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl) and twice more with RIPA buffer. Bound protein was eluted through boiling the dynabeads in 40 µL SDS-PAGE loading dye containing 2 mM biotin.  For input controls, the lysate mixture (50 µg protein) was treated with 10 mM DTT at 56 oC for 1 hr followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 1 hr in the dark, and then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at RT overnight. Thereafter, the sample was acidified with formic acid (5% final concentration) and applied to C18 SpinTips (Protea Biosciences). After washing with 0.1% formic acid in water, tryptic fragments were eluted with 80% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid. The eluate was dried in a speedvac and reconstituted in 100 µL and then diluted 1:50 both in 0.1% formic acid, and 5 µL dilute was used for LC-MS2 analysis.  Eluates from streptavidin dynabeads were first resolved on a 12% SDS-PAGE, which was subsequently stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB), revealing three major protein bands, the streptavidin at 13 kDa, EF-Tu at 40 kDa and EF-G at 80 kDa. The gel lane for each eluate was excised and regions below the 15-kDa or above the 200-kDa marker were trimmed off. The lane   8  was further divided into three samples and processed separately: the EF-Tu and EF-G bands (sample A), the fragment below EF-Tu (sample B), and the rest (sample C). The gel fragments were diced into 1-mm pieces, and then treated with 10 mM DTT at 56 oC for 1 hr followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 1 hr in the dark. After a brief wash with 0.1 M NH4HCO3, gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile, dried in a speedvac, and re-hydrated with a minimal volume of 6 ng/µL trypsin in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for digestion at RT overnight. Thereafter, tryptic fragments were extracted by four shrinking-swelling iterations. In each iteration, gel pieces were first dehydrated with 5% formic acid in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (first two iterations) or neat acetonitrile (second two). Supernatant containing tryptic fragments was then removed for collection and gel pieces were re-swelled with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 in water. The combined supernatant was dried in a speedvac and reconstituted in 50 µL 0.1% formic acid. 5 µL was used for LC-MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic fragments were separated by RP-HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) using a precolumn (made in house, 6 cm of 10 µm C18) and a self-pack 5 µm tip analytical column (12 cm of 5 µm C18, New Objective) over a 140 minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% MeCN/0.1% formic acid.  The gradient conditions were 0-10% B (0-5 min), 10-30% B (5-105 min), 30-40% B (105-119 min), 40-60% B (119-124 min), 60-100% B (124-126 min), 100% B (126-136 min), 1000% B (136-138 min), 0% B (138-140 min), and the mass spectrometer was operated in a datadependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 28 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 15 mmu for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, 13C615N2 (K) and 13C615N4 (R). Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Ppgpp, E. coli

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Janssen Pharmaceuticals

### Submitter
Amanda Del Rosario

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Del Rosario
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


