### Accession
PXD043713

### Title
A bespoke analytical workflow for the identification of sulfopep-tides and confident discrimination from phosphopeptides_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Protein tyrosine sulfation (sY) is a post-translational modification (PTM) catalysed by Golgi-resident Tyrosyl Protein Sul-foTransferases (TPSTs). Information on protein tyrosine sulfation is currently limited to ~50 human proteins with only a handful of those having verified sites of sulfation. The contribution of this chemical moiety for the regulation of biological processes, both inside and outside the cell, remains poorly defined in large part due to analytical limitations. Mass spectrom-etry-based proteomics is the method of choice for PTM analysis, but has yet to be applied for the systematic investigation of biological sulfation (the ‘sulfome’), primarily due to issues associated with discrimination of sY- from phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing peptides. In this study, we developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based workflow centred on the characteri-zation of sY-peptides, incorporating optimised Zr4+-IMAC and TiO2 enrichment strategies. Extensive characterization of a panel of sY- and pY-peptides using an array of MS fragmentation regimes (CID, HCD, EThcC, ETciD, UVPD) highlights differences in the ability to generate site-determining product ions, which can be exploited to differentiate sulfated peptides from nominally isobaric phosphopeptides based on precursor ion neutral loss at low collision energy. Application of our ana-lytical workflow to the HEK-293 cell extracellular secretome facilitated identification of 23 new sulfotyrosine-containing peptides, several of which we validate enzymatically  using in vitro sulfation assays. Our study demonstrates the applicabil-ity of this strategy for confident, high-throughput, ‘sulfomics’ studies

### Sample Protocol
Peptide sulfation assays were performed as described previously 31. Briefly, 2.5 μg of each peptide in individual reactions were incubated at 20 °C for 18 h in the presence of 1 μg TPST1 and TPST2, and 0.5 mM of the co-factor PAPS. All sulfated peptides were combined before undergo-ing stage-tip based strong cation exchange clean-up.55 Elu-ent was aliquoted into 0.25 μg/peptide fractions and vacu-um-dried by centrifugation. sY-peptides for fragmentation studies, standard input samples and spiked into BSA/Casein digests were subject-ed to in-house C18 stage-tip (details) clean-up prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Three discs were packed per 200 μL tip and centrifuged at 5000 g for 5 min to pack the column. All centrifugation steps were at 4000 g for 2 min (or until all liquid has passed through the tip) at room temperature. Stage-tips were equilibrated by sequential washing with 200 μL of methanol, elution buffer (80% (v/v) ACN (acetoni-trile) + 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water) prior to loading peptide samples in 0.1% TFA. Flow through was re-applied before washing in 200 μL of wash buffer and eluting in 200 μL elution buffer. Elution was dried to completion by vacuum centrifugation. All dried peptides were resuspended in 3% (v/v) ACN + 0.1% TFA (in water) by water bath sonication for 10 min, followed by centrifugation at 13000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the cleared supernatant collected. For protein/peptide standards, peptides were separated by reversed-phase HPLC over a 30 min gradient using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex), as described in 58. All data acquisition was performed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using stated frag-mentation conditions for 2+ to 5+ charge states over a m/z range of 350-2000. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Or-bitrap [120K resolution at 200 m/z], normalized automatic gain control (AGC) = 50%, maximum injection time = 50 ms and an intensity threshold for fragmentation = 2.5e4. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap [30K resolution at 200 m/z], AGC target = normal and maximum injection time = dynamic. A dynamic exclusion window of 10 s was applied at a 10 ppm mass tolerance. For cell-based studies, peptides were separated and acquired as before with either of the following adaptions: 1) a 60 min gradient and high-er-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) set at 32% normalized collision energy (NCE). 2) For neutral loss triggered meth-ods, HCD set at 10% NCE, MS2 acquired in the Orbitrap [15K resolution at 200 m/z] and targeted loss continuation trigger for m/z values equivalent to 1-3 sulfation PTMs (79.9568) at charge states 2+ to 5+ (25 ppm mass toler-ance). Continuation of trigger was performed for neutral loss ions with at least 10% relative intensity for correct charge state assigned losses. Triggered scans were acquired in the Orbitrap [30K resolution at 200 m/z], fragmentation methods were changed as stated across HCD, CID, ETD, EThcD, ETciD, UVPD with ranging energies

### Data Protocol
For localization data analysis and heatmap preparation, synthetic peptide MS data sets were search in Comet (with parameters matched to the PEAKS11 search), which ena-bles export of all PSMs, without any machine learning-based rescoring (as in PEAKS11) or score thresholding. Heat maps were produced in R (tidyverse, ggplot2), for every fragmentation mode (for phosphopeptides and sul-fopeptides at multiple charge states). The heat map dis-plays, for correctly identified PSMs, the proportion of iden-tified count of fragment ions containing the known modifi-cation site, divided by the total possible count of theoreti-cal observable ions containing the known modification site.

### Publication Abstract
Protein tyrosine sulfation (sY) is a post-translational modification (PTM) catalyzed by Golgi-resident tyrosyl protein sulfo transferases (TPSTs). Information on sY in humans is currently limited to &#x223c;50 proteins, with only a handful having verified sites of sulfation. As such, the contribution of sulfation to the regulation of biological processes remains poorly defined. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics is the method of choice for PTM analysis but has yet to be applied for systematic investigation of the "sulfome", primarily due to issues associated with discrimination of sY-containing from phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing peptides. In this study, we developed an MS-based workflow for sY-peptide characterization, incorporating optimized Zr<sup>4+</sup> immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) and TiO<sub>2</sub> enrichment strategies. Extensive characterization of a panel of sY- and pY-peptides using an array of fragmentation regimes (CID, HCD, EThcD, ETciD, UVPD) highlighted differences in the generation of site-determining product ions and allowed us to develop a strategy for differentiating sulfated peptides from nominally isobaric phosphopeptides based on low collision energy-induced neutral loss. Application of our "sulfomics" workflow to a HEK-293 cell extracellular secretome facilitated identification of 21 new sulfotyrosine-containing proteins, several of which we validate enzymatically, and reveals new interplay between enzymes relevant to both protein and glycan sulfation.

### Keywords
Tyrosine-o-sulfation, Sulfotyrosine, Sulfation

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, U.K

### Submitter
leonard daly

### Lab Head
Dr Claire eyers
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, U.K


