### Accession
PXD023758

### Title
Human TRPV4 LC-MS protein interactor screen

### Description
TRPV4 is a cell surface-expressed calcium-permeable cation channel that mediates cell-specific effects on cellular morphology and function. Dominant missense mutations of TRPV4 cause various forms of inherited neuropathy, but the pathogenic mechanisms are unknown. Using an unbiased screen, we sought to identify novel TRPV4 interactors that may be relevant to disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with FLAG-tagged TRPV4 or empty vector with Lipofectamine LTX with Plus Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and lysed 24 h after transfection in IP Lysis Buffer (Pierce, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) supplemented with Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were lysed for 15 min followed by centrifugation at 14,000 RPM for 10 min. Supernatants were pre-cleared for 90 min at 4°C in 50 μl of mouse IgG agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich, A0919) followed by immunoprecipitation with EZview Red M2 anti-FLAG Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich, F2426) for 2 h. Following several washes with IP wash buffer (PBS, 0.2% Tween 20), bound proteins were eluted with 300 µg/ml FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich, F-3290) in TBS for 30 min at 4°C. Protein was then reduced with DTT and alkylated with Iodoacetomide, followed by precipitation with TCA/acetone and drying. Proteins were proteolyzed with trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM TEAB buffer at 37°C overnight. Peptides were de-salted on u-HJB Oasis plates (Waters), eluted with 60% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, and dried. Digested peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography interfaced with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) using Easy-LC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) HPLC system interfaced with a QExactive in FTFT. Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap (S-10 µM, 120Å, 75 µm x 2 cm, YMC, Japan) for 5 min at 5 ml/min in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid in-line with a 75 µm x 150 mm ProntoSIL-120-5-C18 H column (5 µm, 120Å, Bischoff. Peptides eluting during the 2%-90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid gradient over 112 min at 300 nl/min were directly sprayed into a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer through a 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective) at 2.2 kV. Survey scans (full ms) were acquired from 350-1800 m/z with data dependent monitoring of up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions), each individually isolated in a 1.6 Da window with -0.5 Da offset, and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy at 28 and 30 second dynamic exclusion. Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at resolutions 70,000 and 35,000, respectively, and automatic gain control target values at 3x106 with 60 ms maximum injection time and 1x105 with 150 ms maximum injection time, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Isotopically resolved masses in precursor (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were extracted from raw MS data without deconvolution and with deconvolution using Xtract or MS2 Processor in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, v1.4). All extracted data were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, v2.5.1) against the RefSeq human protein database (release 72) with the added enzymes and BSA, using the following criteria: sample’s species; trypsin as the enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages; mass tolerance 8 ppm on precursor and 0.02 Da on fragment; cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide identifications from Mascot searches were filtered at 1% false discovery rate confidence threshold, based on a concatenated decoy database search, using the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trpv4, Hek-293t, Cmt2c

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine

### Submitter
Brett McCray

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Jane Sumner
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine


