### Accession
PXD025516

### Title
SARS-Cov2 coronavirus spike protein-induced apoptosis, inflammatory and oxidative stress responses in THP-1-Like-Macrophages: potential role of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (perindopril)

### Description
A purified spike (S) glycoprotein for SARS-COV-2 coronavirus was used to studying its effects on THP-1 macrophages, PBMCs and HUVEC cells. The S protein mediates SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells through binding to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors. We measured viability, intracellular cytokines release, oxidative stress, pro-inflammatory markers and THP-1-like macrophage polarization. We identified an increase in apoptosis, ROS generation, MCP-1 and intracellular calcium expression in THP-1 macrophages. Furthermore, stimulation with the S protein polarizes THP-1 macrophages towards pro-inflammatory futures with an increase in TNFα and MHC-II M1-like phenotype markers. Treatment of cells with an ACE inhibitor, perindopril at 100nM reduced apoptosis, ROS and MHC-II expression. We further analyzed the sensitivity of HUVEC cells after exposure to a conditioned media (CM) of THP-1 macrophages stimulated with S protein. CM induced endothelial cell apoptosis and MCP-1 expression. Treatment with perindopril reduced these effects. However, direct stimulation of HUVEC cells with S protein slightly increased HIF1α and MCP-1 expression which was significantly exaggerated by ACE inhibitor treatment. S protein stimulation induced ROS generation and changed mitogenic responses of PBMCs through upregulation of TNFα and IL-17 cytokine expressions. These effects were blunted by perindopril (100nM) treatment. Proteomic analysis of S protein stimulated THP-1 macrophages with or without perindopril (100nM) uncovered more than 400 differentially regulated proteins. Our results provide a mechanistic analysis suggesting that blood and vascular component could be activated directly through S protein systemically present in circulation and that activation of local renin angiotensin system might be partially involved in this process.

### Sample Protocol
Cells pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by total protein measurement using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 100 µm of proteins were precipitated using Methanol/chloroform/water. Proteins pellets were then dissolved in 8 M Urea/500 mM Tris-HCL buffer. Afterwards, Proteins were reduced with 500 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride followed by alkylation with 500 mM 2-chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested into peptides using trypsin with a ratio of 1:50 (protein to trypsin) with 37 ◦C overnight incubation. Prior to Mass spectrometry analysis, Peptides were desalted and cleaned up using Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns by following the manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis  The analysis of all samples was performed on Ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex, Concord, Canada). Peptides were trapped on C18 and the separation was achieved by reverse phase chromatography using C18 nano-LC column (3C18-CL, 75µmX15cm, Eksigent, USA ) with the following elution gradient; 0-1min, 5% B; 1-60 min, 5-30% B; 60-66 min,30-80%B; 66-74 min, 80%B; 74-85 min, 80-5%B; 85-100 min, 5% B using mobile phase A (0.1% HCOOH in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% HCOOH in Acetonitrile). The MS acquisition method was operated in Data Dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following criteria: MS1 range was set as 400-2000 m/z and the10 most intense precursors ions with charge states (+2 to +5) that exceeds 200 cps were selected for fragmentation. MS2 range was set as 400-1250 m/z and fragmentation was performed using Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread (CES) =5 eV. The instrumental parameters for MS1 and MS2 were set as follow: GS1= 25; GS2= 0; CUR=25; ISVF= 2250; and IHT= 60.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification was performed using ProteinPilot Software (v 4.5, Sciex). The MS/MS data files were searched against Uniprot Proteome Humans database (downloaded on 29.10.2019). The protein identification was set with 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein quantification was performed using Skyline software (v 20.1.0.31).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2 spike protein; monocyte/macrophages; inflammation; angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; proteomics

### Affiliations
king abdullah international medical research center
Medical Research Core Facility and Platforms (MRCFP), King Abdullah International Medical Research Center/King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences (KSAU-HS), King Abdulaziz Medical City (KAMC), NGHA, Riyadh 11426, Saudi Arabia

### Submitter
Bandar Alghanem

### Lab Head
Dr MOHAMED BOUDJELAL
Medical Research Core Facility and Platforms (MRCFP), King Abdullah International Medical Research Center/King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences (KSAU-HS), King Abdulaziz Medical City (KAMC), NGHA, Riyadh 11426, Saudi Arabia


