### Accession
PXD012263

### Title
Functional proteomic atlas of HIV-infection in primary human CD4+ T cells

### Description
Viruses manipulate host cells to enhance their replication, and the identification of host factors targeted by viruses has led to key insights in both viral pathogenesis and cellular physiology. We previously described global changes in cellular protein levels during human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection using transformed CEM-T4 T cells as a model. In this study, we develop an HIV reporter virus displaying a streptavidin-binding affinity tag at the surface of infected cells, allowing facile one-step selection with streptavidin-conjugated magnetic beads. We use this system to obtain pure populations of HIV-infected primary human CD4+ T cells for detailed proteomic analysis, including quantitation of >9,000 proteins across 4 different donors, and temporal profiling during T cell activation. Remarkably, amongst 650 cellular proteins significantly perturbed during HIV infection of primary T cells (q<0.05), almost 50% are regulated directly or indirectly by the viral accessory proteins Vpr, Vif, Nef and Vpu. The remainder have not been previously characterised, but include novel Vif-dependent targets FMR1 and DPH7, and 192 targets not identified and/or regulated in T cell lines, such as AIRD5A and PTPN22. We therefore provide a high-coverage functional proteomic atlas of HIV infection, and a mechanistic account of HIV-dependent changes in its natural target cell.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using either Preomics samples preparation columns or S-Trap columns essentially according to manufacturers protocols. Samples were labeled with TMT reagents before pooling and and high pH reversed phase fractionation. Fractions were analysed using on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument coupled to an nLC device via electrospray ionisaion. An MS3 approch with synchronous precursor selection of MS2 fragements to liberate TMT reporters in MS3 was utilised.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by MASCOT, as implimented within proteome discoverer ver 2.2 against the Uniprot Human Reference Protome with appended contaminants database as well as a databse of viral genes, including modifications made to the viral genome. Peptide FDR was controled at 1% using MASCOT Percolator and Protein FDR was controled at 5%/1% reported as medium or high confidence identfication. Quantiative tools within PD were used to quantify proteins using s/n data derived from TMT reporters. Statistical significance (where 3 replicates were available) was calculated in R using the moderated t-test LIMMA which is available through the Bioconductor package.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses manipulate host cells to enhance their replication, and the identification of cellular factors targeted by viruses has led to key insights into both viral pathogenesis and cell biology. In this study, we develop an HIV reporter virus (HIV-AFMACS) displaying a streptavidin-binding affinity tag at the surface of infected cells, allowing facile one-step selection with streptavidin-conjugated magnetic beads. We use this system to obtain pure populations of HIV-infected primary human CD4+ T cells for detailed proteomic analysis, and quantitate approximately 9000 proteins across multiple donors on a dynamic background of T cell activation. Amongst 650 HIV-dependent changes (q &lt; 0.05), we describe novel Vif-dependent targets FMR1 and DPH7, and 192 proteins not identified and/or regulated in T cell lines, such as ARID5A and PTPN22. We therefore provide a high-coverage functional proteomic atlas of HIV infection, and a mechanistic account of host factors subverted by the virus in its natural target cell.

### Keywords
Hiv, Primary t-cells, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,  Cambridge Biomedical Campus,  Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas J Matheson
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,  Cambridge Biomedical Campus,  Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


