### Accession
PXD012558

### Title
Proteomic Investigations into Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease

### Description
Adult polyglucosan body disease is a rare autosomal recessive neurologicla disorder with progressive paralysis, sensory deficits, and neurogenic bladder usually manifesting late in life. The disease is derived from glycogen branching enzyme deficiency that leads to aggregation of polyglucosan bodies in many cell types. This project focuses on delinating disease mechanisms in APBD through studying the proteomes of lymphoblasts of 3 patients with APBD and comparing them to several controls.

### Sample Protocol
Three patients with known APBD mutations (3 males) and 15 age- and gender-matched controls had blood collected from which were derived EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) and control EBV-transformed LCLs. Two of the cases had homozygous  LCL samples were rinsed in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, transferred to a Covaris cryobag and frozen in liquid nitrogen, pulverized, transferred to glass vials, and then lysed with 2% SDS and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Samples were then sonicated, followed by filter-aided sample preparation detergent clean-up. 10 ug protein of each sample was digested with LysC for 1 hour and trypsin overnight at 37°C. Reverse phase LC-MS/w was performed as described, except that 600 ng of peptide digests was loaded on the HPLC column and the gradient of solvent B ranged from 2% to 40% over 210 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files for each sample were processed using Rosetta Elucidator (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25). Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed as previously described. Briefly, LC-MS/MS raw data were imported, and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC-MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks, and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned. Chromatographic peaks were first aligned by retention time and monoisotopic mass. Peak lists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using Mascot. Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications. The false discovery rate for protein identifications was calculated to be 0.02%. The MS/MS peak lists were searched by Mascot (version 2.4.1) (Matrix Science, London, UK) using the human UniProt database. Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 25 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteines, one missed cleavage and oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Adult polyglucosan body disease, Lymphoblast, Apbd

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Kathleen Lundberg

### Lab Head
Dr Marvin Natowicz
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic


