### Accession
PXD046056

### Title
Structure of the DDB1-AMBRA1 E3 ligase receptor complex linked to cell cycle regulation

### Description
AMBRA1 is a tumor suppressor protein that functions as a substrate receptor of the ubiquitin conjugation system with roles in autophagy and the cell cycle regulatory network. The intrinsic disorder of AMBRA1 has thus far precluded its structural determination. To solve this problem, we analyzed the dynamics of AMBRA1 using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS). The HDX results indicated that AMBRA1 is a highly flexible protein and can be stabilized upon interaction with DDB1, the adaptor of the Cullin4A/B E3 ligase. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of AMBRA1 in complex with DDB1 at 3.08 Å resolution. The structure shows that parts of the N- and C-terminal structural regions in AMBRA1 fold together into the highly dynamic WD40 domain and reveals how DDB1 engages with AMBRA1 to create a binding scaffold for substrate recruitment. The N-terminal helix-loop-helix motif and WD40 domain of AMBRA1 associate with the double-propeller fold of DDB1. We also demonstrate that DDB1 binding-defective AMBRA1 mutants prevent ubiquitination of the substrate Cyclin D1 in vitro and increase cell cycle progression. Together, these results provide structural insights into the AMBRA1-ubiquitin ligase complex and suggest a mechanism by which AMBRA1 acts as a hub involved in various physiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)   H/D exchange was carried out by 10-fold dilution of 0.5 µM AMBRA1 or AMBRA1-CULLIN4-DDB1-RBX1 E3 ligase complex into a D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2) to a final volume of 100 µL. After different time periods of incubation at 25 °C, the reaction was quenched by addition of ice-cold quench solution (1:1, v/v) containing 2 M guanidinium hydrochloride and 0.2 M citric acid. This reaction was digested on an immobilized pepsin column inside a manual HDX system with the temperature maintained at 0 °C. Eluted peptides were desalted using chilled trap column (1mm × 15mm, Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 5 min at a flowrate of 200 μL/min and 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase. Subsequent peptide separation was performed on the chilled ACQUITY BEH C18 (2.1 x 50mm) analytical column using a first gradient ranging from 9 to 45 % of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) for 10 min followed by a second gradient ranging from 45 to 99% of buffer B for 1 min, at an overall flow rate of 50μl/min. Peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization and analyzed by Orbitrap Eclipse and QExactive HFX (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer. Non-deuterated samples peptide identification was performed via data dependent tandem MS/MS experiments. The reported pHread values are direct pH meter readings of the D2O buffer solutions calibrated with standard buffer solutions made with H2O and are uncorrected for the isotope effect at the glass electrode.

### Data Protocol
Non-deuterated samples peptide identification was performed via data dependent tandem MS/MS experiments and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher). Searches were performed against a database containing the sequences of Ambra1 (fused to N-terminal MBP tag and C-terminal his tag) and contaminant proteins (CRAPome/Strep tag AP). Mass analysis of the peptide centroids was carried by HDExaminer v3.3 (Sierra Analytics, Modesto, CA), followed by manual verification for each peptide. No corrections for back exchange that occurs during digestion and LC separation were applied.

### Publication Abstract
AMBRA1 is a tumor suppressor protein that functions as a substrate receptor of the ubiquitin conjugation system with roles in autophagy and the cell cycle regulatory network. The intrinsic disorder of AMBRA1 has thus far precluded its structural determination. To solve this problem, we analyzed the dynamics of AMBRA1 using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS). The HDX results indicated that AMBRA1 is a highly flexible protein and can be stabilized upon interaction with DDB1, the adaptor of the Cullin4A/B E3 ligase. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of AMBRA1 in complex with DDB1 at 3.08&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. The structure shows that parts of the N- and C-terminal structural regions in AMBRA1 fold together into the highly dynamic WD40 domain and reveals how DDB1 engages with AMBRA1 to create a binding scaffold for substrate recruitment. The N-terminal helix-loop-helix motif and WD40 domain of AMBRA1 associate with the double-propeller fold of DDB1. We also demonstrate that DDB1 binding-defective AMBRA1 mutants prevent ubiquitination of the substrate Cyclin D1 in vitro and increase cell cycle progression. Together, these results provide structural insights into the AMBRA1-ubiquitin ligase complex and suggest a mechanism by which AMBRA1 acts as a hub involved in various physiological processes.

### Keywords
Cullin4, Hdx-ms, E3 ligase, Ambra1, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China, 518172
CUHKSZ

### Submitter
Goran Stjepanovic

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Stjepanovic
Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China, 518172


