### Accession
PXD028514

### Title
AKAP2 interactome in the rat heart

### Description
Immunoprecipitation of AKAP to identify interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed on a hybrid linear trap LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) interfaced via a TriVersa Nanomate (Advion Biosciences, Norwich, UK) to a Agilent 1100 nano HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Solvents used for the mobile phase were 95:5 H2O:acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1 % formic acid (A) and 5:95 H2O:acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1 % formic acid (B).  Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn ZORBAX 300SB C18 (5 mm x 300 μm ID, 5 μm, Agilent) in H2O:acetonitrile 97:3 (v/v) + 0.1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. After 5 min, they were back-flush eluted and separated on a reversed-phase nanocolumn ZORBAX 300SB C18 column (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 3.5 μm, Agilent) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a gradient from 5 to 85 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid: 5 min at 0 % of solvent B, from 0 to 25 % of B in 35 min, 25 to 50 % B in 15 min, 50 to 90 % in 5 min, 90 % B during 10 min, 90 to 0 % in 5 min and 15 min at 0 % (total time: 90 min). For spraying, a 400 nozzle ESI Chip (Advion Biosciences) was used with a voltage of 1.65 kV, and the mass spectrometer capillary transfer temperature was set at 200°C. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher), the six most intense precursor ions detected in the full MS survey performed in the Orbitrap (range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 60000 at m/z 400) were selected and fragmented. MS/MS was triggered by a minimum signal threshold of 10000 counts, carried out at relative collision energy of 35 % and with isolation width of 4.0 amu. Only precursors with a charge higher than one were selected for CID fragmentation and fragment ions were analyzed in the LTQ linear trap. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded, with a tolerance of 0.01 amu, from any selection during 120 s. From raw files, MS/MS spectra were exported as mgf (Mascot Generic File, text format) files using the extract_msn.exe script (Thermo Fisher) with the following settings: peptide mass range: 500-5000, minimum total ion intensity threshold: 500, minimum number of fragment ions: 15, minimum signal-to- noise ratio needed for a peak to be written: 3.

### Data Protocol
Collections of tandem mass spectra for database searching were generated from raw data with the ProteoWizard 3.0.20093 tool and searched using Mascot 2.8 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the reference proteome for Rattus norvegicus , version of August 24th, 2020 (UNIPROT Refprot db,  29`940 sequences) assuming strict trypsin digestion specificity (K, R). Mass tolerances used were 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.5Da for fragments. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the protein N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. The software Scaffold 5.01 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide identifications, perform dataset alignment as well as parsimony analysis to discriminate homologous hits. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation (3). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (4). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.    1. Shevchenko, A.; Wilm, M.; Vorm, O.; Mann, M., Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 1996, 68 (5), 850-8.  2. Wilm, M.; Shevchenko, A.; Houthaeve, T.; Breit, S.; Schweigerer, L.; Fotsis, T.; Mann, M., Femtomole sequencing of proteins from polyacrylamide gels by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry. Nature 1996, 379 (6564), 466-9.  3 . Käll, L et al, Bioinformatics, 24(16):i42-i48, Aug 2008 4. Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Keller, A.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R., A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2003, 75 (17), 4646-58.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial infarction (MI) is a leading cause of maladaptive cardiac remodeling and heart failure. In the damaged heart, loss of function is mainly due to cardiomyocyte death and remodeling of the cardiac tissue. The current study shows that A-kinase anchoring protein 2 (AKAP2) orchestrates cellular processes favoring cardioprotection in infarcted hearts. Induction of AKAP2 knockout (KO) in cardiomyocytes of adult mice increases infarct size and exacerbates cardiac dysfunction after MI, as visualized by increased left ventricular dilation and reduced fractional shortening and ejection fraction. In cardiomyocytes, AKAP2 forms a signaling complex with PKA and the steroid receptor co-activator 3 (Src3). Upon activation of cAMP signaling, the AKAP2/PKA/Src3 complex favors PKA-mediated phosphorylation and activation of estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;). This results in the upregulation of ER-dependent genes involved in protection against apoptosis and angiogenesis, including Bcl2 and the vascular endothelial growth factor a (VEGFa). In line with these findings, cardiomyocyte-specific AKAP2 KO reduces Bcl2 and VEGFa expression, increases myocardial apoptosis and impairs the formation of new blood vessels in infarcted hearts. Collectively, our findings suggest that AKAP2 organizes a transcriptional complex that mediates pro-angiogenic and anti-apoptotic responses that protect infarcted hearts.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Protein-protein interactions, Akap2

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne Department of Biomedical Sciences Rue du Bugnon 27 CH-1011 Lausanne SWITZERLAND

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Dario Diviani
University of Lausanne Department of Biomedical Sciences Rue du Bugnon 27 CH-1011 Lausanne SWITZERLAND


