### Accession
PXD019666

### Title
Cancer tissue classification using machine learning applied to MALDI MSI and high resolution H&E stained images

### Description
Aim is to identify a panel of m/z markers for the early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC). Identification of a molecular pattern that can distin- guish the primary tumours of colorectal cancer with lymph node metastasis compared to those without. Materials and Methods: Using MALDI MSI data, we developed and validated a machine learning model that can be used for early screening of CRC. Results: Our model yields high sensitivity and speci- ficity in distinguishing normal tissue from the cancerous. Model described here, can be a used in clinical labs for early diagnosis of colorectal cancer

### Sample Protocol
MALDI MSI data was acquired on an ultra extreme MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik) operated in positive re ectron mode over the mass range of m/z 800{4500 at a spatial resolution of 70m. A total of 1000 laser shots were applied in each sample spot. Raw datasets were recalibrated in  ex Analysis v3.4 (Bruker Daltonik) using the sprayed internal calibrants (Angiotensin, Glu-Fib, Dynorphin and ACTH 1-24) in enhanced quadratic mode with peak alignment tolerance of 500ppm, baseline subtraction using TopHat, SavitzkyGolay smoothing (0.2m/z width) and snap2 as a peak detec- tion algorithm (S/N threshold of 3).

### Data Protocol
The imaging dataset was uploaded and pre-processed into the SCiLS lab v2016b (Bruker Daltonik), baseline subtraction by TopHat and normalisation based on total ion count was performed. Based on the pathological annota- tions, region(s) of interest were defined and grouped together in three different classes, normal, with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and without LNM. MSI dataset was then exported as vendor-neutral data format imzML.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI) can determine the spatial distribution of analytes such as protein distributions in a tissue section according to their mass-to-charge ratio. Here, we explored the clinical potential of machine learning (ML) applied to MALDI MSI data for cancer diagnostic classification using tissue microarrays (TMAs) on 302 colorectal (CRC) and 257 endometrial cancer (EC)) patients. ML based on deep neural networks discriminated colorectal tumour from normal tissue with an overall accuracy of 98% in balanced cross-validation (98.2% sensitivity and 98.6% specificity). Moreover, our machine learning approach predicted the presence of lymph node metastasis (LNM) for primary tumours of EC with an accuracy of 80% (90% sensitivity and 69% specificity). Our results demonstrate the capability of MALDI MSI for complementing classic histopathological examination for cancer diagnostic applications.

### Keywords
Crc  colorectal cancer  machine learning  maldi msi  matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry imaging

### Affiliations
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471  University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5001
Research associate

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter Hoffmann
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471  University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5001


