### Accession
PXD026633

### Title
A small RNA regulates pprM, a modulator of pleiotropic proteins promoting DNA repair, in Deinococcus radiodurans under ionizing radiation

### Description
This study tracks the proteome during recovery from 10 kGy acute ionizing radiation (IR) in Deinococcus radiodurans R1 (WT). After 1 hour of recovery post-IR exposure, we observed 37 proteins significantly differentially expressed, including several within the Radiation and Dessication Response (RDR) pathway. Additionally, we also explored the regulatory network of a sRNA named PprS (previously Dsr2) in Deinococcus radiodurans by comparing the proteome of a sRNA knockdown strain (PprSKD, which demonstrates a ~2-fold decrease in PprS expression) to WT D. radiodurans during unirradiated conditions at late-exponential phase. Comparison between these two strains demonstrated decreased levels of one of PprS's targets, PprM, in the PprSKD strain which validated the activation mechanism we propose for PprS on pprM.

### Sample Protocol
For the time-course experiment, biological triplicate D. radiodurans R1 cultures were grown to exponential phase (OD600~0.8) and irradiated with 10 kGy acute IR using a 10-MeV, 18-kW linear accelerator (LINAC) β-ray source (250 Gy/s) at the National Center for Electron Beam Research, Texas A&M University. Samples were kept on dry ice to and from the irradiation facility (about 2 hr each way). Following irradiation, samples were recovered for 0-4 hr before protein extraction. For the comparison between D.radiodurans R1 and PprSKD strains, cultures were grown to exponential phase in biological triplicates and incubated at 4˚C for two hours before collecting the cell pellet and storing at -80˚C, to mimic the conditions of irradiated D. radiodurans samples.  For each experiment, protein lysis was obtained using sonication at 10 V for 1 min for three bursts with 5 min rest on ice between each pulse. The soluble protein was concentrated via an acetone precipitation for 16 hrs at -20˚C, followed by resuspension in 200 µL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer. This resuspension was directly loaded onto a 12% SDS-PAGE gel and run 2 mm into the stacking layer. The resulting coomassie stained gel band was cut and in-gel trypsin digested using 20 ng/µL trypsin (PierceTM Thermo Fisher Scientific; catalog #90057). Digested samples in 0.1% formic acid were injected into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion hybrid linear ion trap FT-MS with Dionex 3000 nanospray UPLC and run for 2 hrs per sample at the ICMB Proteomics Facility, The University of Texas at Austin.

### Data Protocol
Resulting peptide fragments were searched against the Uniprot D. radiodurans R1/ATCC 13939 database using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Resulting protein spectral counts were analyzed using the Scaffold4 program with greater than 99.0% probability and a minimum of two peptides at 95% peptide probability. Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was calculated for each protein spectral count using Scaffold4 program and differential expression of proteins was calculated using the R DEP Package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Srna, Deinococcus, Ir, Deinococcus radiodurans, Shotgun proteomics, Timecourse

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, USA

### Submitter
Jordan Villa

### Lab Head
Dr Lydia M Contreras
McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, USA


