### Accession
PXD010895

### Title
Non-covalently associated peptides are observed during liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and affect cross-link analyses

### Description
Cross-Linking/mass spectrometry draws structural information out of covalently linked peptide pairs. When these links do not match to previous structural models they may indicate changes of protein conformation. Unfortunately, such links can also be the result of experimental errors or artefacts. Here we describe the observation of non-covalently associated peptides during liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis which can easily be misidentified as cross-linked. Strikingly, they often mismatch to the protein structure or may falsely suggest protein homo-dimerization. Non-covalently associated peptides presumably form during ionization and can be distinguished from cross-linked peptides by observing co-elution of the corresponding linear peptides in MS1, as well as the presence of the individual peptide fragments in mixed MS2 spectra. Interestingly, non-covalently associated peptides seem sensitive to ionization source design as we see them more prevalently on a Q Exactive than on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Finally we show how more disruptive ionization settings such as moderate in-source fragmentation suppresses their presence.

### Sample Protocol
HSA Acquisition and Sample Preparation Human blood serum from a healthy donor (20 μg aliquots, 1 μg/μL) was cross-linked using cross-linker-to-protein, weight-to-weight (w/w) ratios of 1:1 and 2:1. Aliquots of human serum diluted with cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES-OH, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8) were incubated with sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL), in a reaction volume of 30 μL, for 1 h at room temperature. The diazirine group was then photo-activated by UV irradiation, for either 10, 20, 40 or 60 minutes, using a UVP CL-1000 UV Cross-linker (UVP Inc.). Cross-linked samples were separated using gel electrophoresis, with bands corresponding to monomeric HSA excised, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested using trypsin following standard protocols.9 Peptides were then desalted using C18 StageTips12 and eluted using 80% acetonitrile, 20 % water and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were analyzed on either a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific). In both cases, peptides were loaded directly onto a spray analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 8 μm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
Raw files for cross-linking searches were processed with MaxQuant14 (v. 1.6.1.0) to benefit from the implemented precursor m/z and charge correction. Resulting peak files in APL format were used for the peptide identification in Xi15 (v. 1.6.739). The database search with Xi used the following parameters: MS tolerance, 6 ppm; MS2 tolerance, 15 ppm; missed cleavages, 3; enzyme, trypsin; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (cm, +57.02 Da); variable modifications, oxidation methionine (ox, +15.99 Da). For sulfo-SDA, the cross-linker mass 82.04 Da and the modifications SDA-loop (+82.04 Da) and SDA-hyd (+100.05 Da) were used.16 False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was done using XiFDR17 (v. 1.1.26.58), using either 5% link FDR (without boosting) or a 5% peptide spectrum match (PSM) FDR. The Euclidean cross-link distances within HSA were estimated from mapping the peptide sequences to the three-dimensional structure when possible (PDB: 1AO618). Searches for non-covalently associated peptides (NAP) in the absence of cross-linkers were also conducted using Xi with a novel feature to search for cleavable cross-linkers with zero mass. FDR analysis was done at a 1% PSM level using the formula: FDR=(TD-DD)/TT,17 after removing all PSMs with a score less than 1. FDRs were then transformed to q-values, defined as the minimal FDR at which a PSM would pass the threshold.19 Linear peptide identifications from cross-linked acquisitions were done using MaxQuant. We added the above defined SDA-loop and SDA-hyd modifications to the configuration file and allowed up to 5 modifications on a peptide together with a maximum of 5 missed cleavages. Resulting peptide identifications were filtered at the default FDR of 1%. Non-cross-linked acquisitions were searched with default settings treating each replicate as different experiment in the experimental design. RT profiles for a given m/z were extracted using the MS1 (peak picked) raw data after conversion to mzML using msconvert20. The post-processing was done in Python using pyOpenMS21. RT profiles were defined as intensity values for a given m/z for the monoisotopic peak and two isotope peaks. During the developed look-up strategy, the precursor m/z of the identified cross-linked peptide, the m/z of the alpha peptide and the m/z of the beta peptide were searched in the MS1 data. The precursor mass is only matching the sum of the individual peptides in a non-covalently associated peptide if one of the two peptides is SDA-loop-modified. Therefore, the MS1 data was screened for m/z traces of the individual peptides with and without an added SDA-loop modification. Similarly, all charge states up to the precursor charge were used. The m/z trace with the largest number of peaks was eventually selected for each individual peptide. The m/z seeds were all treated similarly, in a RT window of 180 seconds, the given m/z was searched with a 20 ppm tolerance. If the m/z was found, the intensity was extracted. Resulting RT profiles where smoothened by a moving average with 15 points. For further data processing and visualization the RT profile with the most peaks (either monoisotopic, first or second isotope peak) was selected. Statistical analysis and data processing was performed using Python and the scientific package SciPy22. Unless not otherwise noted, we performed significant tests using one-sided Mann-Whitney-U-Tests with α=0.05 and continuity correction. We used the following encoding for p-values: ns – not significant, * ≤ 0.05, ** ≤ 0.01, *** ≤ 0.001. Along with the significance tests we provide effect size estimates based on Cohen’s d23 with pooled standard deviations, which uses the following classification: small - |d|≥0.2, medium - |d|≥0.5 and large - |d|≥0.8.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry draws structural information from covalently linked peptide pairs. When these links do not match to previous structural models, they may indicate changes in protein conformation. Unfortunately, such links can also be the result of experimental error or artifacts. Here, we describe the observation of noncovalently associated peptides during liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis, which can easily be misidentified as cross-linked. Strikingly, they often mismatch to the protein structure. Noncovalently associated peptides presumably form during ionization and can be distinguished from cross-linked peptides by observing coelution of the corresponding linear peptides in MS1 spectra, as well as the presence of the individual (intact) peptide fragments in MS2 spectra. To suppress noncovalent peptide formations, increasingly disruptive ionization settings can be used, such as in-source fragmentation.

### Keywords
Sda, Cross-linking, Hsa

### Affiliations
Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany
1. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH93BF, United Kingdom ( lab head )

### Submitter
Sven Giese

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH93BF, United Kingdom ( lab head )


