### Accession
PXD029376

### Title
Large-scale multi-omics analysis identifies novel early markers of COVID-19 severity

### Description
Matched samples from individuals before they contracted COVID-19 and after they were diagnosed with it were used for TMT-based relative quantitation of their plasma proteome and glycoproteome to study the effects of this infectious disease. Twenty one COVID-19 patients whose pre-COVID-19 plasma samples were also available were selected for this study. These patients had varied courses of illness and were classified based on WHO guidelines into outpatients and those with severe and critical illness. 21 matched sample pairs were divided into 3 sets for 3 TMTPro 16-plex-based mass spectrometry experiments with 8 (set01), 8 (set02), and 5 (set03) patients each. Plasma-derived tryptic peptides from each sample were TMT-labeled, and each pooled set was used for separate experiments for total proteomics and glycoproteomics. A pooled aliquot from each set was used to enrich glycopeptides by size exclusion chromatography and another aliquot was used to fractionate all peptides by basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography. Enriched glycopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and quantified across samples using TMT reporter ion intensities. Fold changes (intensity of protein or glycopeptide from a patient with COVID-19/that from the same patient before they had COVID-19) for each protein and glycopeptide were calculated for all patients to assess changes in the proteome that may be attributable to this illness. We detected 1,520 proteins, of which 472 were detected in all patients. 3,892 glycopeptides were identified at 1% FDR at peptide, glycan and glycopeptides levels and their reporter ion intensities were quantified. 732 glycopeptides from 232 glycoproteins were detected in all patients.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were diluted 1:50 and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. For 21 individuals, plasma samples collected before and after COVID-19, equal amounts of protein were digested with trypsin.  Dried plasma samples were reconstituted in 100 µl of 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5 and reduction was carried out with dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 10 mM (Sigma) at 37°C. Reduced samples were cooled to room temperature (RT) and 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) was added. Samples were incubated for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 1:10 with TEAB and sequencing-grade trypsin was added to a final amount ratio of 1:20 (trypsin:total protein w:w). For each set, the resulting peptides were labeled with tandem mass tag (16-plex TMT) reagents as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher).  After a label check, labeled samples were pooled into one and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and basic pH reversed-phase chromatography (bRPLC) fractionation was performed on separate aliquots. For SEC, an aliquot of dried peptides was resuspended in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid and injected into Superdex peptide 10/300 column (GE Healthcare) also equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid. 21 Early fractions were collected starting at 10 minutes after injection (total run time of 130 minutes) and concatenated to 12 fractions, which were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For bRPLC, another aliquot of total peptides was cleaned up by C18 TopTips (Glygen) and fractionated on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System. 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9 and 5 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 9 were used as solvent A and B. Ninety-six fractions were collected for a total of 120 min and were concatenated into 12 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   A modification of previously published LC-MS/MS parameters (PMID: 34368825, 33079518) were used. Specifically, 10-13 fractions from SEC were selected based on the UV profile (214 nm, 220 nm) and separately 12 concatenated fractions of bRPLC were analyzed by Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography for separation of peptides was performed on an EASY-Spray column (75 m × 50 cm, PepMap RSCL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm C18 particles. The column was maintained at 50 °C. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Injected peptides were trapped on a trap column (100 mm × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Every run was 130 minutes with flow rate being 300 nL/min. The gradient used for separation was: equilibration at 3% solvent B from 0 to 4 min, 3-28% B from 4.1 to 125 min, 28-40% B from 125 to 130 minutes, 40-80% B from 130 to 145 minutes followed by equilibration for next run at 3% sol B for 5 min. Ionization of eluting peptides was performed using an EASY-Spray source at an electric potential of 1.9 kV. All experiments were done in DDA mode with top 15 ions isolated at a window of 0.7 or 1.2 m/z and default charge state of +2. Only precursors with charge states ranging from +2 to +7 were considered for MS/MS events. Stepped collision energy was applied to fragment precursors at normalized collision energies of 15, 25, 40. MS precursor mass range was set to 375 to 2000 m/z and 100 to 2000 for MS/MS. Automatic gain control for MS and MS/MS were 8 x 105 and 1 x 105 and injection time to reach AGC were 50 ms and 250 ms respectively. Exclude isotopes feature was set to “ON” and 60 s dynamic exclusion was applied. Data acquisition was performed with option of Lock mass (441.1200025 m/z) for all data.

### Data Protocol
Database searching for glycoproteomics was performed using publicly available software pGlyco Version 2.2.0 (PMID: 27139140, 28874712). Glycan database containing 8,092 entries, available with the software was used; Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries) were used as proteins sequence FASTA file. Cleavage specificity was set to fully tryptic with 2 missed cleavages and precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 5 and 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The results were filtered to retain only entries which had 1% FDR at glycopeptide level. Reporter ion quantification was performed on Proteome Discoverer 2.5 using “reporter ion quantifier” node and IDs were matched with quantitation on a scan-to-scan basis (MS/MS). Glycopeptide PSMs were combined to reflect unique glycopeptides per search and reporter ion intensities were summed up. MS/MS spectra were manually verified for glycan oxonium ions and quality. All sialic acid-containing glycopeptide spectra were verified for presence of sialic acid-specific oxonium ions (m/z of 274.09, 292.1 and 657.23). Core fucosylated glycopeptides spectra were checked for at least one peptide+HexNAc+Fuc ion. Proteomics dataset was searched using Sequest in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Covid-19, Multiplexed glycoprotoemics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


