### Accession
PXD028349

### Title
Proteomic and biological analysis of metformin senomorphics effects on the mesenchymal stromal cells

### Description
Senotherapeutics are new drugs, which can modulate senescence phenomena within tissues and reduces the onset of age-related pathologies. Senotherapeutics are divided in senolytics and senomorphics. The senolytics kill selectively senescent cells, while the senomorphics may delay or block the onset of senescence. Metformin is used for treatment of diabetes since several decades. Recently, it has been evidenced that metformin may have anti-aging properties by preventing DNA damage and inflammation. We evaluated the senomorphics effect of metformin on the biology human adipose mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) treated for six weeks with therapeutic doses of metformin. The study was combined with proteome analysis of changes occurring in MSCs intracellular and secretome protein composition, this to identify molecular pathways associated with the observed biological phenomena. The metformin reduced the replicative senescence and cell death phenomena, which are associated with prolonged in vitro cultivation. The continuous metformin supplementation delayed/reduced the impairment of MSC functions as evidenced by the presence of specific pathways in metformin treated samples: i) the alpha-adrenergic signaling, which contributes to regulation of MSCs physiological secretory activity; the signaling pathway associated with MSCs detoxification activity; the aspartate degradation pathway for optimal energy production. The senomorphics function of metformin seemed related to its reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging activity. In metformin treated samples, the CEBPA, TP53 and USF1 transcription factors appeared implicated in the regulation of several factors (SOD1, SOD2, CAT, GLRX, GSTP1) involved in blocking ROS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared with the InStage Tip digestion method described by Kulak and colleagues(Kulak, Pichler et al. 2014) . We collected 1x10 6 cells each sample and, after PBS washing, cells dissolved in 100 μL Lysis Buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 40mM CAA, 10mM TCEP, 25mM Tris-HCl pH:8,5). Lysates were boiled for 5 minutes and then were sonicated in an ice-filled ultrasonic water bath for 5 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 minutes, and proteins containing supernatants were collected. We mixed 20 μL of each supernatant with 280 ng Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA) containing a 40 μL dilution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, % 10 ACN), which we put into InStage tips previously prepared by using 3 SDB-RPS extraction disks (3M Emporem, MN, USA). Mixtures were incubated overnight at 37°C. Subsequently, 1,000 ng Trypsin-Gold (Promega, WI, USA) was added to the Stage Tips, mixed well, and incubated for 4 hours. Following the incubation step, a 140 μL loading buffer (1% TFA) was added to each tip and centrifuged at 2,000 g; then, the peptide-loadeddisks were washed four times with a 100 μL washing buffer. Peptides were eluted from disks in three fractions, according to their hydrophobic properties, by using 60 μL of each of the three elution buffers: SDB-RPS1 (100 mM Ammonium formate, 35% ACN, 0.5% Formic Acid), SDB-RPS2 (100 mM Ammonium formate, 55% ACN, 0.5% Formic Acid), and Buffer X (80% ACN, 0.125% Ammonia). Samples were lyophilized with SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until the LC-MS/MS analysis. Secretome Samples were prepared with OnBead Digestion method. MSC cultures were incubated in serum-free media for 24 hours; then, 5 mL of culture medium (secretome) was collected from each culture dish without disturbing the attached cells. Culture debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 minutes, and supernatants were used for the StartaClean beads protein pooling. Collected secretomes were incubated overnight with the beads; then, the beads were washed twice with TE Buffer (50 mM Tris 10 mM EDTA pH 7) and dried with a vacuum concentrator. The dried beads were resuspended at 2% (w/v) in a RapiGest (Agilent, CA, USA) solution containing TEAB (Sigma, MO, USA). Then, TCEP (Sigma, MO, USA) was added to the solution at a final concentration of 20 mM. Samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes and cooled on ice. IAA (Bio Rad, CA, USA) was added to sample solutions, and samples were incubated at RT for 15 min. Then, 200 ng Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA) was added to each sample and incubated for 4 hours at 37°C. After Lys-C incubation, 800 ng Trypsin-Gold (Promega, WI, USA) was added to each sample and incubated overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 minute; peptides containing supernatants were collected and acidified with 1% TFA before being loaded into Stage Tips. These tips were prepared with C18 material: they were washed with buffer B (% 0.1 Acetic Acid, 80% ACN) and equilibrated with buffer A (% 0.1 Acetic Acid). Acidified samples were loaded onto Stage Tips, and peptide-bounded tips were washed twice with buffer A. Following the washing, buffer B was added to the tips, and samples were eluted into collecting tubes with a syringe. Samples were dried with a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein Pilot 4.5 Beta were used for protein identification. Cys Alklation was selected as IAA and biological modifications were included. Homo sapiens proteome (29 Sep 2019; https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) downloaded from UniProt was used for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Senotherapeutics are new drugs that can modulate senescence phenomena within tissues and reduce the onset of age-related pathologies. Senotherapeutics are divided into senolytics and senomorphics. The senolytics selectively kill senescent cells, while the senomorphics delay or block the onset of senescence. Metformin has been used to treat diabetes for several decades. Recently, it has been proposed that metformin may have anti-aging properties as it prevents DNA damage and inflammation. We evaluated the senomorphic effect of 6&#xa0;weeks of therapeutic metformin treatment on the biology of human adipose mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). The study was combined with a proteome analysis of changes occurring in MSCs' intracellular and secretome protein composition in order to identify molecular pathways associated with the observed biological phenomena. The metformin reduced the replicative senescence and cell death phenomena associated with prolonged <i>in vitro</i> cultivation. The continuous metformin supplementation delayed and/or reduced the impairment of MSC functions as evidenced by the presence of three specific pathways in metformin-treated samples: 1) the alpha-adrenergic signaling, which contributes to regulation of MSCs physiological secretory activity, 2) the signaling pathway associated with MSCs detoxification activity, and 3) the aspartate degradation pathway for optimal energy production. The senomorphic function of metformin seemed related to its reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging activity. In metformin-treated samples, the CEBPA, TP53 and USF1 transcription factors appeared to be involved in the regulation of several factors (SOD1, SOD2, CAT, GLRX, GSTP1) blocking ROS.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stromal cells; senescence; senolytics; senomorphics

### Affiliations
Erciyes University Genkök
Erciyes University, Genome and Stem Cell Center, Kayseri,TURKEY

### Submitter
Servet ÖZCAN

### Lab Head
Dr Servet Özcan
Erciyes University, Genome and Stem Cell Center, Kayseri,TURKEY


