### Accession
PXD045918

### Title
Identification of YqfB enzyme expressed in colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 using LC-MS/MS proteomics

### Description
Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy is an emerging strategy for cancer treatment based on the delivery of a gene that encodes an enzyme that is able to convert a prodrug into a potent cytotoxin exclusively in target cancer cells. The aim of this study is to determine the capability of bacterial amidohydrolases to activate novel prodrugs and the effect such system has on the viability of eukaryotic cancer cells. HCT116 cancer cell line was subjected to LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis to confirm bacterial YqfB amidohydrolase expression at protein level.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were collected by scraping and suspended in lysis buffer. Whole cell extract was 8-fold enriched with 6x-His-tagged recombinant protein YqfB using Ni-NTA spin column. Ni-NTA column eluted protein fraction was subjected to digestion according to FASP protocol. Tryptic digests were analyzed in the data-independent-acquisition (DIA) mode MSE using Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) version 3.0.3 (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The following parameters were used to generate peak lists: low and elevated energy thresholds, 135 and 20 counts, respectively; reference mass correction window, 0.25 Da at 556.2771 Da/e. Processed data were analyzed using the following parameters: trypsin was selected as a primary digest reagent, one missed cleavage was permitted, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, carbamylation of lysine were set as variable modifications. Minimal identification criteria included 3 fragment ions per peptide, 7 fragment ions per protein, and a minimum of 1 peptide per protein. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 4%. Sequences (82,678 entries) retrieved from UniProt reference human proteome (UniProt ID: UP000005640), internal standard rabbit muscle glycogen phosphorylase sequence (UniProt ID: P00489) and YqfB and D8_RL enzyme sequences were used as a reference database.

### Publication Abstract
Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy is an emerging strategy for cancer treatment based on the delivery of a gene that encodes an enzyme that is able to convert a prodrug into a potent cytotoxin exclusively in target cancer cells. However, it is limited by the lack of suitable enzyme variants and a scarce choice of chemical bonds that could be activated. Therefore, this study is aimed to determine the capability of bacterial amidohydrolases YqfB and D8_RL to activate novel prodrugs and the effect such system has on the viability of eukaryotic cancer cells. We have established cancer cell lines that stably express the bacterial amidohydrolase genes and selected several N4-acylated cytidine derivatives as potential prodrugs. A significant decrease in the viability of HCT116 human colon cancer cell lines expressing either the YqfB or the D8_RL was observed after exposure to the novel prodrugs. The data we acquired suggests that bacterial YqfB and D8_RL amidohydrolases, together with the modified cytidine-based prodrugs, may serve as a promising enzyme-prodrug system for gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Colorectal cancer, Hct116, Yqfb

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 7, Vilnius, LT-10257, Lithuania

### Submitter
Gediminas Plakys

### Lab Head
Dr Rolandas Meškys
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 7, Vilnius, LT-10257, Lithuania


