### Accession
PXD018362

### Title
Organoid-trasplant model systems to study in vivo the effects of obesity on the pancreatic carcinogenesis

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality among adults in developed countries. The discovery of the most common genetic alterations as well as the development of organoids models of pancreatic cancer have provided insight into the fundamental pathways driving the progression from normal cell, to non-invasive precursor lesion, to widely metastatic disease, offering new opportunities for the discovery of key activated pathways along cancer progression.  Obesity is one of the most serious public health challenges of the 21st century. Several epidemiological studies have shown the positive association between obesity and cancer-related morbidity/mortality, as well as poor prognosis and poorer treatment outcome. Despite strong evidence indicates a link between obesity and cancer incidence, the molecular basis of the initiating events remains largely elusive. This is mainly due to the lack of an accurate and reliable model of pancreatic carcinogenesis that mimics human obesity-associated PDAC, making data interpretation difficult and often confusing.  Here we propose, to our knowledge, the best suitable and manageable preclinical tool, based on next-generation cell culture models, to study the effects of obesity on pancreatic carcinogenesis. Therefore we tracked the effects of obesity on the natural evolution of PDAC in a genetically-defined transplantable model of syngeneic murine pancreatic preneoplastic lesion (mP) and tumor (mT) derived organoids that recapitulates the progression of human disease from early preinvasive lesions to metastatic disease.  Our models indicated that both genetic- and diet-induced obesity promoted incidence engraftment rate and growth of both preneoplastic and neoplastic organoids, favoring pancreatic cancer progression and distant metastases dissemination. Our obesity models of carcinogenesis mimic the evolution of human pancreatic cancer pathology, promoting carcinogenesis and concomitant accumulation of a myeloid infiltrate. These changes in cancer immune infiltrate were also associated to a specific pattern of anti-inflammatory Th2 signature. Moreover, gene expression profile analysis revealed a change in gene expression programs that addresses cells to different pancreatic subtypes and stromal conditions. Our results suggest that organoid-derived transplants in obese mice represent a suitable system to study early step of carcinogenesis and support the hypothesis that inflammation induced by obesity stimulates tumor progression and metastatization during pancreatic carcinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve microliters of mouse sera were depleted of high abundant proteins using the Seppro Mouse spin column kit (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) following the manufacturer protocol. The method is used to bind mice Serum Albumin, IgG, Fibrinogen, Transferrin, IgM, Haptoglobin and alpha1-Antitrypsin and thus to increase the identification of low-abundant proteins. The sample was transferred into an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL 3 kDa centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) to collect the high molecular weight proteins. The sample was then subjected to denaturation with TFE, to reduction with DTT 200 mM, alkylation with IAM 200 mM and the complete protein trypsin digestion with 2 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide digests were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well Plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). After the desalting, the sample was vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μL of 0.05% formic acid in water. The sera proteins were analyzed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5–50 μL, interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 μL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes the samples were subjected to a data dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ionspray floating voltage (ISFV) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V.  For the label-free quantification the samples were subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25- Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Two DDA and three DIA acquisitions were performed.

### Data Protocol
The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both the software. For Mascot we used 2 missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass.  The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing mouse proteins (version 20july15, containing 23,304 sequence entries) was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%. The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality among adults in developed countries. The discovery of the most common genetic alterations as well as the development of organoid models of pancreatic cancer have provided insight into the fundamental pathways driving tumor progression from a normal cell to non-invasive precursor lesion and finally to widely metastatic disease, offering new opportunities for identifying the key driver of cancer evolution. Obesity is one of the most serious public health challenges of the 21st century. Several epidemiological studies have shown the positive association between obesity and cancer-related morbidity/mortality, as well as poorer prognosis and treatment outcome. Despite strong evidence indicates a link between obesity and cancer incidence, the molecular basis of the initiating events remains largely elusive. This is mainly due to the lack of an accurate and reliable model of pancreatic carcinogenesis that mimics human obesity-associated PDAC, making data interpretation difficult and often confusing. Here we propose a feasible and manageable organoid-based preclinical tool to study the effects of obesity on pancreatic carcinogenesis. Therefore, we tracked the effects of obesity on the natural evolution of PDAC in a genetically defined transplantable model of the syngeneic murine pancreatic preneoplastic lesion (mP) and tumor (mT) derived-organoids that recapitulates the progression of human disease from early preinvasive lesions to metastatic disease. Our results suggest that organoid-derived transplant in obese mice represents a suitable system to study early steps of pancreatic carcinogenesis and supports the hypothesis that inflammation induced by obesity stimulates tumor progression and metastatization during pancreatic carcinogenesis.

### Keywords
Obesity, Organoid models, Pancreatic cancer, Adipokines, Carcinogenesis

### Affiliations
Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy


