### Accession
PXD031004

### Title
Neurodegeneration and humoral response proteins in cerebrospinal fluid associate with pediatric-onset multiple sclerosis -- Discovery

### Description
The pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS) remains to be elucidated. Pediatric-onset MS (POMS) represents the earliest stage of the disease. CSF proteins in POMS may therefore provide causal information. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to analyze CSF proteins in children with an initial CNS acquired demyelinating syndrome (ADS) and to make a comparison between POMS and monophasic ADS (mADS). Patients were selected from two prospective pediatric ADS studies. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed in a Dutch discovery cohort (POMS n=28; mADS n=39). Parallel reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry was performed on selected proteins more abundant in POMS with ≥ 8 unique peptides in a combined Dutch and Canadian validation cohort (POMS n=48; mADS n=106).

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were reduced (5 mM DTT), alkylated (15 mM IAA), and digested with trypsin overnight (incubation at 37°C and gentle shaking). Digest was stopped and detergent (RapiGest) removed by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH < 2 followed by incubation (30 min at 37°C) and centrifugation (10’ at 10,000 g). Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germering, Germany) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digests were loaded onto a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å) and desalted for 10’ using 0.1% TFA in water at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å) and peptides were eluted using a binary gradient increasing solvent B from 4% to 38% over 90 minutes, whereby solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid. The column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and column oven temperature to 40°C.  For electrospray ionization, a nano ESI emitter (New Objective) was used and a spray voltage of 1.8 kV applied. For MS/MS analysis a data dependent acquisition method was used with a high resolution survey scan at 120,000 resolution performed in the Orbitrap, followed by consecutively isolation, fragmentation (HCD, 28% NCE) and detection (ion trap, AGC 10,000) of the peptide precursors detected in the survey scan until a duty cycle time of 3” was exceeded (‘Top Speed’ method). Precursor masses that were selected once for MS/MS were excluded for subsequent MS/MS fragmentation for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the human subset of uniport database (version 2015-11-12; 20,194 entries) using Mascot (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, UK) appying following parameters: proteolytic cleavage by trypsin, two missed cleavages allowed, oxidation of Met as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification, precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.5 u. Search results were post-processed with the software package Scaffold (version 3.6.3, Proteome Software, Portland, OR) to merge the individual search results, conduct protein grouping and calculate protein and peptide identification confidence levels (filter set to false discover rate <1%). For label-free quantification analysis, Progenesis LC-MS software package (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Waters, United Kingdom) were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Pediatrics, Multiple sclerosis, Proteomics, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


