### Accession
PXD021711

### Title
Proteomics reveals virulence-related proteins in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and Paracoccidioides lutzii yeast cells grown in the presence of L-dihydroxyphenylalanine

### Description
Species of the genus Paracoccidioides cause a systemic infection in human patients. Yeast cells of Paracoccidioides spp. produce melanin in the presence of L-dihydroxyphenylalanine and during infection, which may impact the pathogen survival into the host. To better understand the metabolic changes that occur in melanized Paracoccidioides spp. cells, a proteomic approach was performed to compare melanized and non-melanized Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and Paracoccidioides lutzii yeast cells. Melanization was conducted using L-dihydroxyphenylalanine as a precursor and quantitative proteomics was performed using reversed-phase chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry. When comparing melanized versus non-melanized cells, 999 and 577 differentially abundant proteins were identified for P. brasiliensis and P. lutzii, respectively. Functional enrichment and comparative analysis revealed 30 abundant biological processes in melanized P. brasiliensis and 18 in P. lutzii, while non-melanized cells from these species had 21 and 25 differentially abundant processes, respectively. Melanized cells presented abundance of other virulence-associated proteins, such as phospholipase, proteases, superoxide dismutase, heat-shock proteins, as well as proteins related to cell-wall remodeling and vesicular transport. The results suggest that L-dihydroxyphenilalanine increases virulence of Paracoccidioides spp. through a complex mechanism involving not only melanin, but other virulence factors as well.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Extracts containing total protein contents from melanized and non-melanized Pb18 and Pb01 strains were obtained by mechanical cellular disruption under liquid nitrogen. Extraction buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 2 mM CaCl2), supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete Mini®, Roche Diagnostics, Manheim, Germany) and zirconia beads of 0.5 mm diameter (BiospecProducts, Bartlesville, OK, USA), were added to the fungal lysates. A vigorous agitation of this mixture was performed on a Mini-Beadbeater (Biospec products) for five cycles of 30 s, intercalated with 1 min ice bath incubation. After this procedure, the material was centrifugated (10,000 g) for 15 min at 4 °C and the Bradford method was employed to determine protein contents, using bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich, Co.) for the generation of standard curves. The protein profiles of the fungal extracts were evaluated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Sample processing for shotgun proteomics For each sample, the volume equivalent to 100 μg was dried on a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, ThermoFischer Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) and then submitted to trypsin digestion. Samples were initially resuspended in 20 μL of 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea, followed by addition of 5 μL of 0.1 M dithiothreitol and incubation at 37 °C for 30 min. Then, 5 μL of 0.4 M iodoacetamide were added and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted by addition of 130 μL of Milli-Q water followed by trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) addition at 1/50 (m/m) of enzyme to substrate and sequencial incubation for 16 h at 37 °C and 45 min at 56 °C; reaction was stopped with 20 μL of 10 % (v/v) formic acid. Samples were desalted with in-lab generated columns packed with Poros R2 resin (Life Technologies). Columns were initially activated with 100% acetonitrile (CH3CN), followed by equilibration with 1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were applied to the columns and subjected to five washes with 0.1 % TFA solution. The elutions were carried out with four washes of 0.1 % TFA in 70 % CH3CN. Samples were dried on a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac) and stored at -20 °C until use. Prior to MS, each sample was resuspended in 20 μL of 1 % formic acid and its peptide concentration was estimated by absorbance measurement at 280 nm on a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFischer Scientific); all samples were normalized to 0.675 ug/uL. Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis The desalted tryptic digests from the 5 biological replicates from P. brasiliensis Pb18 and the 5 biological replicates from P. lutzii Pb01 were each analyzed in 3 technical replicates by reversed-phase nanochromatography coupled to high-resolution nanoelectrospray ionization mass spectrometry.  Chromatography was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFischer Scientific). Samples (4 µL per run) were initially applied, at 2 μL/min of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, to a 2-cm-long trap column (100 μm inner diameter), packed with Magic C18-AQ 200 Å 5 μm matrix (MichromBioresources, USA). Next, peptides were submitted to chromatographic separation on a 26-cm-long column (75 μm inner diameter), packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 1.9 μm matrix (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) directly into a laser-pulled capillary with a 4 μm tip. Fractionation was performed at 200 nL/min having 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phases A and B, respectively. Elutions were carried out by a gradient from 2 to 40 % B for 162 min; concentration was increased to 80 % B in 4 min, and maintained for 2 min more. The eluted peptides were introduced directly into a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap instrument. Ionization was achieved by applying 1.9 kV to the source, setting the capillary temperature to 250 °C, and RF level of the S-lenses at 60 V. The complete MS1 scans (300 to 1,500 m/z) were acquired in the profile mode with one microscan at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target value of 1×106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The 12 most intense precursor ions within both isolation window and offset of 2.0 and 0.5 m/z, respectively, were selected for HCD (higher energy collision dissociation) fragmentation with a collision energy normalized to 30 %. The MS2 spectra (200 to 2,000 m/z) were acquired in centroid mode with one microscan at 17,500 resolution and an AGC target value of 5×104 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, whereas peaks with unassigned charge or those with z=1 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation following mass spectrometry Data were analyzed using the PatternLab for Proteomics 4.0 pipeline. Separate reference databases were downloaded for each species from UniProt proteomes repository, comprising 8,811 entries for Pb01 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002059) and 8,399 entries for Pb18 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001628). The "Generate Search Database" tool was used to add, to each database, common contaminants and decoy (reverse) sequences for all entries. MS data from each species sample runs were searched against their specific database using the Comet search tool, which is integrated into PatternLab. The parameters were set as follows: precursor mass error tolerance of 40 ppm, trypsin as enzyme, semi-tryptic cleavage, maximum number of cleavage loss of 2, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modification and deamination of asparagine and/or glutamine (+0.98400 Da) as variable modifications. Values for fragment bin tolerance, fragment bin offset, and theoretical fragment ions were 0.02, 0, and default peak shape (flanking peaks), respectively. Spectral validation was performed using SEPro algorithm (Search Engine Processor); false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated from the number of decoy sequences identified, so that a maximum limit of 1% FDR, at peptide and protein levels, was established and only identifications with a mass error tolerance of 5 ppm were accepted. Unique peptide spectral count analysis was used for the quantitative comparisons between melanized and non-melanized cells of each species in the TFold module of PatternLab for Proteomics; normalization was done by total spectral count. Only proteins that were detected in at least three (out of five) biological replicates, for each condition, were submitted to relative quantitation with cut-off values for Benjamini–Hochberg q-value, F-stringency, and L-stringency of 0.01, 0.03 and 0.60, respectively; proteins that satisfied both the fold-change and statistical (p-value) criteria were further submitted to bionformatic analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Species of the genus <i>Paracoccidioides</i> cause a systemic infection in human patients. Yeast cells of <i>Paracoccidioides</i> spp. produce melanin in the presence of L-dihydroxyphenylalanine and during infection, which may impact the pathogen's survival in the host. To better understand the metabolic changes that occur in melanized <i>Paracoccidioides</i> spp. cells, a proteomic approach was performed to compare melanized and non-melanized <i>Paracoccidioides brasiliensis</i> and <i>Paracoccidioides lutzii</i> yeast cells. Melanization was induced using L-dihydroxyphenylalanine as a precursor, and quantitative proteomics were performed using reversed-phase nano-chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry. When comparing melanized versus non-melanized cells, 1006 and 582 differentially abundant/detected proteins were identified for <i>P. brasiliensis</i> and <i>P. lutzii</i>, respectively. Functional enrichment and comparative analysis revealed 30 important KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways in melanized <i>P. brasiliensis</i> and 18 in <i>P. lutzii</i>, while differentially abundant proteins from non-melanized cells from these species were involved in 21 and 25 enriched pathways, respectively. Melanized cells presented an abundance of additional virulence-associated proteins, such as phospholipase, proteases, superoxide dis-mutases, heat-shock proteins, adhesins, and proteins related to vesicular transport. The results suggest that L-dihydroxyphenylalanine increases the virulence of <i>Paracoccidioides</i> spp. through complex mechanisms involving not only melanin but other virulence factors as well.

### Keywords
Virulence, Paracoccidioides, L-dihydroxyphenylalanine, Proteomics, Melanin

### Affiliations
Mycology Laboratory, Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fiocruz, Brazil
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz

### Submitter
Richard Hemmi Valente

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Almeida-Paes
Mycology Laboratory, Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fiocruz, Brazil


