### Accession
PXD023933

### Title
Comparative proteome research in a zebrafish model for Vanishing White Matter disease

### Description
Vanishing white matter (VWM) disease is a genetic leukodystrophy leading to severe neurological disease and early death. VWM is caused by bi-allelic mutations in any of the five genes encoding the subunits of the eukaryotic translation factor 2B (EIF2B). Although previous studies are being attempted to investigate the molecular mechanism of VWN by constructing variant models for each subunit of EIF2B that causes VWM disease. The underlying molecular mechanism of how mutations (MT) in EIF2B3 result in VWM is unknown. Based on our recently report, we constructed an eif2b3 knockout (eif2b3-/-) zebrafish (Danio rerio) model and performed quantitative proteomic analysis between the wide type (WT) and eif2b3-/- models to identify 25 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). A total of 4 proteins were significantly up-regulated, and 21 proteins were significantly down-regulated in eif2b3-/- larvae compared to WT, respectively. Representatively, Lon protease and neutral amino acid transporter SLC1A4 were significantly increased in truncated eif2b3 zebrafish, and crystallin proteins were also significantly decreased. In conclusion, this study proposed the candidate proteins as a key regulator related to the progression of VWN disease through quantitative proteomic analysis in the first variant model of VWN disease.

### Sample Protocol
Animal experiments were conducted according to approved guidelines and regulations of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the Animal Ethics Committee of Chungnam National University (CNU-00866). Adult fish were reared under standard conditions with a 14h/10h light/dark cycle. We obtained embryos by natural mating and zebrafish were reared in egg water at 28.5°C. WT zebrafish were obtained from the Zebrafish Center for Disease Modeling (ZCDM). The deyolked zebrafish embryos from each group were lysed with ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) containing protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using homogenizer. Sonication applied directly to all samples for 2 min (output 30%, 5-sec on and off intervals) on ice and centrifuged at 4°C at 16,000 × g for 10 min. The soluble fractions moved into new sample tubes, and the protein concentration measured using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).     We placed 100 μg of the protein samples (n=3) from each group to new sample tubes and added 5 mM of dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) and incubated at 56°C for 30 min, followed by treatment with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark condition for 30 min. Then, ice-cold acetone added slowly to the samples for protein precipitation and kept for 18 hr at -20°C freezer. The samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 16,000 × g for 10 min and supernatants were removed. The protein pellets dissolved in 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich) and the protein concentration measured again. The pH was adjusted to 8 and trypsin (1:50) was directly added to the sample and left to digest for 18 hr at 37°C. Finally, 1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) added to complete the trypsin digestion. The peptides dried in speed vac dryer at low temperature and directly dissolved in 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide for 2-plex TMT labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After checking the peptide concentration using a Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equal amounts of peptides from WT and eif2b3-/- group were labeled (n=3) and placed in one sample tube. The pooled peptide samples fractionated using a Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The fractionated samples dissolved in 10 μL of 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid solution, and 500 ng of each fraction was loaded onto a nano-LC 1D plus system (Eksigent, MA, USA) consisting of an in-house C18 resin (5 µm Proteo 100 Å; Phenomenex Inc., CA, USA) and a capillary column (ID 75 µm, OD 150 µm; Molex, IL, USA). Elution was conducted using a gradient liquid chromatography method (5%–25% acetonitrile for 90 min) and analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode at the Mass Spectrometry Convergence Research Center. The m/z data collection range was set at m/z 300–1,800, and higher-energy collisional dissociation collision mode was used for fragmentation. All mass spectra data were input to MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 to obtain bioinformatics information, and the zebrafish proteome database (updated 10/25/2018) was downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000437). GO, InterPro, and KEGG pathways were analyzed using DAVID Functional Annotation Bioinformatics Microarray Analysis (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Perseus 1.6.0.7 was used for clustering protein groups depending on the protein regulation patterns. The STRING analytical tool (https://string-db.org/) was used to search specific protein networks according to regulation differences resulting from mutation of eif2b3.

### Publication Abstract
Vanishing white matter (VWM) disease is a genetic leukodystrophy leading to severe neurological disease and early death. VWM is caused by bi-allelic mutations in any of the five genes encoding the subunits of the eukaryotic translation factor 2B (EIF2B). Previous studies have attempted to investigate the molecular mechanism of VWN by constructing models for each subunit of EIF2B that causes VWM disease. The underlying molecular mechanisms of the way in which mutations in EIF2B3 result in VWM are largely unknown. Based on our recent results, we generated an <i>eif2b3</i> knockout (<i>eif2b3<sup>-/-</sup></i>) zebrafish model and performed quantitative proteomic analysis between the wild-type (WT) and <i>eif2b3<sup>-/-</sup></i> zebrafish, and identified 25 differentially expressed proteins. Four proteins were significantly upregulated, and 21 proteins were significantly downregulated in <i>eif2b3<sup>-/-</sup></i> zebrafish compared to WT. Lon protease and the neutral amino acid transporter SLC1A4 were significantly increased in <i>eif2b3<sup>-/-</sup></i> zebrafish, and crystallin proteins were significantly decreased. The differential expression of proteins was confirmed by the evaluation of mRNA levels in <i>eif2b3<sup>-/-</sup></i> zebrafish, using whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis. This study identified proteins which candidates as key regulators of the progression of VWN disease, using quantitative proteomic analysis in the first EIF2B3 animal model of VWN disease.

### Keywords
Vanishing white matter disease, Eif2b3, Slc1a4, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea
College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Doeun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea


