### Accession
PXD019087

### Title
TEX15 is an essential executor of MIWI2-directed transposon DNA methylation and silencing.

### Description
The PIWI protein MIWI2 and its associated PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) instruct DNA methylation of young active transposable elements (TEs) in the male germline. Here we show that MIWI2 associates with TEX15 in foetal gonocytes. TEX15 is predominantly a nuclear protein that is not required for piRNA biogenesis but is essential for piRNA-directed TE de novo methylation and silencing. In summary, TEX15 is an essential executor of mammalian piRNA-directed DNA methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was lysed in 1ml IP buffer (100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.2% Tergitol NP-40) with complete protease inhibitor EDTA-free (Invitrogen) plus/minus 25 µg/ml RNase A (Sigma) and incubated 30 min at 4˚C. Lysates were cleared for 5 min at 21,000 rcf and the supernatant incubated with cross-linked anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce) for 30 min at 4 ˚C .  Beads were washed four times in IP buffer followed by two flash washes on the magnet in KCless buffer (5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100) and elution in 100 µl 0.5 % SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0. Proteins were digetsed using FASP methodology, desalted using STAGE tip and resuspended in 0.1%TFA. Peptides were resolved on EasySpray column connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Data were acquired using data-dependent methodology. Standard MS parameters were used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using Maxquant 1.6.0.1 using standard settings, and search results were processed using Perseus using AP-MS experiment processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
The PIWI protein MIWI2 and its associated PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) instruct DNA methylation of young active transposable elements (TEs) in the male germline. piRNAs are proposed to recruit MIWI2 to the transcriptionally active TE loci by base pairing to nascent transcripts, however the downstream mechanisms and effector proteins utilized by MIWI2 in directing de novo TE methylation remain incompletely understood. Here, we show that MIWI2 associates with TEX15 in foetal gonocytes. TEX15 is predominantly a nuclear protein that is not required for piRNA biogenesis but is essential for piRNA-directed TE de novo methylation and silencing. In summary, TEX15 is an essential executor of mammalian piRNA-directed DNA methylation.

### Keywords
Mouse transposon silencing

### Affiliations
WCB, 
The University of Edinburgh
1. MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK.  2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.

### Submitter
Tania Auchynnikava

### Lab Head
Dr Donal O'Carroll
1. MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK.  2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.


