### Accession
PXD019564

### Title
S-glutathionylation proteome profiling of Streptococcus mutans

### Description
S-glutathionylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM) process that targets the protein cysteine thiol by the addition of glutathione (GSH). This modification can prevent proteolysis from over-oxidation of protein cysteine residue during the condition of oxidative or nitrosative stress. Recent studies suggest that protein S-glutathionylation plays an essential role in control of cell-signaling pathways by affecting the protein function in bacteria and even humans. In this study, we investigated the impacts of S-glutathionylation on physiological regulation within Streptococcus mutans, the primary etiological agent of human dental caries. To determine S-glutathionylated proteins in bacteria, the Cys-reactive isobaric reagents iodoTMT (iodoacetyl Tandem Mass Tag) were used to label the S-glutathionylated Cys sites and anti-TMT antibody conjugated resins were used to enrich the modified peptides. Proteome profiling identified a total of 357 glutathionylated cysteines sites on 239 proteins. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these S-glutathionylated proteins were involved in diverse important biological processes, such as pyruvate metabolism and glycolysis

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The three groups (WT, AB, T) were treated in same way, cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer (250 mM HEPES, 2% SDS, pH 7.0), N-acetylmaleimide (NEM) was added to the lysis buffer for blocking the free thiols (final concentration was 100 mM), the samples were then sonicated 12 times of 10 s for each time followed by intervals of 30 s on ice for cooling. The remaining unbroken cells and debris were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and incubated for 30 min at 55 °C in darkness. Then, the protein was precipitated with 6 times volume of pre-cooled acetone for 4 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was re-dissolved in the buffer (8 M urea, 250 mM HEPES, 0.1% SDS, pH 7.5) and transferred to the ultrafiltration tube (0.5 ml, 10 KDa, Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) for replacing the buffer to enzymatic reaction buffer (1 M urea, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5). Finally, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, JiangSu, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database search The fragmentation data were then processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against the Streptococcus mutans database containing 10523 sequences and concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages and 5 modification per peptide. The mass error for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search, 5 ppm for the main search, and the mass error for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Identified peptides with lengths of at least seven amino acid residues were used for further analysis. S-glutathionylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, iodoTMT-6plex var, acetylation of protein N-terminal and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. Quantitation methods was set to iodoTMT-6plex. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptides and modification sites were adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S-glutathionylation; streptococcus mutans; post-translational modification

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Xian Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Xian
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


