### Accession
PXD030280

### Title
DNR pulse treatment of primary AML

### Description
Primary human AML bone marrow sample (newly diagnosed, prior to treatment initation) was obtained from donor after consent and AML blasts were isolated by standard Ficoll centrifugation. AML blasts were pulse-treated with daunorubicine (100 nM, 200 nM, 400 nM) or DMSO control for 1 hour, followed by wash-out and short-term cell culture to allow cellular responses to develop. 20,000 cells were analysed by LC-MS3, and 5,000 cells were subjected to flow cytometry apoptosis assay.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were transferred to StageTips (three punches with a 14-gauge blunt-end needle of Whatman QM-A grade SiO2 mesh (GE Life Sciences) pre-wet with PBS in 20 µl gel loading tips (Rainin LTS) {Myers et al., 2019}, collected onto the filter by centriguation (400 g, 3 min) and washed 3x with 150 µl PBS (400 g, 3 min). All next steps until TMT labeling were carried out within these filter StageTips. The tip was kinked below the quartz filter and forced into a 10 µl pipette tip to create a tight seal. The StageTip tops were then sealed with Parafilm tape and stored at -80 °C. For cell lysis, StageTips were thawed, and 15 µl fresh lysis buffer (1 % w/v sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.5, 0.5 mM TCEP, 2 mM 2-chloro-N,N-diethylacetamide) was added to the filter, followed by 1 µl of 10 U/µl Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich, E8263). After incubation at 37 °C for 30 min while shaking, samples were digested with 100 ng LysC (Wako Chemicals, Osaka, Japan) and 50 ng Trypsin (Promega) overnight in Parafilm-sealed StageTips at 37 °C (total volume 20 µl, acetonitrile (ACN) added to 20 % v/v). Digested peptides were transferred into 1.5 ml Eppendorf LoBind tubes by centrifugation (400 g, 3 min).  For TMT labeling, 4.71 µl of 100 % ACN and 1 µl of TMT reagent were added to peptides in solution and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Subsequently, reactions were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5 % at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were pooled in equimolar ratios for each channel as determined after a single injection measurement by LC-MS, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH of 2–3; 2 volumes of isopropranol were added, and peptides were purified using SDP-RPS resin material (3M Empore) {Kulak et al., 2014} and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were fractionated by offline high-pH reverse phase fractionation into 24 fractions. C18 (3M Empore) stagetips were washed with 100% ACN twice, followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded in 0.1 % TFA and washed with water. Elution was performed stepwise with different ACN concentrations in 0.1% triethylamine solution (5–24 % in 1 % steps, followed by 26 %, 30 %, 35 %, 50 %). The 24 fractions were cross-concatenated into 8 fractions and dried for LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Samples were shot on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in centroid mode. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % FA and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 35 cm long, 75 µm fused-silica column packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile in water (buffer B). Each peptide fraction was eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 %–30 % B over 90 min, followed by a stepwise increase to 95 % B in 6 min, which was held for another 9 min. Full scan MS spectra (350–1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4x105 and a data dependent mode cycle time of 1.5 s between MS scans. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 6 were isolated using a 0.7 Th window and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% for 10 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired in the IonTrap (Turbo) with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 1.5x104. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s after 1 time. MS3 scans were performed with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS1) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with a NCE of 50 % and detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at 200 m/z, scan range of 100–500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5x105 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms.  Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings. Database searches were performed using SequestHT node in PD against trypsin-digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2020-03-12) with static modifications set as TMTpro (N-terminal, +304.207 Da), and diethylcarbamidomethylation (Cys, +113.084 Da). Dynamic modifications were set as methionine oxidation (Met, +15.995 Da), acetylation (protein N-terminus, +42.0.11 Da) and TMTpro (Lys, +304.207 Da). After search, identifications were validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy and FDR was estimated using q-values calculated by Percolator, applying 1 % and 5 % cut-offs for high and medium confidence hits. Only high-confidence hits were accepted for further analysis. Consensus workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Sample loss and contamination are critical preanalytical pitfalls in microscale proteomic applications of nonadhering cells. Common assays and workflows are not easily adoptable to microscale sample sizes of suspension cells due to inadvertent sample loss. This impedes preanalytical experimental manipulation of limited suspension cell samples for microscale proteomics applications, such as encountered for primary human materials. Here, we describe and test a simple manual batch technique for single-step 100-fold concentration of scarce numbers of diluted suspension cells (down to 5000 cells) by volume reduction, facilitating microscale experiments with suspension cells. Pipette tips with heat-sealed orifices (SpinTips) are manufactured within 1 min and serve as versatile microcentrifugation vessels from which supernatant can be aspirated with minimal cell loss. A residual volume of approximately 3 &#x3bc;L can be achieved without visualization of the cell pellet. The results show that SpinTips enable the concentration, medium exchange, washing, and culture of highly limited amounts of suspension cells for functional manipulation and microscale proteomics and are readily incorporated into standard workflows. The application is illustrated by profiling ex vivo responses of primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells from one AML patient to daunorubicin (DNR) to a depth of 3462 quantified proteins with excellent repeatability.

### Keywords
Aml, Dnr

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany & Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Koschade

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Muench
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


