### Accession
PXD009623

### Title
Characterization of cerebrospinal fluid via data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine neurodegenerative diseases in order to identify suitable diagnostic biomarkers. In the field of neuroproteomics the most popular mass spectrometry-based strategy for biomarker discovery studies is data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. In this study we evaluate the use of DIA for native CSF analytics with particular focus on spectral library generation for data analysis, DIA data reproducibility and identification of brain specific proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were in-solution digested. Therefore, 20 µL of CSF were mixed with 20 µL 0.2% RapiGest (Waters). After adding dithiotreitol (DDT) to a final concentration of 5 mM samples were incubated for 30 min at 60°C. For cysteine alkylation iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (Serva) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped and RapiGest precipitated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% by subsequent incubation for 45 min at 37°C. After centrifugation the supernatant was collected and the peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis (AAA). According to AAA 500 ng per sample were taken for MS analysis and spiked with 1 µl HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland).  Blood samples  were in-gel digested. 30 µg of whole blood were loaded to a polyacrylamide gel (12% acrylamide/bisacrylamide) and were separated for 15 min at 50 V, protein bands were cut into small pieces. Proteins were treated as described above with the following changes: DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, IAA to a final concentration of 55 mM. Digestion was performed as described above. Peptides were eluted by washing the gel pieces two times with 80% ACN/50 mM ammonia bicarbonate and finally with 2% ACN/50 mM ammonia bicarbonate. The supernatant was collected, vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentrations were determined by AAA and subsequently 500 ng per sample were taken for MS analysis and spiked with 1 µl HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland).  Substantia nigra tissue was fractionated via gel electrophoresis and in-gel digested. For this, 100 mg substantia nigra tissue was homogenized in 400 µL RIPA buffer (cell signalling). Following, glass beads were added to the lysate and a sonication of the sample was performed with an ultrasound probe (Potter S. Homogenizer, B. Braun; amplitude 90, power 50%, 4 times 1 min). After this, the sample was washed of the glass beads (Ø 1.25 – 1.65 nm; Ø 0.25 – 0.5 nm; Carl Roth) with 50 µL ultrapure water and sonicated in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath six times for 10 sec. After this, the protein concentration of the cell lysate was determined via Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufactures protocol. An acetone precipitation was performed overnight. For this, 40 µg cell lysate was solved 1:4 (v/v) in acetone (J.T. Baker) and stored at -20 °C overnight. After this, gel electrophoresis was performed. 40 µg precipitated proteins were loaded on a NuPAGETM 4-12% BisTris gel as well as on a NuPAGETM 3-8% Tris-Acetate gel (both from Fisher Scientific). Gel electrophoresis was performed at 200 mA and 200 W per gel, the voltage profile was as following: 50 V for 15 min and 180 V for 50 min. After this, gels were stained with Coomassie Blue Staining (SimpleBlueTM SafeStain, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufactures protocol. Protein lanes were cut into single fractions (in total 18) and destained and pH adjusted by incubating the gel pieces for 10 min with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) as well as 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% (v/v) 100% acetonitrile (Merck KGaA) three times alternately. After the second incubation with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, samples were treated with 50 µL 10 mM DTT (AppliChem GmbH) for 1 h at 56 °C and with 50 µL 50 mM IAA (Merck KGaA) for 45 min at room temperature before the destaining protocol was continued. Finally, gel pieces were dried in a vacuum concentrator (RVC2-25CD plus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen) and resuspended in 6 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was initiated by adding 6 µL of trypsin solution (0.012 µg/µL, Promega Corp.) and was performed overnight. The digestion was stopped and peptides eluted by incubating the gel pieces two times for 15 min with 30 µL of a 1:1 solution containing 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA (Merck KGaA) in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath. Samples were transferred in MS vials, dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 15 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Finally, samples were spiked with 1 injection volume of iRT peptides (Biognosys) before they were analyzed via HPLC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by Proteome Discovere 1.4 and Spectronaut 9.  For analysis with Proteome Discoverer the recorded spectra were matched to peptides by the search algorithm Mascot, Matrix Science, London, UK) using a database containing the human Swiss-Prot part of UniProt-KB (version 2.5) and additionally the HRM calibration peptide sequences (all together 20,205 protein entries). Trypsin was selected as digestion enzyme with two maximum missed cleavage sites. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 mmu. Oxidation at methionine was set as dynamic modification, carbamidomethylation as static modification at cysteine. Using the target decoy PSM validator decoy database search was performed with target FDR of 1%). For analysis with Spectronaut different spectral libraries were generated by using Spectronaut 9.0 (Biognosys). Therefore, different .MSF files from PD were uploaded to the “Prepare” perspective of Spectronaut and treated with the following settings: for identification only peptides with high confidence level (equals a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%) were considered and protein inference was performed by Spectronaut. Spectral Library Filters were set to no missed cleavage filters, no peptide charge filters, number of best fragment ions between 3 and 6 in a mass range of 300 – 1800 m/z. The first library (library A) consisted of five .MSF files of untreated CSF samples. The second library (library B) was generated by using library A plus 5 .MSF files of analyzed whole blood. The third library (library C) contained library A and additional 54 .MSF files originating from human substantia nigra analyses. The fourth library (library D) combined library B. These Libraries were used to analyze native CSF measured in data-independent (DIA) mode, subdividing a mass range of 400 – 1000 m/z into 30 isolation windows with an equal width of 20 m/z and one full scan with a loop cycle of 10. The full MS was performed with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maximum injection time). DIA analysis was operated with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 1e6, auto maximum injection time, default charge state 2). This ended up in a cycle time of approx. 2.2 s. The .RAW files were converted into .HTRMS files by using the Raw to HTRMS Converter Professional provided by Biognosys. Those .HTRMS files were analyzed via Spectronaut 9.0 in the “Review” perspective by applying the four different libraries in single experiments. The following settings were applied: dynamic XIC RT Extraction Window, enabled Interference Correction, enabled Cross Run Normalization, quantitation on MS2 level, automatic Protein Inference Workflow and p-value normal distribution estimator. All results were filtered by a Q value of 0.01 at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine diseases of the central nervous system through analyzing its components. These include the analysis of metabolites, cells as well as proteins. For identifying new suitable diagnostic protein biomarkers bottom-up data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry-based approaches are most popular. Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. It overcomes several limitations of DDA, since it combines the benefits of DDA and targeted methods like selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We established a DIA method for in-depth proteome analysis of CSF. For this, four spectral libraries were generated with samples from native CSF ( n = 5), CSF fractionation (15 in total) and substantia nigra fractionation (54 in total) and applied to three CSF DIA replicates. The DDA and DIA methods for CSF were conducted with the same nanoLC parameters using a 180 min gradient. Compared to a conventional DDA method, our DIA approach increased the number of identified protein groups from 648 identifications in DDA to 1574 in DIA using a comprehensive spectral library generated with DDA measurements from five native CSF and 54 substantia nigra fractions. We also could show that a sample specific spectral library generated from native CSF only increased the identification reproducibility from three DIA replicates to 90% (77% with a DDA method). Moreover, by utilizing a substantia nigra specific spectral library for CSF DIA, over 60 brain-originated proteins could be identified compared to only 11 with DDA. In conclusion, the here presented optimized DIA method substantially outperforms DDA and could develop into a powerful tool for biomarker discovery in CSF. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifiers PXD010698, PXD010708, PXD010690, PXD010705, and PXD009624.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Spectral library, Cerebrospinal fluid, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center ZKF 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center ZKF 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany


