### Accession
PXD041861

### Title
Perforin-2 is a pore-forming effector of endocytic escape in cross-presenting dendritic cells

### Description
This study searched for cell-type specific effectors of endocytic escape in dendritic cells and identified a pore-forming protein, perforin-2 (encoded by Mpeg1), as a dedicated effector exclusive to cross-presenting cells. Whole cell proteomics identified differences in the abundance of tryptic and semi-tryptic (cleaved) perforin-2 peptides between control MutuDCs and cells treated with BafA, CpG or with knockout of asparagine endopeptidase (AEP). This revealed how perforin-2 undergoes proteolytic cleavage releasing its pore forming domain into the organellar lumen.

### Sample Protocol
Cell were lysed in 2.5% (w/v) SDS/50mM Tris pH 8 and incubated at 72°C  for 5min. Lysates were sonicated at 4 °C to break-up DNA. For each sample, 100 µg protein was precipitated by the addition of 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone, incubated at −20°C overnight and pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C for 5min at 10,000×g. All subsequent steps were performed at room temperature. Precipitated protein pellets were air-dried, resuspended in 50 µl digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.1, 8M Urea, 1mM DTT) and incubated for 20min. Protein was alkylated by addition of 5mM iodoacetamide for 20min (in the dark) and then enzymatically digested by addition of LysC (1mg per 50mg of protein) for an overnight incubation. Digests were then diluted four-fold with 50mM Tris pH 8.1 before addition of Trypsin (1mg per 50mg of protein) for 4 hours. The peptide mixtures were then acidified to 1% (v/v) TFA. For each sample, 20 µg peptides were loaded onto an SDB-RPS StageTip for peptide cleanup and triple fractionation as previously described. StageTips were activated by washing with 100 µl acetonitrile, followed by 100 µl 30% (v/v) methanol, 1% (v/v) TFA, and then 100 µl 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptide mixtures in 1% TFA were loaded onto activated StageTips and washed with 100 µl isopropanol and then 100 µl 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were then eluted successively using 20µL SDB-RPSx1 (100mM ammonium formate, 40% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid), then 20µL SDB-RPSx2 (150mM ammonium formate, 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid), then 30µL SDB-RPSx3 (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide). Peptides were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 10µL Buffer A* (0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile). For proteomic analysis of BafA1 and CpG induced changes in the abundance of perforin-2 peptides, peptides were loaded on a 50 cm by 75 µm inner diameter column, packed in-house with 1.8 µm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography was performed using an EASY‐nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), running a linear gradient over 95 min at 300 nl/min flow rate and 55 °C. The gradient ran from buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) containing 5% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to buffer A containing 30% buffer B. Runs were separated by 5 min wash-outs with 95% buffer B and re-equilibration. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method that dynamically excludes precursors picked during the last 30 seconds. MS1 survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in a 300-1650 Th range. The maximum injection time was 20 ms for up to 3e6 target ions, as determined with predictive automatic gain control. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation of ions isolated from a 1.4 Th window. The maximum injection time was 28 ms for 1e5 target ions. MS2 fragment scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in a 200-200,000 Th range. For proteomic analysis of perforin-2 peptides in AEP knockout cells, peptides were  loaded on a 50 cm by 75 µm inner diameter column, as above. Peptide separation by reverse  phase chromatography was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific),  running a linear gradient over 100 min at 300 nl/min flow rate and 50 °C. The gradient ran from buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) containing 5% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid), to buffer A containing 30% buffer B in 84 min, followed by an increase to 60% buffer B in 8 min, a further increase to 95% buffer B in 4 min, and a constant phase at 95% buffer B for 4 min. Runs were separated by 5 min wash-outs with 95% buffer B and re-equilibration. The LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method as described above. The maximum injection time for MS1 survey scans was 25 ms for up to 3e6 target ions. MS2 fragment scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with a scan range starting from 100 Th.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed in MaxQuant Version 1.6.10.43, using the  mouse SwissProt canonical and isoform protein database, retrieved from UniProt (2019_10_22; www.uniprot.org). Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ  algorithm. No matching between runs was used. To detect peptide fragments resulting from  other cleavage events than the in-solution digest with LysC and trypsin, the enzyme mode was set to semi-specific. LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1 and default parameters were used for all other settings. To assess abundance of peptides independent of protein abundance changes, peptide  intensities were divided by their corresponding protein intensities. Data were filtered for 3 valid values in at least one experimental condition and then subjected to a two-sided student’s t-test. Multiple hypothesis correction was done by permutation based FDR with s0=0.1 using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
During initiation of antiviral and antitumor T cell-mediated immune responses, dendritic cells (DCs) cross-present exogenous antigens on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Cross-presentation relies on the unusual "leakiness" of endocytic compartments in DCs, whereby internalized proteins escape into the cytosol for proteasome-mediated generation of MHC I-binding peptides. Given that type 1 conventional DCs excel at cross-presentation, we searched for cell type-specific effectors of endocytic escape. We devised an assay suitable for genetic screening and identified a pore-forming protein, perforin-2 (<i>Mpeg1</i>), as a dedicated effector exclusive to cross-presenting cells. Perforin-2 was recruited to antigen-containing compartments, where it underwent maturation, releasing its pore-forming domain. <i>Mpeg1</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice failed to efficiently prime CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells to cell-associated antigens, revealing an important role for perforin-2 in cytosolic entry of antigens during cross-presentation.

### Keywords
Antigen, Cross-presentation, Perforin-2, Dendritic cells

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Alexandra Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H. H. Borner
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


