### Accession
PXD038283

### Title
Robust high throughput proteomics identification and deami-dation quantitation of extinct species up to Pleistocene with Ultrahigh Resolution MALDI-FTICR Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry allows the identification of bone species based on their type I collagen sequence. In archaeological or paleontological field, PMF is known as ZooMS and is widely implement-ed to find markers for most species, including the extinct ones. In addition to the identification of bone species, ZooMS enables dating estimation by measuring the deamidation value of specific peptides. Herein, we report several enhancements to the classical ZooMS technique, which reduces to ten-fold the required bone sample amount (down to milligram scale) and achieves robust deamidation value calculation in a high throughput manner. These improvements rely on a 96-well plates samples preparation, a careful optimization of collagen extraction and digestion to avoid spurious posttranslational modifi-cations production and peptide mass fingerprinting at high resolution using MALDI-FTICR (Matrix Assisted Desorption Ionization Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance) analysis. This method was applied to the identification of a hun-dred bones of herbivores from the Middle Paleolithic site of Caours (Somme, Northern France) well dated from the Eemian Last Interglacial climatic optimum. The method gave reliable species identification to bones already identified by their oste-omorphology, as well as to more challenging bone samples consisting of small or burnt bone fragments. The obtained de-amidation values of bones originating from the same geological layers have a low standard deviation. The method can be applied to archaeological bone remains and offers a robust capacity to identify traditionally unidentifiable bone fragments, thus increasing the number of identified specimens and providing invaluable information in specific contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins digestion on plate. Bone proteins were analyzed by a modified MStern method.28 All solutions were eluted through the wells using a vacuum manifold (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) pumped by a DS 102 Rotary Vane Pump (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA). The wells of a 0.45 μm hydrophobe-high protein binding Immobilon-P membrane plate (MSIPS4510, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) were prepared by washing them 3 times with 100 µL of 70% ethanol flowed through the filter. In each well, 1 mg of bone powder was deposited and 200 µL of demineraliza-tion solution (5% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) were added. The plate was incubated at room temperature for 4 h with shaking on vortex Genie2 (Scientific Industries Inc, Bohe-mia, NY, USA). The demineralization solution with TFA was recovered in a V-bottom well collecting plate by ap-plying vacuum. 8 µL of NaOH 6 M and 100 µL of 100 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) pH 8.8 were added. The plate was kept at 4°C for digestion. The bone powder in each well was washed three times with 100 µL of diges-tion buffer (50 mM ABC, pH 8.8). The plate was incubat-ed at 65 °C for 1 h on a heating stirrer MHR23 (Hettich, Tuttlingen, Germany) for collagen gelatinization. The di-gestion of bone powder and demineralization solution with TFA was performed by adding 0.5 μg of sequencing grade trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubat-ing the mixture at 37 °C overnight with shaking on a heat-ing stirrer MHR23. Peptides from bone powder were recov-ered in a V-bottom well collecting plate by applying vacu-um and the plate was washed two times with elution buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.8). Tryptic peptides from bones pow-der and demineralization solution were concentrated on TurboVap 96 Evaporator (Caliper LifeScience, Hopkinton, MA, USA) for 2 h at 37 °C on air flux. Tryptic peptides were desalted on 96 wells plates C18 (Affinisep, Petit-Couronne, France). Briefly, the plate was washed once with 500 µL of ACN (acetonitrile) followed by a washing step for 3 successive times with 80% ACN, H2O 0.5% ace-tic acid and another washing repeated for 3 times with H2O 0.5% acetic acid. Tryptic peptides from bones powder and demineralization solution were resuspended in 200 µL of H2O, 0.5% acetic acid. Tryptic peptides form both solu-tions were transferred to C18 96 wells plate and eluted with vacuum manifold. The plate was washed 3 times with 200 µL of H2O, 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were recovered in a V-bottom well collecting plate using 100 µL of 80% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid and 100 µL of ACN. The plate was evaporated on TurboVap 96 Evaporator. Before analysis, each sample was resuspended in 10 µL of H2O, 0.1% for-mic acid.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics for MALDI data. MS raw data from MALDI-TOF were processed using Data Explorer 4800. Peaks were detected with a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) > 3, quality 0.6. MS raw data from MALDI FTICR were pro-cessed using DataAnalysis 5.0. SNAP algorithm was em-ployed with the following parameters of S/N > 3 and quali-ty 0.6. The procedure for the calculation of the deami-dation extent from MALDI TOF was based on “q2e” package. 20 Bio informatics for LC-MS/MS data. Proteomics data were processed with Proteome Discoverer against a home-made database containing 1,765 collagen sequences ex-tracted from NCBi database (All_Collagen, downloaded 08-2019, database information is avaible in Supporting Information S2) restricted to Mammalian with Sequest search engine. Three missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass error for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS were tolerated. Methio-nine and proline oxidation as well as asparagine and glu-tamine deamidation were selected as variable modifica-tions.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry allows the identification of bone species based on their type I collagen sequence. In the archaeological or paleontological field, PMF is known as zooarchaeology mass spectrometry (ZooMS) and is widely implemented to find markers for most species, including the extinct ones. In addition to the identification of bone species, ZooMS enables dating estimation by measuring the deamidation value of specific peptides. Herein, we report several enhancements to the classical ZooMS technique, which reduces to 10-fold the required bone sample amount (down to the milligram scale) and achieves robust deamidation value calculation in a high-throughput manner. These improvements rely on a 96-well plate samples preparation, a careful optimization of collagen extraction and digestion to avoid spurious post-translational modification production, and PMF at high resolution using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (MALDI-FTICR) analysis. This method was applied to the identification of a hundred bones of herbivores from the Middle Paleolithic site of Caours (Somme, France) well dated from the Eemian Last Interglacial climatic optimum. The method gave reliable species identification to bones already identified by their osteomorphology, as well as to more challenging samples consisting of small or burned bone fragments. Deamidation values of bones originating from the same geological layers have a low standard deviation. The method can be applied to archaeological bone remains and offers a robust capacity to identify traditionally unidentifiable bone fragments, thus increasing the number of identified specimens and providing invaluable information in specific contexts.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Maldi-fticr, Paleoproteomics, Deamidation, Species identification

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Bray Fabrice
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS


