### Accession
PXD001954

### Title
Molecular signatures after challenge with Salmonella Typhi implicate host tryptophan metabolism in the pathogenesis of typhoid fever, part 2

### Description
Label free quantitation using DIA HDMSe of Salmonella infected and uninfected mouse caecum tissue

### Sample Protocol
6-7 week old C57BL/6N mice were treated with streptomycin by oral gavage. 24hrs after streptomycin treatment mice were infected with S. Typhimurium SL1344 while naive controls received PBS. Mice were culled at day 4 post-infection. Caecal tissue from each mouse was divided consistently into segments and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissue pieces were homogenized in lysis buffer and sonication performed to shear DNA. Samples were centrifuged and the concentration of the supernatant determined by Pierce 660nm assay. IAA was added to a final concentration of 80mM. Filter-aided sample preparation was performed. Samples were acidified to a pH of 3-4 and diluted in 0.1% FA. Yeast enolase was added as an internal standard. Each sample was analysed in 4 technical replicates using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer in HDMSe mode (Waters) using a nano-electrospray source. 300 ng of each sample was loaded onto the UPLC system and separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC with a 90minute linear gradient. Data collection was performed in ion mobility-assisted data independent acquisition (HDMSe) mode, used a 0.6s alternating cycle time between low (4V) and high (15-45V) collision energy.  Ions from [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide with an m/z of 785.8426 were in injected alongside the analyte at 300fm/uL and were used as a lockmass.

### Data Protocol
12 raw files were first processed using Protein Lynx Global Server v3.02. The processed spectra were searched against a database containing the UniProt complete Mouse and Salmonella proteomes plus a set of contaminate and standard sequences. The database also contained decoy protein sequences. Search parameters included fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and the precursor and fragment tolerances set to automatic.

### Publication Abstract
Enteric fever, caused by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, is an important public health problem in resource-limited settings and, despite decades of research, human responses to the infection are poorly understood. In 41 healthy adults experimentally infected with wild-type S. Typhi, we detected significant cytokine responses within 12 h of bacterial ingestion. These early responses did not correlate with subsequent clinical disease outcomes and likely indicate initial host-pathogen interactions in the gut mucosa. In participants developing enteric fever after oral infection, marked transcriptional and cytokine responses during acute disease reflected dominant type I/II interferon signatures, which were significantly associated with bacteremia. Using a murine and macrophage infection model, we validated the pivotal role of this response in the expression of proteins of the host tryptophan metabolism during Salmonella infection. Corresponding alterations in tryptophan catabolites with immunomodulatory properties in serum of participants with typhoid fever confirmed the activity of this pathway, and implicate a central role of host tryptophan metabolism in the pathogenesis of typhoid fever.

### Keywords
Tissue, Mouse, Hdmse, Salmonella typhi, Label free, Caecum

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


