### Accession
PXD009698

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic responses of the oceanic diatom Pseudo-nitzschia granii to iron limitation

### Description
The oceanic diatom Pseudo-nitzschia granii was cultured in the laboratory under steady-state iron-replete and iron-limited conditions. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were performed to determine how this organism reorganizes major metabolic processes as a function of iron supply.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was reduced, alkylated and digested with a 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio. Tryptic peptides were analyzed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using a Michrom Advance HPLC system with reverse phase chromatography coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Orbitrap ion-trap mass spectrometer with a Michrom Advance CaptiveSpray source (1 µL min-1 flow rate, C18 column). Each sample was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 250 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 500 nL min-1. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 150 minute gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents being Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer monitored MS1 scans from 380 m/z to 1580 m/z at 70K resolution. MS2 scans were performed on the top 10 ions with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a 15 second exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against the P. granii translated transcriptome using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. MS2 scans were performed using a 2 m/z isolation window. Identification criteria consisted of a peptide threshold of 91% and protein threshold of 99% (2 peptides minimum), corresponding to a false discovery rate (protein FDR) of 1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms are a highly successful group of photosynthetic protists that often thrive under adverse environmental conditions. Members of the genus Pseudo-nitzschia are ecologically important diatoms which are able to subsist during periods of chronic iron limitation and form dense blooms following iron fertilization events. The cellular strategies within diatoms that orchestrate these physiological responses to variable iron concentrations remain largely uncharacterized. Using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach, we explore the exceptional ability of a diatom isolated from the iron-limited Northeast Pacific Ocean to reorganize its intracellular processes as a function of iron. We compared the molecular responses of Pseudo-nitzschia granii observed under iron-replete and iron-limited growth conditions to those of other model diatoms. Iron-coordinated molecular responses demonstrated some agreement between gene expression and protein abundance, including iron-starvation-induced-proteins, a putative iron transport system and components of photosynthesis and the Calvin cycle. Pseudo-nitzschia granii distinctly differentially expresses genes encoding proteins involved in iron-independent photosynthetic electron transport, urea acquisition and vitamin synthesis. We show that P. granii is unique among studied diatoms in its physiology stemming from distinct cellular responses, which may underlie its ability to subsist in low iron regions and rapidly bloom to outcompete other diatom taxa following iron enrichment.

### Keywords
Iron limitation, Diatom

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole MA 02543
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 

### Submitter
Natalie Cohen

### Lab Head
Dr Mak A. Saito
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole MA 02543


