### Accession
PXD028938

### Title
Ionophore 4-Br-A23187  causes copper stress in B. subtilis

### Description
Ionophores are small molecules or peptides that transport metal ions across biological membranes. Their transport capabilities are typically characterized in vitro using vesicles and single ion species. It is difficult to infer from these data which effects ionophores have on living cells in a complex environment (e.g. culture medium), since net transport is influenced e.g. by ion composition, concentration gradients, pH gradient, and active transport. To gain insights into the antibacterial mechanism of the semi-synthetic polyether ionophore 4-Br-A23187, we investigated its effects on the gram-positive model organism Bacillus subtilis. Changes in intracellular ion concentrations were determined using ionomics and the physiological impact was assessed by proteomics. 4-Br-A23187 treatment resulted in an increase in intracellular copper levels, an effect that was dependent on the copper concentration of the medium. The antibiotic effect of 4-Br-A23187 is further aggravated by a decrease in intracellular manganese and magnesium. Effects of copper hyperaccumulation, mirrored by the proteomic response, included oxidative stress, disturbance of proteostasis, metal, and sulfur homeostasis. Especially solvent-exposed iron-sulfur clusters like that of aconitase of the citric acid cycle are readily destabilized by copper. Using calcein fluorescence quenching as a readout, we confirmed in vitro that 4-Br-A23187 acts as copper ionophore.

### Sample Protocol
4-Br-A23187-response-associated proteins that were at least two-fold upregulated in each of three biological replicates (we termed them marker proteins) were cut from non-radioactive gels and prepared for mass spectrometrical analysis by tryptic in-gel digest. For protein identification, tryptic digests were analyzed by a nanoACQUITY-UPLC-coupled Synapt G2-S-HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with the NanoLockSpray-Source (Waters) and a time-of-flight detector. Samples were desalted using a nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column (pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 5 μm; length, 20 mm; Waters) with a flow of 10 µl/min in 0.5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Samples were separated using a nanoACQUITY-UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (pore size, 130 Å; particle size, 1.7 μm; length, 150 mm; Waters) with a flow of 0.35 µl/min at 40°C. Gradient elution was performed as follows: initial, 0.5% buffer B; 22 min, 50% buffer B; 23 min, 99% buffer B; 26 min, 99% buffer B; 27 min, 0.5% buffer B; 30 min, 0.5% buffer B. Spectra were recorded in positive resolution mode with the following settings: capillary voltage, 1.7 kV; cone voltage, 40 V; source temperature, 100°C; cone gas flow, 50 l/h; desolvation gas flow, 500 l/h; desolvation temperature, 150°C. Continuous MSE spectra were recorded in a mass range of 50-1200 m/z with a scan time of 1 s. Collision energy was ramped from 14 to 45 eV. Serving as mass reference, leucine-encephalin was injected with a capillary voltage of 3 kV every 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were processed with ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters, version 2.5.2). Processing parameters were adjusted as follows: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS TOF resolution, automatic; lock mass for charge 1, 556.2771 Da/e; Lock Mass Window, 0.25 Da; low energy threshold, 100 counts; elevated energy threshold, 30 counts; intensity threshold, 750 counts. For protein identification, databanks containing 4180 proteins of B. subtilis (NCBI reference sequence: NC_000964.3, added manually: trypsin, keratin) were searched. The following settings were used: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; min fragment ion matches per protein, 4; maximum protein mass, 300000; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M; false positive rate, 4.

### Publication Abstract
Ionophores are small molecules or peptides that transport metal ions across biological membranes. Their transport capabilities are typically characterized in vitro using vesicles and single ion species. It is difficult to infer from these data which effects ionophores have on living cells in a complex environment (e.g., culture medium), since net ion movement is influenced by many factors including ion composition of the medium, concentration gradients, pH gradient, and protein-mediated transport processes across the membrane. To gain insights into the antibacterial mechanism of action of the semisynthetic polyether ionophore 4-Br-A23187, known to efficiently transport zinc and manganese in vitro, we investigated its effects on the gram-positive model organism Bacillus subtilis. In addition to monitoring cellular ion concentrations, the physiological impact of treatment was assessed on the proteome level. 4-Br-A23187 treatment resulted in an increase in intracellular copper levels, the extent of which depended on the copper concentration of the medium. Effects of copper accumulation mirrored by the proteomic response included oxidative stress, disturbance of proteostasis, metal and sulfur homeostasis. The antibiotic effect of 4-Br-A23187 is further aggravated by a decrease in intracellular manganese and magnesium. A liposome model confirmed that 4-Br-A23187 acts as copper ionophore in vitro.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Bacillus subtilis, Ionophore, Copper, 4-br-a23187

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Senges

### Lab Head
Dr Julia E. Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany


