### Accession
PXD027641

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern have acquired mutations associated with an increased spike cleavage

### Description
Quantification of Spike cleavage across different Sars-Cov2 variants by partial reaction monitoring mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
VeroE6-TMPRSS2 cells were seeded in a 6 well-plate and infected with the corresponding SARS-CoV-2 variants at an MOI of 0.1. Cells were lysated after 24 hours with RIPA buffer containing EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail and 10% SDS to a final concentration of 1%. Then, samples were boiled for 10 minutes at 100°C. Cells were centrifuged at 12k rpm on a tabletop centrifuge at RT for 20 minutes to remove insoluble debris and separated into three samples to assess technical reproducibility. 50 ul for each sample were loaded in a 1:4 ratio (v/v) with urea buffer (8M urea, 100 mM AmBic pH 8.1) on a Microcon 30 kDa MWCO (Millipore, Sigma) and centrifuged to dryness at 9500 rpm for 15 minutes at RT, until all sample was loaded. The filters were washed three times with 200 ul of urea buffer using similar centrifugation parameter as the sample loading. 100 ul of reduction buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM AmBic pH 8.1, 5 mM TCEP) was added and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 20 minutes to reduce the cysteines. Chloroacetamide (CAA) was added to 10 mM final concentration and the samples were incubated for 30 minutes in the dark at RT. The filters were washed 3 times with 200 ul of urea buffer and 3 times with 200 ul of digestion buffer (50 mM AmBiC). GluC was added to samples in a 1:100 ratio (w/w) and the filters were incubated on a shaker for 16 hours at 37°C and 450 rpm. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filters were washed twice with 100 ul of LC-MS grade water. Desalting was done using the Nest group microspin C18 columns.  Activation of the resin was done with 1 column volume (CV) of MeCN and the columns were equilibrated with 2 CV of 0.1% FA in water. Samples were loaded and flowthrough was loaded again before washing the columns with 3 CV of 0.1% FA in water. Peptide elution was done with 2 CV of 50% MeCN in 0.1% FA and 1 CV of 80% MeCN in 0.1% FA. Following collection, the peptides were dried under the vacuum. Samples were resuspended at 1 ug/ul in 0.1% FA and approximately 1 ug was injected into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For the mass spectrometry analysis DDA data was searched with MSFragger (REF) using a FASTA file combining the human proteome, the SARS-Cov2 proteome, all the variants and the C-term and N-term cleaved Spike protein entry for each variant. The Speclib workflow was used to generate a library which was imported into Skyline for selection of peptides and internal controls. Overall, 3 versions of the C-term furin cleaved peptide (SVASQSIIAYTMSLGAE) with two charge states (2+ and 3+) and the oxidated methionine were used. 4 other peptides were included as controls: 2 from the C-term spike fragment to be used as proxy for total spike quantity and 2 from Orf3a and N protein to be used as internal standard to normalize across variants. Following acquisition, the PRM data was imported into the Skyline document with the following transition settings: MS1 filtering was enabled, and MS/MS filtering was changed to targeted using Orbitrap as mass analyzer (35000 resolution) and high selectivity extraction. A minimum of 6 transitions and a maximum of 18 having m/z > precursors were selected for data analysis. After manual peak boundaries selection and elimination of interferences the transition results were exported. Transitions where the signal/background ratio was less than 5 were removed to ensure robust quantitative accuracy. The transitions were summed within the same charge state and the 2+ unmodified SVASQSIIAYTMSLGAE was used for quantification. The data was normalized using median centering of the other Spike peptide (ILPVSMTKTSVD) as internal standard. Following normalization, log2 fold change was calculated by averaging the intensities for the furin-cleaved peptide per variant and divide them by the one from the WA1 variant used here as control sample. Resulting ratios were logged and used for visualization and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 lineages have diverged into highly prevalent variants termed "variants of concern" (VOCs). Here, we characterized emerging SARS-CoV-2 spike polymorphisms in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo to understand their impact on transmissibility and virus pathogenicity and fitness. We demonstrate that the substitution S:655Y, represented in the gamma and omicron VOCs, enhances viral replication and spike protein cleavage. The S:655Y substitution was transmitted more efficiently than its ancestor S:655H in the hamster infection model and was able to outcompete S:655H in the hamster model and in a human primary airway system. Finally, we analyzed a set of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants to investigate how different sets of mutations may impact spike processing. All VOCs tested exhibited increased spike cleavage and fusogenic capacity. Taken together, our study demonstrates that the spike mutations present in VOCs that become epidemiologically prevalent in humans are linked to an increase in spike processing and virus transmission.

### Keywords
Gluc, Sars-cov2, Furin, Prm

### Affiliations
6Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA

### Submitter
Andrea Fossati

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
6Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA


