### Accession
PXD041786

### Title
Ubiquitin ligase and signalling hub MYCBP2 is required for efficient EPHB2 tyrosine kinase receptor function

### Description
Eph receptor tyrosine kinases participate in a variety of normal and pathogenic processes during development and throughout adulthood. This versatility is likely facilitated by the ability of Eph receptors to signal through diverse cellular signalling pathways: primarily by controlling cytoskeletal dynamics, but also by regulating cellular growth, proliferation, and survival. Despite many proteins linked to these signalling pathways interacting with Eph receptors, the specific mechanisms behind such links and their coordination remain to be elucidated. In a proteomics screen for novel EPHB2 multi-effector proteins, we identified human MYC binding protein 2 (MYCBP2 or PAM or Phr1). MYCBP2 is a large signalling hub involved in diverse processes such as neuronal connectivity, synaptic growth, cell division, neuronal survival, and protein ubiquitination. Our biochemical experiments demonstrate that the formation of a complex containing EPHB2 and MYCBP2 is facilitated by FBXO45, a protein known to select substrates for MYCBP2 ubiquitin ligase activity. Formation of the MYCBP2-EPHB2 complex does not require EPHB2 tyrosine kinase activity and is destabilised by binding of ephrin-B ligands, suggesting that the MYCBP2-EPHB2 association is a prelude to EPHB2 signalling. Paradoxically, the loss of MYCBP2 results in increased ubiquitination of EPHB2 and a decrease of its protein levels suggesting that MYCBP2 stabilises EPHB2. Commensurate with this effect, our cellular experiments reveal that MYCBP2 is essential for efficient EPHB2 signalling responses in cell lines and primary neurons. Finally, our genetic studies in C. elegans provide in vivo evidence that the ephrin receptor VAB-1 displays genetic interactions with known MYCBP2 binding proteins. Together, our results align with the similarity of neurodevelopmental phenotypes caused by MYCBP2 and EPHB2 loss of function, and couple EPHB2 to a signalling effector that controls diverse cellular functions.         

### Sample Protocol
HeLa FLAG-EPHB2 cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with 0.5% FBS and 1µg/ml tetracycline in 15 cm cell culture plates for 20h, were treated with pre-clustered Fc control or ephrinB2-Fc for 15min. After treatment, cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed using RIPA lysis buffer (50mM Tris, pH7.4; 150mM NaCl; 1% NP-40) supplemented with protease (Roche, #11836153001) and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, #04906837001). The lysates were collected in 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 13,000rpm for 15min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes with prewashed anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma, #A2220) and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4°C. The following day, beads were washed four times using 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. The on-bead proteins were diluted in 2M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate and on-bead trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. The samples were then reduced with 13 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C and, after cooling for 10 minutes, alkylated with 23 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. The supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned from residual detergents and reagents with MCX cartridges (Waters Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution in 10% ammonium hydroxide /90% methanol (v/v), samples were dried with a Speed-vac, reconstituted under agitation for 15 min in 12 µL of 2%ACN-1%FA and loaded into a 75 μm i.d. × 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptides were eluted with a two-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B first increased from 2 to 35% in 100 min and then from 35 to 80% B in 10 min. The HPLC system was coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3-1.7 kV and 60 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 360-1560) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 3e5. The 25 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell and analyzed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 2e4 and a normalized collision energy at 29 V. Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 15 sec after two MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) against the UniProt Human protein database. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Data interpretation was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms, Ephb2

### Affiliations
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 2B4, Canada Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 2B2, Canada Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 0C7, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - McGill University

### Submitter
Sara Luiza Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Artur Kania
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 2B4, Canada Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 2B2, Canada Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 0C7, Canada


