### Accession
PXD009025

### Title
Quantification of calcyclin and heat shock protein 90 in sera from women with and without preeclampsia by mass spectrometry

### Description
Maternal serum levels of calcyclin and heat shock protein 90 were compared throughout pregnancy from the first trimester till term among women with preeclampsia (PE) and age-matched normotensive pregnant controls (C). Serum samples from two different studies, a nested case-control study embedded in the Rotterdam periconception cohort and the Lepra Study both conducted at the Erasmus MC in Rotterdam. They were collected in the first, second and third trimester of pregnancy in 43 patients with preeclampsia, consisting of 20 early-onset and 23 late-onset preeclampsia, and 46 normotensive pregnant controls. A serum based 2D LC-MS assay on Parallel Reaction Monitoring mode using a high resolution tribrid mass spectrometer was used to quantify both calcyclin and heat shock protein 90.

### Sample Protocol
A Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) assay was developed for quantitative measurements of S100A6 and HSP90 levels in serum using SIL peptides serving as internal standards, i.e. LQDAEIAR (13C615N4) for S100A6 and YIDQEELNK (13C615N2) related to both isoforms HSP90 and HSP90. HSP90 was not analyzed, because it is known from literature that very low levels (~1-2 ng/mL) of HSP90 are usually measured in serum. For S100A6, PRM signals were recorded for doubly-charged endogenous and SIL peptide LQDAEIAR precursor ions m/z 458.25 and m/z 463.25, respectively. For HSP90, m/z 576.28 and m/z 580.29 were taken for YIDQEELNK, respectively. PRM measurements were carried out on a nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, US). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 µm ID × 5 mm length, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed and desalted for 5 min using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water as loading solvent. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID × 250 mm, 2 μm particle and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a binary gradient from 12 to 25% solvent B in 14.7 min, where solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% FA in water. The column flow rate was set to 250 nL/min and oven temperature to 40 °C. All LC solvents were UHPLC grade and purchased at Biosolve, Valkenswaard, the Netherlands. For electrospray ionization, nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA) were used and a spray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied. For PRM of the doubly-charged precursor ions of LQDAEIAR and YIDQEELNK (endogenous and SIL), we used the targeted MS/MS mode set up as follows: isolation width 1.4 Da, HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25%, ion injection time was set to 512 ms (by setting the AGC target to 500,000 ions), Orbitrap resolution of 240,000. Selection of the precursor ions was time scheduled and each duty cycle consisted of two targeted MS/MS scans (endogenous and SIL form of a peptide) yielding a scan rate of approximately 0.83 Hz. Fluoranthene (202.0777 Da) was infused as lock mass (Easy IC option active).

### Data Protocol
The SCX-fractionated serum digests of preeclamptics (PE) and age-matched controls (C) were measured in a single run whereas ratios between endogenous and SIL peptides of S100A6 and HSP90 were calculated to determine the concentrations. The PRM signals were integrated and analyzed using Skyline. The linearity, limit of detection (LOD) and lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) of the assay were determined for S100A6 and HSP90 peptides by spiking five different concentrations of SIL S100A6 and HSP90 peptides into an SCX-separated serum digest. The LOD and LOD defined as 3.3σ/slope (LOD) and as 10σ/slope (LLOQ) according to the ICH guidelines (http://www.ich.org) were calculated. Statistical differences between serum levels of S100A6 and HSP90 in the total PE group, in the subgroups of early- and late-onset, and control group during the first, second and third trimester were calculated with an unpaired t-test. A probability below 0.05 was considered to be significant. Serum levels were tested for normality using Kolmogorov-Smirnoff and Shapiro-Wilk tests. Natural log (ln)-transformed values were used for statistical testing if data were not normally distributed. To evaluate the repeatability and reproducibility of the PRM assay, for both peptides three technical (three consecutive PRM measurements of an identical sample) and three methodological (three independently prepared replicates of an SCX-fractionated serum sample) replicates were measured and CVs as percentages calculated, respectively. For statistical analysis of clinical characteristics independent students’ T-tests (normal distributed data) or Mann-Whitney U tests (non-normal distributed data) were used for continuous variables and Chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests were used for categorical variables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Placenta, Preeclampsia, S100a6, Serum, Prm

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics the Netherlands
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics the Netherlands


