### Accession
PXD023509

### Title
HyperLOPIT and temporal proteomic profiling of the response to lipopolysaccharide in the THP-1 human leukaemia cell line

### Description
The hyperLOPIT proteomics platform combines mass-spectrometry with state-of-the-art machine learning for simultaneous “mapping” of the steady-state subcellular location of thousands of proteins. Here, we use a synergistic approach and combine global proteome analysis with hyperLOPIT in a fully Bayesian framework to elucidate the spatio-temporal changes that occur during the pro-inflammatory response to lipopolysaccharide in the human monocytic leukaemia cell-line THP-1.  We report cell-wide protein relocalisations upon LPS stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate preparation for time-course analysis: THP-1 cells (10e6) were stimulated with 200 ng / ml LPS and lysed at appropriate time-points: 0, 2, 4, 6, 12 and 24 hours in lysis buffer containing 0.2 % SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 with protease inhibitors (Roche). Benzonase nuclease at a concentration of 25 U / ml was added and incubated for 30 min, on ice. Samples were sonicated for 3 x 5 min bursts in a cooled sonicating bath, to aid solubilisation and then centrifuged at 16,000 g, 10 min, 4 °C to remove insoluble material. Three biological triplicate time-course experiments were conducted. Proteins from each time-point were digested with trypsin and peptides were labelled with TMT 6-plex according to manufacturer's instructions. Labelled peptides were pooled, desalted and separated by high pH reverse phase UPLC on the Acquity chromatography system with a diode array detector (Waters). The time-course analysis was acquired on the Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ MS instrument (Thermo Scientific) with MS2 level quantitation.  Subcellular fractionation for hyperLOPIT:  Equilibrium density gradient ultracentrifugation is central to the hyperLOPIT protocol and is described in detail elsewhere (Mulvey et al., 2017, Nature Protocols). Briefly, 5 x 10e8 THP-1 cells (either unstimulated or following 12 h of 200 ng / ml LPS stimulation) were lysed in iso-osmotic conditions and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g, 90 min, 4 °C, to separate crude membranes and cytosolic-enriched fractions. The crude membranes were underlaid beneath an iodixanol density gradient and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g for 10 h, 4 °C. Individual fractions were collected with a peristaltic pump fraction collector. Proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides were labelled with TMT 10-plex according to manufacturer's instructions. Labelled peptides were pooled, desalted and separated by high pH reverse phase UPLC on the Acquity chromatography system with a diode array detector (Waters). The hyperLOPIT analysis was acquired on the Orbitrap™ Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ instrument (Thermo Scientific) using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 level quantitation.

### Data Protocol
XCalibur .raw files from both the time-course and hyperLOPIT experiments were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Mascot server v2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The SwissProt sequence database for Homo sapiens was downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) in November 2016, with 42,118 canonical and isoform sequence entries, together with 48 common contaminant sequences from the cRAP database (common Repository for Adventitious Proteins, https://www.thegpm.org/crap).  For the hyperLOPIT analysis, parameters included a 20 p.p.m. reporter ion integration tolerance window around the expected reporter ion m/z value, 10 p.p.m. precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, reporter peak intensities were integrated using the most confident centroid, tryptic digestion was selected as the enzyme of choice and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were permitted. Static modifications: TMT(K), TMT(N-term), carbamidomethyl(C); Dynamic modifications: oxidation(M), carbamyl(N-term), carbamyl(K), and deamidation(NQ), as appropriate. Percolator was used to obtain a robust peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level false discovery rate. Peptide “rank” must equal one with a minimum length of six amino acids, only “high confidence” peptides were used for identification and only unique peptides were used for quantification. Protein Grouping was enabled, a 50 % co-isolation threshold was applied, the strict parsimony principle was required and isotopic impurity correction factors were applied. For the time-course analysis, the above parameters were the same, with the exception of the precursor and the fragment mass tolerances which were set to 20 p.p.m. and 0.2 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Protein localisation and translocation between intracellular compartments underlie almost all physiological processes. The hyperLOPIT proteomics platform combines mass spectrometry with state-of-the-art machine learning to map the subcellular location of thousands of proteins simultaneously. We combine global proteome analysis with hyperLOPIT in a fully Bayesian framework to elucidate spatiotemporal proteomic changes during a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory response. We report a highly dynamic proteome in terms of both protein abundance and subcellular localisation, with alterations in the interferon response, endo-lysosomal system, plasma membrane reorganisation and cell migration. Proteins not previously associated with an LPS response were found to relocalise upon stimulation, the functional consequences of which are still unclear. By quantifying proteome-wide uncertainty through Bayesian modelling, a necessary role for protein relocalisation and the importance of taking a holistic overview of the LPS-driven immune response has been revealed. The data are showcased as an interactive application freely available for the scientific community.

### Keywords
Immune response, Thp-1 cells, Lc-ms/ms, Hyperlopit

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Claire Mulvey

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Susan Lilley
University of Cambridge


