### Accession
PXD014198

### Title
Genome-wide CRISPR screening reveals genetic modifiers of mutant EGFR dependence in NSCLC

### Description
Human non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) harboring activating mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) frequently respond to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as erlotinib and gefitinib. However, the responses are not durable, and the magnitude of tumor regression is variable, suggesting the existence of genetic modifiers of EGFR dependency in EGFR-mutant NSCLCs. Here, we applied a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening to identify genetic determinants of EGFR TKI sensitivity and uncovered both known and putative candidates. Specifically, we show that knockout of RIC8A, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) essential for G-alpha protein activation, enhanced EGFR TKI-induced cell death and prevented acquired resistance. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that RIC8A is a potent positive regulator of the pro-survival YAP signaling pathway, activation of which rescued the EGFR TKI sensitizing phenotype resulting from RIC8A knockout. We also show that knockout of ARIH2, or other components in the Cullin-5 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, conferred resistance to EGFR inhibition, in part by promoting nascent protein synthesis through METAP2. Together, these data uncover a spectrum of previously unidentified regulators of EGFR TKI sensitivity in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells, providing insights into the heterogeneity of EGFR TKI treatment responses in EGFR-mutant NSCLCs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellet was lysed with urea buffer: 8 M urea (Sigma, #U1250), 1% SDS (Promega, #V6551), 50 mM Tris (Sigma, #10708976001) pH 8.5, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablet PhosSTOP (Roche, #4906837001). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma, #D9779) 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, #I6125) for 1h at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then precipitated with chloroform/ methanol to remove salt and detergent. After dissolving the dry protein pellet with 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5; the proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, #V5072) after dilution to 2 M urea. The peptides were acidified to 1% TFA, desalted on SepPak C18 cartridges and eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8.5 and then labelled with TMT reagent (1:4; peptide:TMT label) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction was quenched with 0.5% TFA and the 6 samples were combined to a 1:1 ratio. Mixed and labeled peptides were subjected to high-pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation on an Agilent X-bridge C18 column (3.5 µm particles, 2.1 mm i.d., and 15 cm in length). Using an Agilent 1200 LC system, a 60 min linear gradient from 10% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate separated the peptide mixture into a total of 96 fractions, which were then consolidated into 24 fractions. The dried 24 fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS3 analysis. Labelled peptides were loaded onto a 15 cm column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9µM (75 µm inner diameter) in an EASY-nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 3% to 30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted TMT peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 scans were acquired at resolution 120,000 with 350-1500 m/z scan range, AGC target 2x105, maximum injection time 50 ms. Then, MS2 precursors were isolated using the quadrupole (0.7 m/z window) with AGC 1x104 and maximum injection time 50 ms. Precursors were fragmented by CID at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35 % and analyzed in the ion trap. Following MS2, synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scans were collected by using high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and fragments were analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65%, AGC target 1x105, maximum injection time 120 ms, resolution 60,000).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 with the SEQUEST algorithm and Uniprot human database (2014-01-31, 21568 protein sequences). Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursors and at 0.6 Da for fragment. Maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification; while TMT tags on peptide N termini/lysine residues and cysteine alkylation (+57.02146) were set as static modifications. The list of identified peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was filtered to respect a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) after excluding PSMs with an average TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise value lower than 10 and a precursor interference level value higher 50%. The Student’s test was applied to identify significantly changed protein abundances and adjusted p-values were calculated according to Benjamin & Hochberg. The final list of identified proteins was filtered to achieve a 5% protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
EGFR-mutant NSCLCs frequently respond to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, the responses are not durable, and the magnitude of tumor regression is variable, suggesting the existence of genetic modifiers of EGFR dependency. Here, we applied a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening to identify genetic determinants of EGFR TKI sensitivity and uncovered putative candidates. We show that knockout of <i>RIC8A</i>, essential for G-alpha protein activation, enhanced EGFR TKI-induced cell death. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that RIC8A is a positive regulator of YAP signaling, activation of which rescued the EGFR TKI sensitizing phenotype resulting from <i>RIC8A</i> knockout. We also show that knockout of <i>ARIH2</i>, or other components in the Cullin-5 E3 complex, conferred resistance to EGFR inhibition, in part by promoting nascent protein synthesis through METAP2. Together, these data uncover a spectrum of previously unidentified regulators of EGFR TKI sensitivity in EGFR-mutant human NSCLC, providing insights into the heterogeneity of EGFR TKI treatment responses.

### Keywords
Human, Egfr, Cancer

### Affiliations
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical research, Basel, Switzerland
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research

### Submitter
Debora Bonenfant

### Lab Head
Dr Debora Bonenfant
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical research, Basel, Switzerland


