### Accession
PXD026998

### Title
Pro-inflammatory Beta Cell Small Extracellular Vesicles Induce Beta Cell Failure Through Activation of the CXCL10/CXCR3 Axis in Diabetes

### Description
Coordinated communication among pancreatic islet cells is necessary for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis. In diabetes, chronic exposure to pro-inflammatory cytokines has been shown to perturb β-cell communication and function. Compelling evidence has implicated extracellular vesicles (EVs) in modulating physiological and pathological responses to β-cell stress. We report that pro-inflammatory β-cell small EVs (cytoEV) induce β-cell dysfunction, promote a pro-inflammatory islet transcriptome, and enhance recruitment of CD8+ T-cells and macrophages. Proteomic analysis of cytoEV revealed an enrichment of the chemokine, CXCL10, with surface topological analysis depicting CXCL10 as membrane-bound on cytoEV to facilitate direct binding to CXCR3 receptors on the surface of β-cells. CXCR3 receptor inhibition reduced CXCL10-cytoEV binding and attenuated β-cell dysfunction, inflammatory gene expression, and leukocyte recruitment to islets. Collectively, this work implicates the significant role of pro-inflammatory β-cell derived small EVs in modulating β-cell function, global gene expression, and antigen presentation through activation of the CXCL10/CXCR3 axis.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted EVs were resuspended in 50 ul of 2% SDS and protein content was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce). Proteolytic digestion took place with the addition of Trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (wt:wt) followed by a 16h overnight incubation. A normalized amount of the resulting peptides were analyzed by nano liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). Eluting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode.  Raw files were processed in MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.1. Spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the mouse SwissProt database downloaded May 9th, 2018.  N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set to fixed modification.  Searches were performed with a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptides and proteins using a target-decoy approach. A two peptide minimum was required, peptide length was at least 7 amino acids long and MS2 match tolerance was set to 0.02Da.  Match between runs was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7min.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Data Protocol
Protein data was extracted from the “proteinGroups.txt” file and all mass spectrometry data was processed using custom R scripts. Significantly up and down regulated proteins were determined by using Log2(fold change)>1 and then subjected to pathway analysis using Panther Go Slim.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cxcl10, Extracellular vesicles, Inflammation, Β-cell, Diabetes, Intercellular communication

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering Rochester, MN 55901

### Submitter
Naureen Javeed

### Lab Head
Dr Naureen Javeed
Mayo Clinic Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering Rochester, MN 55901


