### Accession
PXD037980

### Title
Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633 T6SS2 secretome

### Description
Comparative proteomics to identify proteins found in the media of Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633 bacteria with an active T6SS2 compared to bacteria with inactive T6SS2. Bacteria with an active T6SS2 are Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633 inwhich hcp1 was deleted to inactivate T6SS1. T6SS2 inactive bacteria are the former strain with an additional deletion in hcp2. Both strains express TfoX from an arabinose-inducible plasmid to induce T6SS2 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria (triplicate for each strain) were gron in LB supplemented with kanamycin (to maintain the plasmid) and arabinose (to induce TfoX expression) for 5 hours at 30 degrees. The media were centrifuged and filtered (0.2 micron), and proteins found in the supernatants were pelleted using deoxicholate and TCA and then washed with cold acetone. Proteins, that were precipitated with TCA and washed with 80% Acetone, were resuspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 8M Urea than reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with  10mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature for  30 min in the dark) and digested in 2M Urea, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega), overnight at 37oC in a 1:50 (M/M) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 300-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (C18-AQ 3µm, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 60 minutes gradient of 5 to 28%, followed by 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 15 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by high collision dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 for peak picking and identification using the Andromeda search engine (1), searching against Vibrio parahaemolyticus from the Uniprot database with mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminus acetylation were accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed.  The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software. Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants and single peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc/ms, T6ss, Vibrio parahaemolyticus

### Affiliations
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Dor Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Dor Salomon
Tel Aviv University


