### Accession
PXD007815

### Title
Identification of SUN5 interactors from mouse testis lysate

### Description
GST pulldown assay was used to identify SUN5 interactors from testis lysate. Two bands were pulled down, subjected to LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
GST pulldown of GST-SUN (SUN domain of SUN5 protein) or GST protein in mouse testis protein lysates were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Two bands, band 1 and band 2, were subjected to in gel digestion by trypsin and LC-MS/MS analysis by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt Protein database using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) for protein identification with a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptides and proteins. Three replicates were performed, and for label free quantification, protein expression levels were estimated using the iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithm embedded in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Acephalic spermatozoa syndrome has been reported for many decades; it is characterized by very few intact spermatozoa and tailless sperm heads in the semen and causes severe male infertility. The only gene in which mutations have been found to be associated with this syndrome encodes Sad1 and UNC84 domain-containing 5 (<i>SUN5</i>), a testis-specific nuclear envelope protein. The functional role of SUN5 has been well-studied in mouse models, but the molecular basis for the pathogenic effects of mutations in the human <i>SUN5</i> gene remains elusive. Here, we report a new SUN5 mutation (c.475C&#x2192;T; p.Arg159*), and explore the pathogenic effects of all known <i>SUN5</i> mutations on acephalic spermatozoa syndrome. Using an artificial splicing system, we found that the intronic mutation affects the splicing of <i>SUN5</i> mRNA, yielding a premature stop codon that results in a truncated SUN5 protein. We also found that SUN5 interacts with the coupling apparatus protein DnaJ heat shock protein family (Hsp40) member B13 (DNAJB13) during spermatogenesis, and the substitutions in the SUN5 SUN domain impair its interaction with DNAJB13. Furthermore, we observed that many <i>SUN5</i> mutations affect the secondary structure of the protein and influence its folding and cellular localization. In summary, our findings indicate an interaction of SUN5 with DNAJB13 during spermatogenesis, provide mechanistic insights into the functional role of this interaction in sperm head-tail integration, and elucidate the molecular etiology of acephalic spermatozoa syndrome-associated <i>SUN5</i> mutations.

### Keywords
Gst pulldown, Lc-ms/ms, Sun5

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guo, Xuejiang
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.


