### Accession
PXD010512

### Title
NuRD-interacting protein ZFP296 regulates genome-wide NuRD localization and differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex plays an important role in gene expression regulation, stem cell self-renewal, and lineage commitment. Yet little is known about the dynamics of NuRD during cellular differentiation. Here, we study these dynamics using genome-wide profiling and quantitative interaction proteomics in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and neural progenitor cells (NPCs). The genomic targets of NuRD are highly dynamic during differentiation, with most binding occurring at cell-type specific promoters and enhancers. We identify ZFP296 as a novel, ESC-specific NuRD interactor that also interacts with the SIN3A complex. ChIP-sequencing in Zfp296 knockout (KO) ESCs reveals decreased NuRD binding both genome-wide and at ZFP296 binding sites, although this has little effect on the transcriptome. Nevertheless, Zfp296 KO ESCs exhibit delayed induction of lineage-specific markers upon differentiation to embryoid bodies. In summary, we identify an ESC-specific NuRD interacting protein which regulates genome-wide NuRD binding and cellular differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free GFP pulldowns were performed in triplicate as previously described (Smits AH NAR 2013) with the following modifications. For GFP pulldowns, 2 mg of nuclear extract was incubated with 7.5 μl GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) and 50 μg/mL ethidium bromide in Buffer C (300 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA) with 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors, and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol in a total volume of 400 μl. After incubation, 6 washes were performed: 2 with Buffer C and 0.5% NP-40, 2 with PBS and 0.5% NP-40, and 2 with PBS. Affinity purified proteins were subject to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described (Baymaz, Spruijt, Vermeulen 2014). Tryptic peptides were acidified and desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber 2007) prior to mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptides were separated with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MBD3-GFP ESC and NPC nuclear extract LFQ samples were separated using a 120-min gradient from 7% until 32% Buffer B followed by step-wise increases up to 95% Buffer B. Mass spectra were recorded on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer or on a LTQ-Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), selecting the 10-15 most intense precursor ions of every full scan for fragmentation. The tryptic peptides from GFP-ZFP296 ESC nuclear extracts, Zfp296 KO ESC nuclear extracts, and ESC nuclear pellet pulldowns were measured by developing a gradient from 9-32% Buffer B for 114 minutes before washes at 50% then 95% Buffer B, for 140 minutes of total data collection time. Mass spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Scans were collected in data-dependent top speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 seconds. For label-free nuclear proteomes, 100 μg of nuclear extracts were digested using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski Nat Meth 2009) using a 30 kDa cut-off filter and trypsin digest in 50 mM ABC buffer. For dimethyl-labelled whole proteomes, 100 μg of whole cell lysates were digested using FASP using a 30 kDa cut-off filter and trypsin digest in TEAB buffer. For labelling, each sample was differentially labelled after FASP by incorporation of stable isotopes on the peptide level using light and medium dimethyl labeling as described (Boersema 2009). Differentially dimethyl-labeled samples were mixed and fractionated by strong anion exchange (SAX) (Wisniewski J Pro Res 2009). We collected the flow through (FT) and pH11, pH8, pH5, and pH2 elutions. The peptides were subjected to Stage-Tip desalting (Rappsilber 2007) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were applied to online nanoLC-MS/MS using a 214 min gradient of acetonitrile (7% to 30%) followed by washes at 60% then 95% acetonitrile. Data were collected on a Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer for 240 min of total data acquisition time.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 or 1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann 2008). using default settings and searching against the UniProt mouse proteome, release 2015_12 or 2017_06. Additional options for Match between runs, LFQ, iBAQ, and dimethyl labelling were selected where appropriate. Stoichiometry calculations and volcano plots were produced essentially as described (Smits AH NAR 2013) using Perseus version 1.4.0.8 and in-house R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex plays an important role in gene expression regulation, stem cell self-renewal, and lineage commitment. However, little is known about the dynamics of NuRD during cellular differentiation. Here, we study these dynamics using genome-wide profiling and quantitative interaction proteomics in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and neural progenitor cells (NPCs). We find that the genomic targets of NuRD are highly dynamic during differentiation, with most binding occurring at cell-type specific promoters and enhancers. We identify ZFP296 as an ESC-specific NuRD interactor that also interacts with the SIN3A complex. ChIP-sequencing in Zfp296 knockout (KO) ESCs reveals decreased NuRD binding both genome-wide and at ZFP296 binding sites, although this has little effect on the transcriptome. Nevertheless, Zfp296 KO ESCs exhibit delayed induction of lineage-specific markers upon differentiation to embryoid bodies. In summary, we identify an ESC-specific NuRD-interacting protein which regulates genome-wide NuRD binding and cellular differentiation.

### Keywords
Npc, Mouse, Esc, Nurd, Zfp296

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Ino Karemaker

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


