### Accession
PXD033112

### Title
LC-MS/MS of human MFN2 interaction proteins

### Description
LC-MS/MS of human MFN2 interaction proteins from 293T cells or 786-O cells

### Sample Protocol
Flag affinity resins with Flag-tagged MFN2 coating (MFN2-beads) were incubated with 293T or 786-O cell lysates. The lyophilized peptide fractions were re-suspended in ddH2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and 2ul aliquots of which was loaded into a nanoViper C18 (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm×2 cm) trap column. The online Chromatography seperation was performed on the Easy nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher). The trapping, desalting procedure were carried out with a volumn of 20 μL 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Then, an elution gradient of 5-38% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min was used on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75μm×25 cm C18-2 μm 100 Å). DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques were used to acquire tandem MS data on a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) fitted with a Nano Flex ion source. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 1.9 kV, and an interface heater temperature of 275℃. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 3 × 106 and the scan ranged from 350 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, only spectra with a charge state of 2-5 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28. The MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode with an AGC target of 8,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation using PEAKS Studio 8.5. The local false discovery rate at PSM was 1.0% after searching against Homo sapiens database with a maximum of two missed cleavages.The following settings were selected: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-glu from E, Pyro-glu from Q for variable modifications as well as fixed Carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Mfn2

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510060, China

### Submitter
Gao Song

### Lab Head
Dr Gao Song
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510060, China


