### Accession
PXD032170

### Title
The translation regulator Zar1l is required to control the timing of meiosis in Xenopus oocytes

### Description
In vertebrates, sexual reproduction depends on the precisely temporally controlled translation of mRNAs stockpiled in the oocyte. The RNA-binding proteins Zar1 and Zar2 have been implicated in translational control in oocytes of several vertebrate species, but how they act mechanistically is still incompletely understood. Here, we investigate the function of Zar1l, a so far uncharacterized member of the Zar protein family, in Xenopus laevis oocytes. By combining biochemical assays and mass spectrometry, we reveal that Zar1l is a constituent of a known large ribonucleoparticle containing the translation repressor 4E-T and the central polyadenylation regulator CPEB1. Employing TRIM-Away, we show that depletion of Zar1l from prophase-I arrested oocytes results in premature meiotic maturation upon hormone treatment. We provide evidence that this is based on the precocious expression of the kinase cMos, a key promotor of meiotic resumption. Based on our data, we propose a model according to which degradation of Zar1l results in dissociation of 4E-T from CPEB1, thus weakening translation inhibition imposed by the mRNA 3’UTR of cMos and probably also other M-phase promoting regulators. Thus, our detailed characterization of the function of Zar1l reveals novel mechanistic insights into the regulation of maternal mRNA translation during vertebrate meiosis.

### Sample Protocol
α-Flag antibody was covalently crosslinked to DynabeadsTM Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by incubating the antibody-coupled Dynabeads two times for 30min with 10mg/ml DMP (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0,2M Boric Acid pH=9,0. The Dynabeads were washed three times in 0,2M Ethanolamine pH=8,0 and then incubated two times for 1h in 0,2M Ethanolamine pH=8,0. The Dynabeads were washed three times with 0,1M Glycine pH=2,5 and three times with PBST. Stage-VI oocytes were injected with water or 5,5ng mRNA encoding Flag-Zar1l.S wt and incubated for 18h at 19°C in 1xMBS. Pools of 50 oocytes were lysed in 250µl Lysis Buffer supplemented with 100U/ml RNasin® Ribonuclease Inhibitor (Promega). 250µl lysate were added to 10µg α-Flag antibody covalently cross-linked to DynabeadsTM Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After incubation for 1,5h at 6°C, the Dynabeads were washed three times with 1xMS Wash Buffer (137mM NaCl; 2,7mM KCl; 10mM Na2HPO4; 2mM KH2PO4; 0,025% Tween; 100U/ml RNasin® Ribonuclease Inhibitor (Promega); 1x cOmpleteTM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich); pH=7,4). Proteins were eluted from the Dynabeads by addition of 25µl 1,5x LSB. For in-gel digestion, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by ROTI®Blue (Carl Roth) staining. Lanes of interest were excised and digested with trypsin (Promega) according to (Shevchenko et al. 2006). In brief, the gel pieces were alternately washed in 100mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min and destained in 50mM NH4HCO3, 50% (v/v) ACN and afterwards dehydrated in ACN. Next, disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of 10mM TCEP in 100mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56 °C, followed by dehydration in ACN and subsequent alkylation in 55mM 2-iodoacetamide in 100mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at RT in the dark. After dehydration in ACN, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Promega). Peptides were extracted in 30% ACN, 5% formic acid and 60% ACN, 5% formic acid. The combined extracts were evaporated to dryness and stored at -20 °C. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were desalted using PierceTM C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) system at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 75 min linear gradient from 5 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid to 35 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid, followed by a linear increase to 45 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid within 5 min and to 80 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid within 1 min followed by a final washing step at 80 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid for 5 min. Each of the 3 independent biological replicates was measured as technical duplicate. Mass spectra were collected on a QExactive HF system (Thermo Scientific).  The SWATH DIA method consisted of a survey scan at 120000 resolution from 300 to 1650 m/z with an automatic gain control target set to 3e6 or a maximum injection time of 60 ms followed by 22 dynamic isolation windows acquired at 30000 resolution, the automatic gain control target was set to 3e6 and auto for injection time. Normalized stepped collision energies were set to 25.5, 27 and 30, MS2 spectra were recorded in profile type. The 22 dynamic SWATH windows were adjusted as described by (Bruderer et al. 2015) covering 300 to 1650 m/z with eight datapoints per peak.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed with the directDIA workflow in Spectronaut (version 15.6) with the pulsar search engine and default settings.  Fragment MS2 area was used for precursor quantitation and MaxLFQ (Cox et al. 2014) for protein quantitation. For spectral library generation a Xenopus laevis database (JGI v9.2) was downloaded from xenbase.org as of 18.12.2020 (James-Zorn et al. 2018). The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at 1 % for PSMs, peptides and protein groups, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation as fixed modifications. The protein group quantities as determined by Spectronaut were exported and further evaluated using Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al. 2016). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. The proteins were filtered to be detected in at least 4 of 6 replicate experiments and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8) in the total matrix mode based on the assumption that these proteins were below the detection limit. A two-sample student’s t-test was carried out using the following settings: S0 was adjusted to 0.1, the number of randomizations set to 250 and the permutation-based FDR accepted equal or below 0.01 with technical replicates grouped for randomization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis; zar1l; meiosis

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Sepectrometry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Sepectrometry, University of Konstanz


