### Accession
PXD005041

### Title
Absolute quantification of yeast proteome

### Description
Protein synthesis is the most energy consuming process in a proliferating cell, and understanding what controls protein abundances and how this impacts changes in metabolic fluxes is a key question in biology. We quantified mRNA and protein levels in Saccharomyces cerevisiae under ten environmental conditions. Linear correlation across all proteins predicted only 45% of the final protein abundances based on corresponding mRNAs, however, very good condition-dependent correlation was identified for individual proteins pointing to constant translation efficiency across the ten conditions. Hence, protein turnover was measured and combined with quantitative abundances to calculate translation efficiencies which were found to vary more than 400-fold. Non-linear regression analysis detected that mRNA abundance and translation elongation are the dominant factors controlling protein synthesis rate. Protein turnover was detected to play a minor role in determining protein levels, however, contributing markedly to overall cellular energy metabolism. Mitochondrial fluxes were detected to be the only major exception for flux control being at the posttranscriptional level. The here collected quantitative data provide a valuable resource for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling for the proteome analyses was carried out as follows: the dead volume in the tubing was collected and discarded; biomass was collected from the reactor with a syringe and immediately injected into Eppendorf tubes already placed in a centrifuge pre-cooled to 4°C; samples were centrifuged for 22 seconds; supernatant was discarded and cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The whole procedure from sample collection to the final freezing step took less than 70 seconds. The peak intensity-based absolute quantification method iBAQ was chosen for protein quantification (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011). First, a lysine auxotrophic strain was created by deleting the LYS1 gene. Another strain was cultivated with a labelled heavy 15N, 13C-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc., Tewksbury, MA, United States), and fully labelled biomass was produced (in which 98% of proteogenic lysine was labelled, data not shown) and used as an internal standard in the measurements.  Nano-LC/MS/MS sample preparation Cell pellets were suspended in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), heated at 95°C 5 min and sonicated with Bioruptor (Diagenonde, Denville, NJ, United States) sonication (15 min, “High” setting). After protein concentration measurement with tryptophan, florescence samples spiked at a 1:1 ratio with the heavy lysine labelled standard. For absolute quantification, 6 g of heavy standard was spiked separately with 1.1 g of UPS2 protein mix (Sigma Aldrich). Overall, 50 g of protein was precipitated with a 2:1:3 methanol:chloroform:water extraction. The precipitates were mixed in 7:2 M urea:thiourea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a disulfide reduction with 2.5 mM DTT and alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide, the proteins were digested with 1:50 LysC overnight at room temperature. The peptides were desalted using C18 material (3M) tips and reconstituted in 0.5% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. Labelling state (multiplicity) was set to 2, and Lys8 was defined as the heavy label. The heavy spike-in standard was quantified with the iBAQ option enabled using log fit. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. A search was performed against the SWISS-PROT (Boeckmann et al., 2003) Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (version from Sept 2014) using the LysC digestion rule. Only identifications with a minimum of 1 peptide of 7 amino acids long were accepted, and transfer of identifications between runs was enabled. Re-quantification was used, except for the label incorporation check. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were set at their default values.  Curve fitting for protein turnover calculations To calculate protein turnover rates measured with SILAC approach, both, heavy-light ratio in protein dynamics as well as in the intracellular amino acid pool must be taken into account. As in mass-spectrometry based protein analysis we were measuring peptides containing in average one lysine molecule, we are not able to detect whether the protein where the peptide with a light lysine belongs was coming from the “old” or resynthesized protein. This is because the intracellular amino acid pool, although with a constant intracellular concentration, is not having a constant heavy to light ratio but exponentially approaching the fully labelled form. Hence, the rate of change in the fraction of unlabelled lysine can be described with the differential equation described also previously (Hong et al., 2012; Lahtvee et al., 2014): 〖df〗_(p,i)/dt=f_a (t)(D+k_(deg,i) )-f_(p,i) (t) k_(deg,i)-f_(p,i) (t)D (1) Parameters fa and fp,i are unlabelled fraction of lysine in its pool and in protein i at time t. kdeg,i is the turnover rate of protein i. The specific growth rate  of yeast is equal to the dilution rate D at steady state in continuous culture experiments. The free lysine pool fa is defined as the amount of lysine available to yeast for the synthesis of proteins. This free lysine pool is common for all proteins in the cell. The fraction of unlabelled lysine in its pool is a function of time and can be defined as: f_a (t)=e^(-at) (2) where coefficient a describes the rate at which unlabelled lysine is replaced by heavy lysine in its free amino acid pool. The integration of equation (1) gives a solution for fp,i: f_(p,i) (t)=e^(-(D+k_(deg,i) )t)/(D+k_(deg,i)-a) [e^(D+k_(deg,i)-a)t (D+k_(deg,i) )-a] (3) Equation (3) contains two unknown parameters a and kdeg,i. Parameter a is common for all the proteins and is calculated based on fitting time-dependent intracellular lysine labelling pattern to the equation 2. Thereafter, a is used for calculating individual protein turnover rates (kdeg,i).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrative data analysis, Temperature, Osmolarity, Ethanol, Chemostats, Absolute quantification, Stress response, Saccaromyces cerevisiae, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
University of Tartu
Jens Nielsen, PhD, Dr. Tech. Professor Director of Systems and Synthetic Biology Chief Scientific Officer Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability  Systems and Synthetic Biology Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN

### Submitter
Petri-Jaan Lahtvee

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Jens Nielsen, PhD, Dr. Tech. Professor Director of Systems and Synthetic Biology Chief Scientific Officer Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability  Systems and Synthetic Biology Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN


