### Accession
PXD015650

### Title
LC-MSMS of DCC and Neuropilin-1 immunoprecipitated samples from Xenopus Laevis brains

### Description
During neuronal wiring, extrinsic cues trigger the local translation of specific mRNAs in axons via cell surface receptors. The coupling of ribosomes to receptors has been proposed as a mechanism linking signals to local translation but it is not known how broadly this mechanism operates, nor whether it can selectively regulate mRNA translation. Here, we analyzed the interactome of endogenous DCC and Neuropilin-1 by analysing immunoprecipitated samples obtained from Xenopus Laevis brains with LC-MSMS. We find that DCC and Neuropilin-1 bind to ribosomal proteins and specific RNA-binding proteins confirming that multiple guidance cue receptors can bind to ribosomes and may use receptor-ribosome coupling to regulate cue-induced local translation in axons.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous DCC and Neuropilin-1 were immunoprecipitated from Xenopus Laevis brains using antibodies against these proteins of interest. Eluted proteins were loaded onto a polyacrylamide gel and  gel bands were cut out after Coomassie staining. 1D gel bands were transferred into a 96-well PCR plate. The bands were cut into 1mm2 pieces, destained, reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with chymotrypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2μm particle size, 100A pore size, 75μm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5μm particle size, 100A pore size, 300μm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10μL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data-dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Maxquant (version 1.5.5.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default settings. MS/MS spectra were searched against the X. laevis protein sequences from Xenbase (xlaevisProtein.fasta, v20170315). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimal peptide length allowed was set to seven amino acids. Global false discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. The match-between runs option was enabled. To identify significant interactors, t-test-based statistics were applied on label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values were performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.2). Briefly, LFQ intensity values were logarithmized (log2) and missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8). Significant interactors of DCC or Nrp1 pulldowns compared to IgG pulldowns were determined using a two-tailed t-test with correction for multiple testing using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) method (S0 = 2, FDR <0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Extrinsic cues trigger the local translation of specific mRNAs in growing axons via cell surface receptors. The coupling of ribosomes to receptors has been proposed as a mechanism linking signals to local translation but it is not known how broadly this mechanism operates, nor whether it can selectively regulate mRNA translation. We report that receptor-ribosome coupling is employed by multiple guidance cue receptors and this interaction is mRNA-dependent. We find that different receptors associate with distinct sets of mRNAs and RNA-binding proteins. Cue stimulation of growing <i>Xenopus</i> retinal ganglion cell axons induces rapid dissociation of ribosomes from receptors and the selective translation of receptor-specific mRNAs. Further, we show that receptor-ribosome dissociation and cue-induced selective translation are inhibited by co-exposure to translation-repressive cues, suggesting a novel mode of signal integration. Our findings reveal receptor-specific interactomes and suggest a generalizable model for cue-selective control of the local proteome.

### Keywords
Neuropilin-1, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Dcc, Lfq, Xenopus laevis brains

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.

### Submitter
Toshiaki Shigeoka

### Lab Head
Dr Christine E. Holt
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.


