### Accession
PXD031741

### Title
Insight to the molecular mechanisms underpinning the mycoremediation of multiple metals by proteomic technique

### Description
We investigated the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus PD-18 responses when subjected to the multimetal combination (Total Cr, Cd2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, Pb2+and Zn2+) in synthetic composite media. To understand how multimetal stress impacts fungal cells at molecular level, the cellular response of A.fumigatus PD-18 to 30 mg/L multimetal stress (5 mg/L of each individual heavy metal) were determined by proteomics. The comparative fungal proteomics displayed the remarkable inherent intracellular and extracellular mechanism of metal resistance and tolerance potential of A.fumigatus PD-18.This study reported 2238 proteins of which 434 proteins were exclusively expressed in multimetal extracts. The most predominant functional class expressed was for cellular process and signalling. The number of proteins that were up-regulated due to various stress tolerance mechanisms were posttranslational modification, protein turnover and chaperones (42); translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis (60); intracellular trafficking and secretion and vesicular transport (18). Additionally, free radical scavenging antioxidant proteins such as superoxide dismutase was upregulated up to 3.45-fold, transporters systems such as protein transport (SEC31) up to 3.31-fold to combat the oxidative stress caused by the multiple metals. Also, protein–protein interaction network analysis revealed that cytochrome c oxidase and 60S ribosomal protein played key roles to detoxify the multimetals.  To the best of our knowledge, this study of A.fumigatus PD-18 provide valuable insights towards the growing research in comprehending the metal microbe interactions in the presence of multimetals. This will facilitate in developing novel molecular markers for contaminant bioremediation.

### Sample Protocol
The fungal strain used was Aspergillus fumigatus PD-18 that was isolated from a polluted river bank and characterized with accession number KX365202 after depositing the sequence to the Genbank (NCBI) (Dey et al., 2016). The growth media used was the composite medium with following composition (g/L): (NH4NO3, 0.5; K2HPO4, 0.5; MgSO4.7H2O, 0.1; NaCl, 1.0; Yeast extract, 2.5; pH 6.8 ± 0.2). The sterilization of the media was carried out at 121˚C for 15 minutes. Glucose (10.0 g/L) was added to the flasks separately after autoclaving to avoid precipitation. The methodology adopted in this study was to estimate the differential expression of proteins in A.fumigatus PD18 brought about by 30 mg/L multimetal (MM) viz. 5 mg/L of each of the individual Cd, Total Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn amended in the composite media in addition to 1% of glucose. These concentrations were chosen taking into considerations of the permissible mandates for the occurrence of each metal in water that is used for irrigation according to Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) (Cd,0.01; Total Cr, 0.1; Cu, 0.2; Ni, 0.2; Pb, 5.0; Zn, 2.0) as well as this mixture of the metals is a typical occurrence in the river body (Bhattacharya et al., 2015). The biotic control included composite media added with only 1% of glucose. Studies were conducted in series of Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) comprising 100 mL of composite growth media.1mL of spore suspension (having a concentration of 107 spores eluted with sterile distilled water containing 0.01% Tween 80) were inoculated in the flasks and incubated at 30˚C and 150 rpm agitation for 72 h to ensure complete uptake of metal ions. The flasks were withdrawn after the late log phase incubation period. Analysis was done in three technical replicates for biotic control and multimetal treated samples separately. The fungal pellets were separated from the media by inversion and followed by centrifugation at 4000 g for 10 min at 4˚C. The mycelia were further snap freezed in liquid nitrogen and then lyophilized and stored as dry powder at −20˚C before the subsequent steps.  The total protein from the dried powdered fungal cells were extracted in buffer of composition (8M Urea and 2M Thiourea). The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 14000 rpm, 4˚C for 10 minutes and precipitated overnight in five volumes of ice-cold acetone and the pellet was stored at −20˚C for further use. The concentration of protein to be measured was estimated according to the Bradford assay of protein quantification (Bradford, 1976). The separation of the proteins was carried out by one dimensional SDS-PAGE and the separated proteins bands were visualized by Coomassie brilliant blue staining. The individual gel bands were cut into small pieces and washed with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by reduction with 10 mM 1, 4-Dithiothreitol and 100 mM 2-Iodoacetamide. The proteins lysates were subjected to tryptic digestion and incubated overnight and kept at 37˚C.The peptides were extracted from the gel pieces in 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate and further purified by C-18 Zip Tip columns according to the protocol (Haange et al., 2012).Thereafter the peptide lysates were dried in vacuum centrifuge and stored at −20˚C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The dried peptides lysates were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded and separated by reversed phase chromatography before being measured on mass spectrometer nanoLC-Ultimate 3000RSLCnano (Dionex/Thermo) Orbitrap Fusion MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw MS-MS ion spectra data from the instrument were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v1.0 build 43, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fixed and variable modifications (Carbamidomethylation at cysteines was given as fixed and oxidation of methionines as variable modification) were taken into consideration. Only ranked one peptide hits with ≥1 high confidence and less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as identified and taken up for further analysis. The intensity data was further processed by logarithmic transformation and normalization for the determination of changes in abundance of proteins (at least 1.5-fold up - or down regulated). Only the values of p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Triplicate gels were run for biotic control and MM samples. For functional annotation of the proteins, the generated protein lists were analyzed by Prophane (https://www.prophane.de/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fungi, Mycoremediation, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Multi-metal

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


