### Accession
PXD023226

### Title
Isobaric peptide labeling on digital microfluidics for quantitative proteomics of low cell numbers is facilitated by low critical micellar concentration detergents

### Description
We developed protocols for isobaric TMT labeling on digital microfluidics (DMF) devices enabling the quantitative proteome analysis of approximately 25 mammalian cells per channel by subsequent bottom-up proteome analysis by LC-MS. This comprised identification of a compatible detergent for digestion, on-chip labeling, and LC-MS. Application of the method in a TMT 6-plex sample analysis enabled the relative quantification 648 proteins (2 unique peptides for quantification) from a total of 125 cell equivalents.

### Sample Protocol
SP3 digests of Jurkat T cells were either directly analyzed or loaded onto DMF chips (90-pin array v3, Sci-Bots, Kitchener, ON, Canada) for on-chip TMT labeling. Labeled peptides were removed from the chips and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap trap cartridge (5 µm, 0.3 mm x 5 mm, 100 Å), and an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, 100 Å), coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) utilizing HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. Full scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 3e6, max injection time (IT) of 80 ms) with subsequent MS/MS (resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 1e5, max IT of 120 ms) of the top 15 most intense ions, dynamic exclusion was enabled (15 sec duration). Eluents used for LC were eluent A: 0.05% FA, eluent B: 80% ACN + 0.04% FA. The separation was performed over a 95-minute run. Initial chromatographic conditions were 5% B for 5 minutes to desalt samples on the trap column, followed by a linear gradient from 5% to 50% B over 60 minutes and a 5-minute increase to 95% B, followed by 10 minutes at 95% B; flow rate of 300 nL/min. Inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 15 minutes at 5% B. For comparison of detergent impact on digestion, a 100 cell equivalent was injected, while the whole sample (4 µL) was injected from on-chip TMTzero labeled samples.  TMTsixplex sample of UPS1-spiked Jurkat T cell digests were analyzed on the same UHPLC system coupled to an Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Full scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution of 60,000, AGC target of 5e5, max injection time (IT) of 50 ms) with subsequent MS/MS (resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 5e4, max IT of 250 ms, NCE of 32) of the top 10 most intense ions, dynamic exclusion was enabled (20 sec duration). Sample (9.5 µL) was desalted on an Acclaim PepMap trap cartridge and separated on an emitter integrated C18 Aurora column (1.6 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, 120 Å, Ion Opticks Pty Ltd, Victoria, Australia). The separation was performed over a 180-minute run. Initial chromatographic conditions were 5% B for 2 minutes to desalt samples on the trap column, followed by a linear gradient from 5% to 30% B over 120 minutes, and 30% to 45% B over 30 min. This was followed by a steep increase to 95% B, followed by 14 minutes at 95% B. Inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 15 minutes at 5% B. A flow rate of 200 nL/min was used.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (Version 2.2.0.388) and searched using the SequestHT algorithm node against a human protein database (accessed from UniProt on the 2017/04/07) and the cRAP list of common laboratory contaminants. Search parameters were Enzyme: Trypsin (full), precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Dynamic modification: Oxidation (M). The Percolator node was used for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation and a target protein target FDR of 0.01 was employed. For TMT-labeled samples, the following modifications were searched: Fixed modification: TMT (K, N-term), carbamidomethyl (C), Dynamic modification: oxidation (M). For analysis of under labeling: Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), Dynamic modification: TMT (K, N-term), oxidation (M). For analysis of over labeling: Fixed modification: TMT (K, N-term), carbamidomethyl (C), Dynamic modification: TMT (S, T, Y), oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Digital microfluidics, Tmt labeling, Sp3, Cmc, Detergents

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin  Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Andreas Tholey
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin  Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany


