### Accession
PXD013468

### Title
The interactome of the clathrin adaptor AP2 is modulated by the phosphorylation status of its µ2 subunit.

### Description
The clathrin adaptor AP2 is phosphorylated at a single site (Thr156) of its µ2 subunit. To gain insight how phosphorylation influences the interactome of AP2, we used human RPE cells which that were treated with LP-935509, an inhibitor of the adaptor-associated kinase AAK1. Kinase inhibition and loss of µ2 phosphorylation was verified with phospho-specific antibodies in westernblots of total cell extracts. We then used SILAC labelled cells and immune-isolated AP-2 and subjected bound proteins to mass spectrometry to identify all bound proteins and to determine phosphorylation-dependent changes in the interactome.

### Sample Protocol
After SILAC, cells were harvested, lysates were prepared and incubated with bead-bound AP-6 antibody to capture the AP2 complex. After washing, the immune complexes were subjected to protease digestion and further processing for quantitative mass spectrometry for analysis of AP2 and its interactions partners in response to the phosphorylation status of the µ2 subunit. Protein-derived peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 and searched against a FASTA database constructed from reviewed and unreviewed human sequences extracted from Uniprot (downloaded at: 16.6.2017). The Maxquant default list of common contaminants was included in the searches. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. For SILAC quantification (Arg10 and Lys8) multiplicity was set to 2 and the re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) is key to maintaining the transmembrane protein composition of cells' limiting membranes. During mammalian CME, a reversible phosphorylation event occurs on Thr156 of the &#x3bc;2 subunit of the main endocytic clathrin adaptor, AP2. We show that this phosphorylation event starts during clathrin-coated pit (CCP) initiation and increases throughout CCP lifetime. &#x3bc;2Thr156 phosphorylation favors a new, cargo-bound conformation of AP2 and simultaneously creates a binding platform for the endocytic NECAP proteins but without significantly altering AP2's cargo affinity in&#xa0;vitro. We describe the structural bases of both. NECAP arrival at CCPs parallels that of clathrin and increases with &#x3bc;2Thr156 phosphorylation. In turn, NECAP recruits drivers of late stages of CCP formation, including SNX9, via a site distinct from where NECAP binds AP2. Disruption of the different modules of this phosphorylation-based temporal regulatory system results in CCP maturation being delayed and/or stalled, hence impairing global rates of CME.

### Keywords
Necap, Endocytosis, Clathrin, Receptor, Aak1

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry Medical Faculty University of Cologne Germany
Institute for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Stefan Hoening

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Höning
Institute of Biochemistry Medical Faculty University of Cologne Germany


