### Accession
PXD013734

### Title
Comparative analysis of T cell receptor and chimeric antigen receptor signaling in primary CD8+ T cells

### Description
Chimeric antigen receptor-modified (CAR) T cell therapy targeting highly expressed lineage antigens is effective for B cell malignancies. Achieving durable efficacy for hematological malignancies and extending this therapeutic approach to solid tumors will require T cell recognition and elimination of tumor cells that may express lower levels of the CAR target antigen. Realizing this goal is challenging because current approaches to CAR design are largely empiric and detailed information on CAR signaling is only beginning to emerge. Synthetic CARs typically require hundreds of molecules on the target cell to initiate signaling, whereas natural T cell receptors (TCRs) can recognize less than ten peptide-MHC (pMHC) antigen complexes. We reasoned that in depth comparison of TCR and CAR stimulation-induced signaling events in primary T cells might guide rationale adaptations to CAR design that would improve antigen sensitivity. Bi-specific T cells possessing an endogenous TCR and exogenous CAR of defined specificity were formulated from healthy HLA-B8+ Epstein-Barr virus-seropositive donors. Bi-specific T cells were stimulated with magnetic microbeads coated with recombinant TCR or CAR antigen for 10, 45, or 90 minutes. Some bi-specific T cells were also left unstimulated and harvested at each timepoint to serve as controls. Altogether, 9 unique conditions were tested in an experiment and three independent experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
For each independent experiment, lysates were prepared from stimulated or unstimulated bi-specific T cells. Lysates were quantified and equal masses were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Individual lysate digests were labeled with a unique tandem mass tag and pooled. The pooled lysate was subjected to p-Tyr immunoprecipitation and the p-Tyr enriched fraction was retained for LC-MS/MS analysis. The flow-through was separated into 13 fractions by basic reverse phase HP-LC and phosphopeptides were further enriched from each fraction by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). All 14 eluates (1 p-Tyr + 13 IMAC) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification of phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra from the analysis were searched against reviewed Human Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) sequence database release 2016_01 using MaxQuant/Andromeda.  The search was performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification.  Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Quantification of TMT ratios was performed using MaxQuant, Perseus, and Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cell receptor, Chimeric antigen receptor, T cell, Immunotherapy, Phosphoprotein signaling

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Immunology, Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Riddell
Immunology, Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA


