### Accession
PXD021575

### Title
A proteomics-based method for identifying antigens within immune complexes

### Description
A novel approach to recover and identify immune complexes (ICs) was developed using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and affinity chromatography on immunoglobulin binding columns (HiTrap Protein G). The purification process was monitored by 1D SDS-PAGE, protein staining, Western blotting and, finally, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) was used to identify the recovered antigens. This approach was applied to serum with artificially created immune complexes (ICs) comprising vaccine antigen (influenza) and antibody, which led to recovery and identification of influenza peptides within the recovered ICs. This approach was compared with the established method for IC detection and recovery, polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation, followed by LC MS/MS. Both approaches successfully enabled capture, recovery and characterization of immunoglobulins and influenza antigen(s) in complex with the immunoglobulins. However, PEG precipitation has the advantage of simplicity and is more suited for large scale studies.

### Sample Protocol
==Sample collection and processing== Serum was recovered from venous blood from seven healthy adult donors, with informed consent and approval of the local research ethics committee (St Mary’s Hospital 09/H0712/58, 13/LO/0026). All seven volunteers had been vaccinated with influenza vaccine Split Virion BP 2014/2015 (strains: A/California/7/2009(H1N1), A/Texas/50/2012(H3N2) and B/Massachusetts/2/2012 from Sanofi Pasteur) at 6-10 weeks prior to sample collection. In addition to the seven volunteers above, serum from two healthy individuals who had been immunized with the Split Virion BP 2015/2016 vaccine (A/California/7/2009 (H1N1)pdm09, A/Switzerland/971593/2013(H3N2), B/Phuket/3073/2013) 6 months prior to serum collection was used. Ten patients with febrile illness within 10 days of onset of fever were recruited at University of California San Diego (UCSD) with parental consent and approval of the local research ethics committee (Human Research Protection Program #140220).   Volunteers’ venous whole blood was collected in serum-separating tube (SST) II advance bottles (Becton Dickinson), kept at room temperature (RT) for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 4°C at 3000 g for 10 minutes for serum separation and recovery.   In vitro ICs were created by adding 40 μl of influenza vaccine to 160 μl of serum. For PEG precipitation studies, two different volumes of influenza vaccine were evaluated - 4 μl and 40 μl. Serum and influenza vaccine were mixed, incubated at 37°C for 1 hour to allow antibody-antigen binding, and then processed either by size exclusion chromatography-affinity purification (SEC-AP) or polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation.  ==Size-exclusion chromatography== Serum spiked with influenza vaccine as above was fractionated on a Superdex 200 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare) pre-packed Tricorn column attached to an AKTA purifier 10 chromatography system (GE Healthcare). Samples were loaded and eluted in 50 mM NaPO4, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.0) buffer. Sample elution was monitored by 280 nm Ultraviolet (UV) absorbance. Molecular mass standards (High Molecular Weight Kit, GE Healthcare) were used to construct calibration curves. All fractions after the void volume (24 ml) were collected.  ==Affinity purification== To further purify the proteins in the fractions collected by SEC, the two initial peaks of SEC were pooled individually and applied separately to a 5 ml HiTrap Protein G column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). Samples were eluted with 0.1 M glycine-HCl (pH 2.7) buffer and neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0).   ==PEG precipitation== Equal 200 μl volumes of serum and 6% PEG 6000 (BDH) which were mixed and dissolved in borate buffer comprising 100 mM boric acid (Sigma Aldrich), 75 mM NaCl (BDH), 25 mM sodium tetraborate (Sigma Aldrich), and incubated statically at 4°C overnight. The resulting precipitate was centrifuged at 2000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. After decanting the supernatant, precipitates were washed once with a 400 μl PEG solution of the same final concentration (3%). Supernatant was decanted and the pellet dissolved in 200 μl of 1x phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (Sigma Aldrich) which was left to stand at 4°C overnight and stored at -80°C until analysed.   ==Protein concentration== Centrifugal filter membranes (GE Healthcare) were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Membranes were rinsed in deionized water (Milli-Q water, HPLC grade, Acros). Vivaspin 20 membranes with 3,000 molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) were used. Each sample was centrifuged at 5,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C using a swing bucket rotor.   ==Protein quantification== For total protein quantification of the resulting PEG precipitated samples, Coomassie Plus (Pierce) was used. The standard microplate protocol (working range = 100-1,500 µg/ml) was followed. Absorbance at 595 nm of each well was determined using a VERSAmax tunable microplate reader.  ==Protein sequencing== Following protein quantification, the samples from affinity chromatography and PEG precipitation were sequenced by LC-MS/MS at the University of Bristol Proteomics Facility (UK) by in-gel digestion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.10. In brief, spectra were searched against the UniProt human proteome (February 2019), immunoglobulin sequences (January 2018 Kabat and NCBI databases) from the abYisis database (Prof Andrew Martin, Personal Communication), and MaxQuant’s standard contaminant database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with full specificity and up to two missed cleavages. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5 Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was employed. Match-between-runs was activated with default settings. False discovery rate was set at 0.01 for peptides and 1 for proteins (to prevent exclusion of immunoglobulin variable peptides which would be distributed between many protein sequences).  Downstream analysis was undertaken in R for Windows 3.5.1. Full gene names for UniProt proteins were determined by InterMineR. Individual proteins were classified using string matching as keratin, trypsin, complement, albumin, fibrinogen, immunoglobulin, other, contaminant and influenza. Individual peptides were then classified according to their corresponding protein(s). Where multiple classes matched, the first in the list preceding was selected.  iBAQ normalises total MS1 intensity per protein based on the number of tryptic peptides, approximating molar ratios of proteins within samples. We sought to calculate mass ratios and recalculate immunoglobulin results using constant region peptides only. We therefore calculated modified iBAQ-based values at peptide level.  Immunoglobulin peptides were classed as belonging to the constant region based on edit distance of two or below to a UniProt human constant immunoglobulin sequence (approximate Levenshtein distance algorithm).  For each protein, including immunoglobulin constant sequences, the number of tryptic peptides per kDa was calculated. Normalised peptide intensities were calculated by dividing the original intensities by the corresponding ratios. Non-constant region immunoglobulin peptide intensities were set to zero.  Normalised constant immunoglobulin peptide intensities were then multiplied by the ratio between the molecular weight (MW) of the (sub)class and its constant region. Where a peptide corresponded to multiple immunoglobulin subclasses, the mean of each correction was taken.  Normalised intensities were summarised by class and sample, with the total for each sample normalised to correspond to the proportion of MS1 intensity belonging to identified features. In this way, differences in identification rates between samples remains informative.

### Publication Abstract
A novel approach to recover and identify immune complexes (ICs) was developed using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and affinity chromatography on immunoglobulin binding columns (HiTrap Protein G). The purification process was monitored by 1D SDS-PAGE, protein staining, Western blotting and, finally, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) was used to identify the recovered antigens. This approach was applied to serum with artificially created immune complexes (ICs) comprising vaccine antigen (influenza) and antibody, which led to recovery and identification of influenza peptides within the recovered ICs. This approach was compared with the established method for IC detection and recovery, polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation, followed by LC MS/MS. Both approaches successfully enabled capture, recovery and characterization of immunoglobulins and influenza antigen(s) in complex with the immunoglobulins. However, PEG precipitation has the advantage of simplicity and is more suited for large scale studies.

### Keywords
Human, Metaproteomics, Immune complexes, Influenza, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Section of Paediatric Infectious Disease
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Andrew McArdle

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Levin
Section of Paediatric Infectious Disease


