### Accession
PXD035566

### Title
Loss of NDR1/2 kinases impairs endomembrane trafficking and ATG9A localisation, reduces autophagy and leads to neurodegeneration

### Description
Autophagy is essential for neuronal development and its deregulation contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. NDR1 and NDR2 are highly conserved kinases implicated in neuronal development, mitochondrial health and autophagy, but how they affect mammalian brain development in vivo is not known. Using single and double Ndr1/2 knockout mouse models we show that, dual, but not individual loss of Ndr1/2 in neurons causes neurodegeneration during brain development, but also in adult mice. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic comparisons between Ndr1/2 knockout and control brains revealed novel kinase substrates and indicated that endocytosis is significantly affected in the absence of NDR1/2. We validated the endocytic protein, Raph1/Lpd1 as a novel NDR1/2 substrate and showed that both NDR1/2 and Raph1 are critical for endocytosis and membrane recycling. In NDR1/2 knockout brains, we observed prominent accumulation of transferrin receptor, p62 and ubiquitinated proteins, indicative of a major impairment of protein homeostasis. Furthermore, the levels of LC3-positive autophagosomes were reduced in knockout neurons, implying that reduced autophagy efficiency mediates p62 accumulation and neurotoxicity. Mechanistically, pronounced mislocalisation of the transmembrane autophagy protein ATG9A at the neuronal periphery, impaired axonal ATG9A trafficking and increased ATG9A surface levels further confirm defects in membrane trafficking and could underlie the impairment in autophagy. We provide novel insight into the roles of NDR1/2 kinases in maintaining neuronal health.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) was used to analyse differences in the total proteome and the phospho-proteome of P20 NDR1/2 KO mice compared to control animals. The hippocampus was dissected from 5 control mice and 5 NDR1/2 KO mice and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to lysis and labelling with a TMT 10-plex reagent. Sample preparation, data acquisition and mass spectrometry analysis were carried out as previously described in (Eder et al., 2020b) with some modifications. Briefly, pooled TMT-labelled (Lot# UK288606) samples were cleaned up using a C18 Sep Pak Vac 1cc, 50 mg (Waters) and dried. The peptide mixture was then subjected to high-select sequential enrichment of metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) to capture phospho-peptides. It was first passed through a high-select TiO2 phospho-enrichment column (Thermo Scientific, A32993) following manufacturer protocol. Flow-through and wash fractions were combined, dried and subsequently used for Fe-NTA phospho-enrichment (Thermo Scientific, A32992). One tenth of the combined flow-through and wash fractions from this enrichment was used for total proteome analysis. The eluates from SMOAC were freeze-dried, solubilised and pooled together. Total proteome and phospho-proteome samples were subjected to high pH reversed phase fractionation (Thermo Scientific, 84868), dried and resolubilised in 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS/MS. The samples were then subjected to HCD MS2 and MSA SPS MS3 fragmentation methods as described in Jiang et al.  Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data for total proteome and phosphoproteome were processed seperately with MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 using reporter ion quantification method and adjusted isotopic distribution according to the TMT Lot number used. Peptide identification was carried out by Andromeda search engine using Uniprot Mus musculus canonical reference proteome from March 2021. Peptide minimum lenght was set to 7 for total proteome and 6 for phosphoproteome and peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is essential for neuronal development and its deregulation contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. NDR1 and NDR2 are highly conserved kinases, implicated in neuronal development, mitochondrial health and autophagy, but how they affect mammalian brain development in vivo is not known. Using single and double <i>Ndr1/2</i> knockout mouse models, we show that only dual loss of <i>Ndr1/2</i> in neurons causes neurodegeneration. This phenotype was present when NDR kinases were deleted both during embryonic development, as well as in adult mice. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic comparisons between <i>Ndr1/2</i> knockout and control brains revealed novel kinase substrates and indicated that endocytosis is significantly affected in the absence of NDR1/2. We validated the endocytic protein Raph1/Lpd1, as a novel NDR1/2 substrate, and showed that both NDR1/2 and Raph1 are critical for endocytosis and membrane recycling. In NDR1/2 knockout brains, we observed prominent accumulation of transferrin receptor, p62 and ubiquitinated proteins, indicative of a major impairment of protein homeostasis. Furthermore, the levels of LC3-positive autophagosomes were reduced in knockout neurons, implying that reduced autophagy efficiency mediates p62 accumulation and neurotoxicity. Mechanistically, pronounced mislocalisation of the transmembrane autophagy protein ATG9A at the neuronal periphery, impaired axonal ATG9A trafficking and increased ATG9A surface levels further confirm defects in membrane trafficking, and could underlie the impairment in autophagy. We provide novel insight into the roles of NDR1/2 kinases in maintaining neuronal health.

### Keywords
Neurodegeneration, Atg9a, Ndr1/2, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Kinases and Brain Development Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Simeon Mihaylov

### Lab Head
Dr Sila K. Ultanir
Kinases and Brain Development Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK


