### Accession
PXD009829

### Title
Generation of a C3a-specific monoclonal antibody and immunoapheresis of C3a/C3 and its associates

### Description
A high affine murine monoclonal antibody was generated against complement factor C3 and selected for binding to the C3a region to serve as immunoaffinity reagent. Subsequently, a C3a/C3 specific immunoaffinity column was developed and apheresis of C3a/C3 and its associates was performed. A proteomic analysis was carried out for identification of apheresis products.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the immunogen: Human serum diluted in PBS was injected into a size exclusion HPLC column (Ultraspherogel SEC 4000, Beckman Instruments, San Ramon, CA, USA) using PBS as mobile phase. Complement factor C3 fractions were pooled and concentrated using Centricon-30 (Amicon Co., Beverly, MA, USA) and further purified by rechromatography.   Antibody generation: A four week old Balb C mouse was immunized with human complement factor C3. Spleen cells were fused with the HAT sensitive murine myeloma cell line 63A8.536 using the poly ethylene glycol method. Clones were tested in immunoblotting experiments and clone 3F7E2 was found to detect C3 via its anterior part of the alpha chain representing C3a.    Purification of 3F7E2-antibody: The antibody clone 3F7E2 was grown in tissue culture flask and the tissue culture supernatant was filtered through a 22 µm filter. The resultant tissue culture fluid was loaded onto a HiTrap protein G column for purification of the murine IgG1 monoclonal antibody. The purified mAb was then dialyzed against PBS at 4°C and then further used for preparing an immunoaffinity column.   Production of 3F7E2-immunoaffinity column: Protein G column purified IgG 1 mAb was ligated to Cyanobromide Sepharose for immunoaffinity purification of human factor C3a/C3. Following the preparation procedure of the immunoaffinity column human precleared serum was loaded onto the 3F7E2-mAb column by recirculation at 4°C for two hours. Purified C3a/C3 was loaded onto SDS PAGE gels and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue followed by destaining. Destained gels were incubated in glycerol H2O and individually stained bands were cut out and subjected to proteomic analysis.   NanoLC-MS Analysis:  The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nL min-1, and a binary 1h gradient, respectively 105 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35% B over 60 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90% B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 2 min back to the gradient 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1650, nominal resolution of 120,000, target value 3E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 27%, isolation width of 2 m/z, resolution of 30,000 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8, >8) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 20 sec. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 2E4 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 8E4. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing protocol:  For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.1.5.8733, Engine version v2.0.0.10 20. For the first step search the RAW-files were searched against the SwissProt human database (20,169 sequences; 11315,794 residues), using following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.03 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % false discovery rate on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS 21. An in-house-developed tool apQuant (www.pd-nodes.org) was used for the peptide and protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoapheresis, Proteomic analysis., Electrophoresis, Complement factor c3a, Monoclonal antibody, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Ludwig Wagner
Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


