### Accession
PXD021023

### Title
Investigating byssogenesis with proteomic analysis of byssus, foot and mantle in Mytilus mussels by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Mussels synthesize an interesting class of biological materials with unique properties to adhere onto virtually any solid surface. Inter- and cross-species analyses have revealed that mussel byssus fabrication is influenced by environmental factors. In this study, proteins expressed specifically byssus and in the byssal-producing organ (foot) were examined for two mussel species from the Mytilidae family using liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The main goal was to describe which proteins are exclusively expressed in the mussel's foot gland, which is responsible for byssus secretion. Proteins uniquely found in the foot samples have been found by comparing to a control tissue (mantle). The overlap with proteins found in byssus samples were also investigated. A restricted list of these proteins have been highlighted as byssus-related, believed to contribute to the unique properties of byssus, such as securing adhesion and toughness, and plasticity based on environmental factors (including promoter regulation). This work may provide further directions on thread biofabrication and additional information on its regulation, as well as contribute to a more complete description of the mussel proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Mechanical and ultrasonic homogenization for foot and mantle (control) tissues were performed in ABC. An urea and thiourea solution was added to ground byssus samples Homogenized samples were incubated with DTT and IAM, and digested overnight with trypsin and pepsin (separately) in triplicate. The digests were clean-up on a OASIS-HLB SPE cartridges and evaporated to dryness under vacuum. Samples were evaporated to dryness under vacuum, and then reconstituted in 10% ACN prior to injection in triplicate onto an Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 solid core column using a Nexera UHPLC system with a water/ACN gradient. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected on a hybrid high-resolution quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer in positive ion mode using information-dependant acquisition (IDA) with dynamic background substraction. The total cycle time was 1.05 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS files were searched against a UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (released on April 2020) by ProteinPilot software (version 5.0.2). From the Bivalvia database (63,461 proteins, 210 species), all mussel-related proteins were kept (11,946 proteins, 81 species) as the search database. To increase proteome coverage, trypsin and pepsin files were combined during data searching (TP-co), ProteinPilot exports (.mgf, .mzIdentML, and PeptideSummary.txt) were then uploaded into Scaffold-Q+ (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software). Within Scaffold, only proteins with a minimum of two peptides at 1% FDR were considered. For each species, Byssus, foot and mantle datasets were compared, and proteins found only in the foot organ were of particular interest, and therefore filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Mussel byssus represents a fascinating class of biological materials with a unique capacity to adhere onto virtually any solid surface. Proteins expressed in byssus, the byssal-producing organ (foot) as well as mantle tissue from Mytilus edulis or Mytilus californianus are analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The mantle is used as a control tissue to pinpoint unique proteins from the foot samples potentially involved in byssogenesis. This work represents an important step towards identifying biologically important proteins expressed in foot, as well as extending knowledge on the byssus proteome. Considering the minimal proteomics data of the studied species, this data also contributes to a more complete description of M. edulis and M. californianus proteomes.

### Keywords
Mussel, Lc-ms/ms, Byssus, Bottom-up proteomics, Foot

### Affiliations
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Chemistry Department / Pharmaqam, Montréal, QC, Canada
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) Montréal (Québec) Canada (lab head)

### Submitter
Lekha Sleno

### Lab Head
Dr Lekha Sleno
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) Montréal (Québec) Canada (lab head)


