### Accession
PXD017298

### Title
Identification of gene fusion events in Mycobacterium tuberculosis that encode novel chimeric proteins

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a facultative intracellular pathogen, responsible for causing tuberculosis. The harsh environment in which M. tuberculosis survives requires this pathogen to maintain an evolutionary advantage. However, the apparent absence of horizontal gene transfer in M. tuberculosis imposes restrictions in the ways by which evolution can occur. Large scale changes in the genome can be introduced through genome reduction, recombination events and structural variation. Here, we identify a functional chimeric protein in the ppe38-71 locus, the absence of which is known to have an impact on protein secretion and virulence. To examine whether this approach was used more often by this pathogen we further develop software that detects potential gene fusion events from multigene deletions using whole-genome sequencing data. With this software we could identify a number of other putative gene-fusion events within the genomes of M. tuberculosis isolates. We were able to demonstrate the expression of one of these gene fusions at the protein level using mass spectrometry. Therefore, gene fusions may provide an additional means of evolution for M. tuberculosis in its natural environment whereby novel proteins and functions can arise.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates were reduced with TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide followed by in solution digestion using sequencing grade modified trypsin overnight in a humidified chamber. The peptides were desalted using stop-and-go tips and dried using a dessicator. The desalted peptides were dried in a desiccator and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis. A total of 1 µg of peptides from each sample was analysed independently on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer connected to a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system Separation of peptides was done a PepMap C18 LC pre-column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å) and an analytical column packed with C18 Aeris peptide 3.6 µM beads at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode where precursor ions (MS1) were detected in the Orbitrap with a nominal resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z. The most intense ions above a threshold of 5 x 103 were chosen for high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 32%. The fragmented ions were analysed in the Orbitrap (MS2) at a resolution of 15 000 at 200 m/z. Ions that had a charge less than 2+ were excluded from MS2 selection.

### Data Protocol
A custom-made M. tuberculosis reference proteome was generated as described in the whole genome sequencing analysis section, specifically by addition of the putative chimeras to the reference proteome. The reference proteome (UniProt accession: UP000001584) from M. tuberculosis H37Rv (downloaded from UniProt 10 April 2018) with a total of 3993 proteins. MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) was used to analyse raw files obtained from LC-MS/MS. The Andromeda search algorithm, integrated in MaxQuant, was used for peptide and protein identification, using default parameters

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genomics, Protoemics, Gene fusions

### Affiliations
DST-NRF Center for Excellence in Biomedical TB research south African Medical Research Council Center for Tuberculosis Research Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics Department of Biomedical Science Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Stellenbosch University Cape Town South Africa
Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town

### Submitter
Samantha Sampson

### Lab Head
Dr Samantha Sampson
DST-NRF Center for Excellence in Biomedical TB research south African Medical Research Council Center for Tuberculosis Research Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics Department of Biomedical Science Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Stellenbosch University Cape Town South Africa


