### Accession
PXD025384

### Title
PfCDPK7 signaling regulates phospholipid biogenesis in Plasmodium  falciparum

### Description
Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) play important function in calcium signaling at various stage of Plasmodium falciparum. CDPK7 is one such kinase, which plays a crucial role in the development of Plasmodium falciparum parasite. In order to understand the function of PfCDPK7, we performed comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of PfCDPK7 knockout mutant and wild-type lines. In brief, proteins from PfCDPK7 knockout mutant and wild-type parasites were isolated, digested with trypsin and labelled with iTRAQ tags. Phosphopeptides were then enriched from iTRAQ labeled peptides and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. This led to the identification of putative substrates of PfCDPK7 in the parasites. A comparative proteomic analysis was performed to measure the protein abundance changes in the PfCDPK7 mutant parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 wild-type and PfCDPK7 knockout mutant lines were cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium with 0.5% albumax and gassed with 5% CO2, 3% O2  and 92% N2 at 37ºC. Synchronization of parasites was achieved by 3 rounds of 5% sorbitol treatment.  PfCDPK7-KO parasites were maintained under ~2.5 µg/ml blasticidine. Wild-type and PfCDPK7-KO parasites at late rings/early trophozoite stages were used for the analysis.  The pellets of mutant and wild type parasites were suspended in lysis buffer (8M Urea, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mMβ-glycerophosphate). The parasite pellets were sonicated, and proteins were extracted. Total protein amount was estimated using the BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion. Resulting peptides were dried and processed further for iTRAQ labeling. Further, labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography using XBridge C18, 5µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). A total of 96 fractions were collected, which were then concatenated to 12 fractions. From each fraction 1/10 was taken for total proteome analysis and the remaining amounts of peptides were subjected to TiO2-based enrichment of phosphopeptides. The analysis was carried out on four independent biological replicates. Each biological replicate was further analysed in technical duplicates to minimize false positives.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data obtained from each replicate of PfCDPK7 were searched against reference protein database of P. falciparum from PlasmoDB resource (human proteins were included as contaminants). Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms were used through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da was used. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine and oxidation of methionine were selected as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and iTRAQ labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine residues were selected as static modifications. Percolator node was used to compute the false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM level and posterior error probability score. The data was filtered at 1% PSM level FDR and normalized against the total protein abundance. We used ptmRS node to calculate the probability of phosphorylation site localization and used a cut-off of > 75% ptmRS score to identify phosphorylation sites. Perseus software (version1.4) used to compute t-test and p-value for each phosphosite. Altered phosphosites upon PfCDPK7 depletion across biological replicates with significant p-valve (0.05) were considered for further bioinformatics analysis. The minimum cut-off of 1.33-fold was applied for differentially phosphorylated sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Cdpk7, Itraq, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India


