### Accession
PXD025026

### Title
Goat’s milk exosomes as natural nanoparticles in detection of inflammatory processes by optical imaging

### Description
Exosomes are cell-derived nanovesicles with a proven key role in intercellular signaling, inflammation processes and immune response. Due to their natural origin and liposome-like structure, these nanometric vesicles have emerged as novel platforms for therapy and diagnosis. This work presents goat’s milk exosomes as natural nanoparticles applied in the detection of inflammatory processes by optical imaging. Goat’s milk exosomes were isolated and fully characterized by their physicochemical properties, proteomics profile and biochemical impact in healthy mice. For the in vitro and in vivo assessment, these nanoparticles were covalently labeled with sulfo-Cyanine 5 and BODIPY-FL. In vitro studies confirmed the internalization of the nanoprobe as well as no cytotoxicity in macrophages populations (RAW 264.7). The capacity of our probe to localize inflammatory processes was in vivo assessed by optical imaging in a peritonitis mouse model confirmed. These results were also confirmed by the flow cytometry analysis of the peritonitis exudates, supporting the use of these natural nanoparticles in the detection of inflammatory processes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  The protein content of goat milk exosomes isolated as described above was solubilized using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Samples (20 µg) were digested using the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were simultaneously reduced (15 mM TCEP) and alkylated (30 mM CAA) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, and sequentially digested with Lys-C (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, overnight at room temperature; Wako) and with trypsin (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C; Promega). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips.  Mass spectrometry For the proteomic analysis of goat milk-derived exosomes, LC-MS/MS was carried out by coupling an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, ThermoScientific) over 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoScientific) and separated using a 90 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-5 min 4% B, 5-7 min 6% B 7-60 min 17.5% B, 60-72.5 min 21.5% B, 72.5-80 min 25% B, 80-94 min 42.5% B, 94-100 min 98% B, 100-110 min 4% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (2.1 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 320 °C and a S-Lens RF level of 50%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between the MS and MS/MS  scans using a top 15 method (minimum AGC target 3E3) and a dynamic exclusion time of 26 sec. MS (350-1500 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (45 ms maximum injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0) using the standard settings against a Bovidae protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL October 2018, 92,108 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation were variable protein modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level) and subsequently the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.6.0.7) for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are cell-derived nanovesicles with a proven intercellular signaling role in inflammation processes and immune response. Due to their natural origin and liposome-like structure, these nanometer-scale vesicles have emerged as novel platforms for therapy and diagnosis. In this work, goat milk exosomes are isolated and fully characterized in terms of their physicochemical properties, proteomics, and biochemical profile in healthy mice, and used to detect inflammatory processes by optical imaging. For the in vitro and in vivo experiments, the exosomes are covalently labeled with the commercial fluorophores sulfo-Cyanine 5 and BODIPY-FL to create nanoprobes. In vitro studies using confocal imaging, flow cytometry, and colorimetric assays confirm the internalization of the nanoprobes as well their lack of cytotoxicity in macrophage populations RAW 264.7. Optical imaging in the mouse peritoneal region confirms the in vivo ability of one of the nanoprobes to localize inflammatory processes. In vivo imaging shows exosome uptake in the inflamed peritoneal region, and flow-cytometric analysis of peritonitis exudates confirms the uptake by macrophage and neutrophil populations. These results support the promising use of goat milk exosomes as natural probes in the detection of inflammatory processes.

### Keywords
Exosome, Nanoparticle, Optical imaging, Inflammation, Diagnosis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN


