### Accession
PXD006736

### Title
Label-free quantification of proteome changes in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii treated with lipid inducing small molecules

### Description
A study to investigate the effect of small molecule lipid inducing compounds that leads to hyper-accumulation of lipids in N replete cells of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  These compounds were identified through a high throughput screening designed for that purpose.  The highthrouhput screen (HTS) evaluated  43,783 compounds and identified 367 primary hits.  These 367 hits were further retested using a 8-point dilution series (from 0.25 to 30 uM) and verified the activity of 243 compounds that induce the hyper lipid accumulating phenotype in algae.  Once the hit compounds were identified and confirmed, we then performed extensive chemoinformatics analysis to look for common scaffolds and identified several common substructures.  We then selected 15 top performing compounds from 5 diverse structural groups and tested for biochemical parameters such as growth, lipid accumulating capacity, effect on photosynthetic rates, respiration rates, oxygen consumption rates, analysis of different lipid species to identify and quantify fatty acid species using GC-MS, transcriptome analysis using next generation sequencing (RNASeq), untargeted metabolomics using LC-MS, lipidome analysis using FT-ICR MS.  To understand the global changes in the proteome, 2 structurally different compounds were selected and compared to the control without compound treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in biological triplicates treated with either DMSO (Control),  and compound treatment (5 uM final conc.) for 72 h.  Cells were harvested  and proteins were extracted using a routine FASP protocol.  For protein quantification, proteins were first precipitated using 100 % acetone and quantified using BCA (Pierce) as per manufacturers instruction.  For in-solution digestion, 100 ug protein lysate was used.  The protein lysate was reduced, alkylated and two-step digestion was performed using a mixture of Trypsin and Lys-C mixture.  The proteins were resuspended in 8 M Urea and reduction and alkylation was performed.  For proteolytic digestion, the protease mixture was added at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein ratio) and incubated initially for 4 hours.  After the 4 hours incubation, the sample is diluted so as to bring the urea concentration below 0.8 M with 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and allowed for digestion was continued overnight at 37 C.  Digestion reaction was terminated by adding was stopped by adding TFA (1% of final volume).  Peptides were cleaned using C18 stage tips and analyzed on Waters Synapt G2 HDMS instrument in MSE mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (64-bit version v1.0; Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters). Raw files were lock mass-corrected using [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8426; [M+2H]2+) . For initial peak detection Apex3D algorithm from Waters Corporation was used with following settings: Apex3D processing: (i) low energy ion threshold: 250 counts, (ii) elevated energy ion threshold: 125 counts, (iii) minimal total ion intensity: 750 counts.   Search database. Search database was Chlamydomonas reinhardtii v5.5 Phytozome (19526 sequences). Mitochondrial and chloroplastic protein sequences were downloaded from NCBI (81 sequences) and used for MSE search.  Imported runs were automatically aligned to the reference run identified automatically by the software. All runs were selected for peak picking with the default setting (3) of the automatic peak picking method. A minimum chromatographic peak width of 0.15 min was applied and the maximum allowable ion charge was set to 6. All detected features were normalized to a normalization reference run identified by the software. Samples Between-treatment comparison was used as experimental design.   For peptide identification, a MSE search was performed against the combined target-decoy database specified above with the following parameter settings: digest reagent, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 2; max protein mass: 2,500 kDa; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl; variable modifications: deamination N, deamination Q, oxidation M. Search tolerance parameters: peptide tolerance, auto; fragment tolerance, auto; FDR < 1 %. Ion matching requirements: 3 fragments/peptide, 5 fragments/protein, 1 peptide/protein. Default settings (i.e. grouping of similar proteins and quantitation from non-conflicting features only) were used for protein building.  For statistical testing between conditions and identification of differentially abundant proteins R package MSstats 3.7.3 was employed.  Peptides were excluded if they were not found in 7 out of 9 samples (approx. 80% of samples) (7132 peptides total).  Raw data was log2 transformed and normalized using default equalizeMedians method (Supp material S1).  Features (peptides) mapped to the same protein is treated as replicate measures of protein abundance.  Using pair-wise comparison of protein abundance across groups, significant differences in protein abundance across different compound treatment conditions was performed based on linear mixed-effects models. We defined the protein expression to be regulated if changes in the intensity of treatment group compared to untreated control had a p-value of less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) and log2 fold change of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Label free proteomics, Biofuels, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Lincoln
FATTTLab Department of Biochemistry,  1901 Vine Street,  University of Nebraska-Lincoln http://biochem.unl.edu/concetta-c-dirusso

### Submitter
Nishikant Wase

### Lab Head
Dr Concetta DiRusso
FATTTLab Department of Biochemistry,  1901 Vine Street,  University of Nebraska-Lincoln http://biochem.unl.edu/concetta-c-dirusso


