### Accession
PXD010338

### Title
The garlic compound allicin causes strong disulfide stress and protein S-sulfoallylation as revealed by proteomics and transcriptomics in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Allicin from garlic is an antimicrobial substance that is effective against several ESKAPE pathogens, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). However, the antimicrobial mode action of allicin has not been revealed in Gram-positive bacteria. Here, we have studied the changes in the transcriptome by Allicin which revealed a thiol-specific oxidative stress response in S. aureus. Using shotgun proteomics, we identified numerous proteins that were modified by protein S-sulfoallylation in S. aureus. Allicin further caused an oxidative shift in the bacillithiol (BSH) redox potential as revealed by Brx-roGFP2 biosensor measurements. In summary, our results revealed that allicin acts via sulfoallylation of Cys residues in proteins causing an impaired redox state in S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Staphylococcus aureus USA300 TCH1516 was cultivated in Luria Bertani (LB) medium in triplicate at 37°C until cells have reached an optical density at 540 nm of 2.0. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8500 rpm for 10 min at 25oC, washed with Belitsky minimal medium (BMM) and adapted to BMM for one hour before exposure to 300 µM allicin stress. S. aureus cells were harvested before and 30 min after exposure to 300 µM allicin and disrupted in TE buffer (10mM Tris, 1mM EDTA) (pH8) containning 50mM N-Ethylmaleinimid (NEM) with a Precellys24 Ribolyzer. NEM-alkylated protein extracts from allicin treated-cells were separated by 15% non-reducing SDS-PAGE followed by tryptic in-gel digestion and LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Post-translational thiol modifications of proteins were identified by searching all tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra in dta format against the S. aureus USA300 target–decoy protein sequence database extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) using Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev. 11, Thermo Electron, including Scaffold 4.0; Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR). The SEQUEST search parameters and thiol modifications were used as described (DOI:10.1089/ars.2013.5423)

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of methicillin-resitant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in hospitals and the community poses an increasing health burden, which requires the discovery of alternative antimicrobials. Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate) from garlic exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against many multidrug resistant bacteria. The thiol-reactive mode of action of allicin involves its S-thioallylations of low molecular weight (LMW) thiols and protein thiols. To investigate the mode of action and stress response caused by allicin in S. aureus, we analyzed the transcriptome signature, the targets for S-thioallylation in the proteome and the changes in the bacillithiol (BSH) redox potential (E<sub>BSH</sub>) under allicin stress. Allicin caused a strong thiol-specific oxidative and sulfur stress response and protein damage as revealed by the induction of the PerR, HypR, QsrR, MhqR, CstR, CtsR, HrcA and CymR regulons in the RNA-seq transcriptome. Allicin also interfered with metal and cell wall homeostasis and caused induction of the Zur, CsoR and GraRS regulons. Brx-roGFP2 biosensor measurements revealed a strongly increased E<sub>BSH</sub> under allicin stress. In the proteome, 57 proteins were identified with S-thioallylations under allicin treatment, including translation factors (EF-Tu, EF-Ts), metabolic and redox enzymes (AldA, GuaB, Tpx, KatA, BrxA, MsrB) as well as redox-sensitive MarR/SarA-family regulators (MgrA, SarA, SarH1, SarS). Phenotype and biochemical analyses revealed that BSH and the HypR-controlled disulfide reductase MerA are involved in allicin detoxification in S. aureus. The reversal of protein S-thioallylation was catalyzed by the Brx/BSH/YpdA pathway. Finally, the BSSB reductase YpdA was shown to use S-allylmercaptobacillithiol (BSSA) as substrate to regenerate BSH in S. aureus. In conclusion, allicin results in an oxidative shift of E<sub>BSH</sub> and protein S-thioallylation, which can be reversed by YpdA and the Brx/BSH/YpdA electron pathways in S. aureus to regenerate thiol homeostasis.

### Keywords
S-sulfoallylation, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Allicin stress, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Biology-Microbiology, Königin-Luise-Strasse 12-16, D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Biology-Microbiology, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Busche

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Biology-Microbiology, Königin-Luise-Strasse 12-16, D-14195 Berlin, Germany.


