### Accession
PXD009409

### Title
FAM183b interactome -  The evolutionary conserved FOXJ1 target gene Fam183b is essential for motile cilia in Xenopus but dispensable for ciliary function in mice

### Description
A SF-TAP tagged FAM183b fusion protein was expressed in HEK293T cells. Protein complexes were purified by tandem affinity purification to identify the FAM183b-associated protein complex.

### Sample Protocol
AFFINITY PURIFICATION HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM (PAA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 0.5% Penicillin/Streptomycin. Cells were seeded, grown overnight and then transfected with the corresponding SF-TAP-tagged DNA constructs using PEI reagent (Polysciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 48 hours later, cells were harvested in lysis buffer containing 0.5% Nonidet-P40 (NP-40), protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails II and III (Sigma-Aldrich) in TBS (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 150 mM NaCl) for 20 minutes at 4°C. Cell debris and nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 minutes. For SF-TAP analysis, the cleared supernatant was incubated for one hour at 4°C with Strep-Tactin superflow (IBA). Subsequently, the resin was washed three times in wash buffer (TBS containing 0.1% NP-40 and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails II and III, Sigma-Aldrich). Protein baits were eluted with Strep-elution buffer (2 mM desthiobiotin in TBS). For the second purification step, the eluates were transferred to anti-Flag M2 agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for one hour at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with wash buffer and proteins were eluted with Flag peptide (200 µg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) in TBS. After purification, the samples were precipitated with chloroform and methanol and subjected to in-solution tryptic cleavage. Precipitated protein samples were dissolved in 30 µl, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), supplemented with 2% RapiGest (Waters) before 1 µl 100 mM DTT (Merck) was added. After incubation at 60 °C for 10 minutes, 1 µl, 300 mM 2-Iodacetamide was added followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Before overnight incubation at 37 °C, 1 µg of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, sequencing grade) was added. The reaction was stopped by addition of Trifluoracetic acid to a final concentration of 1%.  MASS SPECTROMETRY After precipitation of the proteins by methanol-chloroform, a tryptic in-solution digestion was performed as described above. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a NanoRSLC3000 HPLC system (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapXL, respectively coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were automatically injected and loaded at a flow rate of 6 μl/min in 98% buffer C (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water) and 2% buffer B (80% actetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) onto a nanotrap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Dionex). After 5 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100 Å; Dionex) by a linear gradient from 2% to 35% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 33 minutes for EPASIS samples, and over 80 minutes for SF-TAP samples. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 35% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. The eluted peptides were analyzed by using a LTQ OrbitrapVelos mass spectrometer. From the high-resolution mass spectrometry pre-scan with a mass range of 300–1,500, the 10 most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 200 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for collision-induced dissociation was set to a value of 35, and the resulting fragments were detected with normal resolution in the linear ion trap. The lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
For qualitative results the raw data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) and Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.). Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by ProteoWizard msConvert. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot. Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt_2015_03 database (selected for Homo sapiens, 20,212 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Furthermore, proteins were only considered to be specific protein complex components if they were not detected in the control experiments and identified in at least two of three biological replicates

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor FOXJ1 is essential for the formation of motile cilia throughout the animal kingdom. Target genes therefore likely constitute an important part of the motile cilia program. Here, we report on the analysis of one of these targets, Fam183b, in Xenopus and mice. Fam183b encodes a protein with unknown function which is conserved from the green algae Chlamydomonas to humans. Fam183b is expressed in tissues harbouring motile cilia in both mouse and frog embryos. FAM183b protein localises to basal bodies of cilia in mIMCD3 cells and of multiciliated cells of the frog larval epidermis. In addition, FAM183b interacts with NUP93, which also localises to basal bodies. During frog embryogenesis, Fam183b was dispensable for laterality specification and brain development, but required for ciliogenesis and motility of epidermal multiciliated cells and nephrostomes, i.e. the embryonic kidney. Surprisingly, mice homozygous for a null allele did not display any defects indicative of disrupted motile ciliary function. The lack of a cilia phenotype in mouse and the limited requirements in frog contrast with high sequence conservation and the correlation of gene expression with the presence of motile cilia. This finding may be explained through compensatory mechanisms at sites where no defects were observed in our FAM183b-loss-of-function studies.

### Keywords
Human, Protein complex, Mouse

### Affiliations
Medical bioanalytics Institute for ophthalmic research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Karsten Boldt
Medical bioanalytics Institute for ophthalmic research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen


