### Accession
PXD028314

### Title
PCNA regulates metabolism by stabilizing ENO1 and 6PGD

### Description
The essential roles of PCNA as a scaffold protein in DNA replication and repair are well established, while its more recently discovered cytosolic roles are less explored. Alpha-enolase (ENO1) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD), important proteins in glycolysis and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway (PPP), respectively, both contain PCNA interacting motifs. Here we show reduced binding to PCNA when the PCNA interacting motif APIM in ENO1 is mutated. Mutant cells have lower ENO1 protein levels, have reduced glucose consumption, altered glycolytic metabolite and nucleoside phosphate pools and increased activation of the citric acid cycle (TCA) compared to parental cells. Treatment of a panel of haematological cell lines with a cell penetrating peptide containing APIM (ATX-101), lead to a metabolic shift with reduction in glycolytic metabolite and nucleoside phosphate pools as well reduced levels of ENO1 and 6PGD proteins. These results suggests that PCNA stabilize ENO1 and 6PGD, and that targeting PCNA reduce the glycolysis, PPP and nucleoside phosphate pools via destabilization of these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides and stressors. APIM-peptide, ATX-101 (Ac-MDRWLVKWKKKRKIRRRRRRRRRRR), mutAPIM-peptide, ATX-A (Ac-MDRALVKWKKKRKIRRRRRRRRRRR) {Müller, 2013 #51}, and R11 (Ac-RRRRRRRRRRR) {Olaisen, 2015 #120}  (Innovagen, Lund, Sweden) were used. Monocytes were stimulated with Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, Missouri, USA) for 4h, and cell lines were treated with cisplatin (Hospira, Lake Forest, Illinois, USA). Cell lines and assay conditions. Cell densities were optimized for each individual assay and corresponding sampling time points, and peptide doses were adjusted to cell density to obtain the same number of annexin-positive cells in all experiments. These data are listed in Supplementary Table 2, also listing number of independent cultures analyzed (n) and number of repeated experiments. JJN3 {Müller, 2013 #51} and RPMI 8226 (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia, USA, CCL-155) (MM), HL60 (ATCC  CCL-240) and NB4 (Kind gift from professor Stein Døskeland, University of Bergen, Norway) (AML), and DU145 (ATCC HBT-81, prostate cancer) cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich),  MC/CAR (ATTC® CRL-8083) (MM) were cultured in IMDM (Sigma-Aldrich), and HEK293 (ATCC CRL-1573, embryonic kidney) were cultured in DMEM high glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), all supplemented with 2mM glutamine (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 100 µg/mL gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich), 2.5 µg/mL amphotericin (Sigma-Aldrich), and fetal bovine serum (FBS)(Sigma-Aldrich); 10% in DMEM high glucose and RPMI 1640, and 20% in IMDM.  Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Primary monocytes. Peripheral blood monocytes were isolated and cultured from three A +/- buffy coats (Blood Bank, St. Olav's University Hospital, Norway) as described in {Olaisen, 2015 #120}. Mutated cell lines. HAP1 is a near haploid cell line isolated from a patient with chronic myeloid leukemia. The fact that it is haploid also make it easier to induce site specific mutations using CRISPR/Cas9 in this cell line. We ordered CRISPR/Cas9-edited HAP1 ENO1 F423A cell lines from Horizon (Cambridge, UK), and received two individual clones (called M1 and M2) and the parental cell line (WT). The mutation was verified by targeted sequencing (non-allele specific PCR). The cell lines were cultured in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM) (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10 % FBS, 2.5 µg/ml Fungizone ® Amphotericin B (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific), 1x MEM non-essential amino acids Solutions (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific) and antibiotic mixture containing 100 µg/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptromycin (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific). The cells were cultured at 37 °C in a 5 % CO2–humidified atmosphere.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by processing MS data using MaxQuant v.1.6.17.0 (Ref: https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2016.136).  Open workflow provided in FragPipe version 14 (Ref: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S153594762035132X) was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, the following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; acetylation of protein N-terminal, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine as dynamic post-translational modification. These were imported in MaxQuant which uses m/z and retention time (RT) values to align each run against each other sample with a minute window match-between-run function and 20 mins overall sliding window using a clustering-based technique. These were further queried against the Human proteome including isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) in September 2019 along with MaxQuant’s internal contaminants database using Andromeda built into MaxQuant. Both Protein and peptide identifications false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, only unique peptides with high confidence were used for final protein group identification. Peak abundances were extracted by integrating the area under the peak curve. Each protein group abundance was normalized by the total abundance of all identified peptides for each run and protein by calculated median summing all unique and razor peptide-ion abundances for each protein using label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm  (Ref:  https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) with minimum peptides ≥ 1. LFQ values for all samples were combined and log-transformed with base 2 and the transformed control values were subtracted. The resulting values reflecting the change relative to control for each condition were subjected to two-sided non-parametric Wilcoxon Sign Rank Test {Gibbons, 2010 #422} as implemented in MATLAB R2015a (Math Works Inc, Natick, Massachusetts, USA) in order to check the consistency in directionality of the change, namely a negative sign reflecting decreased and positive sign reflecting increased expression of respective protein group. The choice of this non-parametric test avoids the assumption of a certain type of null distribution as in Student’s t-test by working over the Rank of the observation instead of observation value itself. Further, it also makes it robust to outliers and extreme variations noticed in observed values. DE protein groups were identified at p 0.25. The Uniprot accession IDs of these DE were mapped to pathways (https://www.wikipathways.org/index.php/WikiPathways Pathways version wikipathways-20201010-gmt-Homo_sapiens.gmt (Carlson M (2019). org.Hs.eg.db: Genome wide annotation for Human. R package version 3.8.2.) ) using R (https://www.R-project.org/) libraries, org.Hs.eg.db and clusterProfiler (www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/omi.2011.0118). Venn diagrams were built using the R package limma {Ritchie, 2015 #496}. Online Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis™ software (QIAGEN Inc., www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis) was used to combine with metabolomics data for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery of canonical pathways and other functional analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The essential roles of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) as a scaffold protein in DNA replication and repair are well established, while its cytosolic roles are less explored. Two metabolic enzymes, alpha-enolase (ENO1) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD), both contain PCNA interacting motifs. Mutation of the PCNA interacting motif APIM in ENO1 (F423A) impaired its binding to PCNA and resulted in reduced cellular levels of ENO1 protein, reduced growth rate, reduced glucose consumption, and reduced activation of AKT. Metabolome and signalome analysis reveal large consequences of impairing the direct interaction between PCNA and ENO1. Metabolites above ENO1 in glycolysis accumulated while lower glycolytic and TCA cycle metabolite pools decreased in the APIM-mutated cells; however, their overall energetic status were similar to parental cells. Treating haematological cancer cells or activated primary monocytes with a PCNA targeting peptide drug containing APIM (ATX-101) also lead to a metabolic shift characterized by reduced glycolytic rate. In addition, we show that ATX-101 treatments reduced the ENO1 - PCNA interaction, the ENO1, GAPDH and 6PGD protein levels, as well as the 6PGD activity. Here we report for the first time that PCNA acts as a scaffold for metabolic enzymes, and thereby act as a direct regulator of primary metabolism.

### Keywords
Apim-peptide, Glycolysis, Apim, Atx-101, Cell signaling, Pi3k/akt pathway

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400


