### Accession
PXD036951

### Title
Phosphoproteomics informed tailored low-dose drug combination strategies in Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is a devastating disease with poor prognosis, commonly characterized by aberrant signaling. Phosphoproteomics provides a functional scaffold to unravel these complex signaling networks and to identify new targets. By a two-step sequential phospho-peptide enrichment, we generated the phosphoproteome for 9 PDAC cell lines (2 derived from PDX samples). By using integrative inferred kinase activity (INKA) scoring, we identified hyperactive phosphokinases that were subsequently matched to kinase inhibitors. In the absence of an oncogenic driver, low-dose kinase inhibitor combinations against multiple (parallel) activated kinases, provided higher efficacy as compared to single-drug treatment. Tailored low-dose combination strategies exhibited promising efficacy in vitro and in vivo, which may ultimately improve treatment outcomes in PDAC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured to 80% confluency in 15 cm dishes. For protein isolation, 3 dishes of were washed twice with 10 ml PBS and were lysed in 3 ml lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate), followed by three cycles of sonication (MSE soniprep 150). Afterwards, samples were cleared by centrifugation (4500 x g, 20 min, room temperature). For protein digestion and desalting for IMAC and pTyr IP experiments an equivalent of 5 mg was used. Reduction with DTT and alkylation with IAA followed, and after dilution to 2 M urea, samples were digested with trypsin overnight (1:100 m/m) and then acidified by addition of TFA (0.1% end concentration). The digests were desalted using Oasis HLB columns (10 or 500 mg capacity, Waters) and eluted in 0.1 % TFA, 80% ACN solution. Immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine-containing peptides (pTyr IP) was essentially performed according to instructions of Cell Signaling Technologies using the PTM scan pTyr-1000 kit #8803 following lyophilisation of the desalted digest. For global phosphoproteomic experiments enrichment was performed on the pTyr IP non-bound fraction on the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies) by using 5 µl Fe(III)-NTA IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) cartridges (Agilent # G5496-60085) starting from 200 µg desalted peptides in 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in 25 µl 5% NH4OH / 30% ACN. Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 110 min (140 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100 ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms, and an underfill ratio of 0.1%, resulting in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification, as well as  phosphosite identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 software using the Swissprot homo sapiens reference proteome (downloaded January 2021, canonical and isoforms, 42383 entries. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Phosphosite Intensities were normalized to the median site intensity for the global phosphoproteome and to the corresponding lysate sum spectral counts for the pTyr phosphoproteome. Downstream phosphosite analysis included only class I phosphosites (localization probability >0.75). Label-free quantitation was performed both with spectral counting as well as with LFQ. Lysate protein group spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Imac, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Ptyr ip, Inka, Single shot

### Affiliations
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


