### Accession
PXD031033

### Title
Cross-linking MS of S. cerevisiae ORC bound to DNA and Cdc6

### Description
During DNA replication initiation, the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC) and Cdc6 co-associate on DNA to load replicative helicases onto origins of replication. We apply DSSO crosslinking mass spectrometry of reconstituted ORC-DNA-Cdc6 to identify interactions between different subunits and domains in the complex.

### Sample Protocol
DSSO-based crosslinking of recombinant proteins and measurement by MS2/MS3 on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos instrument as described in Schmidt et al.

### Data Protocol
XlinkX/Proteome Discoverer analysis as described in Schmidt et al.

### Publication Abstract
The coordinated action of multiple replicative helicase loading factors is needed for the licensing of replication origins prior to DNA replication. Binding of the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC) to DNA initiates the ATP-dependent recruitment of Cdc6, Cdt1 and Mcm2-7 loading, but the structural details for timely ATPase site regulation and for how loading can be impeded by inhibitory signals, such as cyclin-dependent kinase phosphorylation, are unknown. Using cryo-electron microscopy, we have determined several structures of S. cerevisiae ORC&#xb7;DNA&#xb7;Cdc6 intermediates at 2.5-2.7&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. These structures reveal distinct ring conformations of the initiator&#xb7;co-loader assembly and inactive ATPase site configurations for ORC and Cdc6. The Orc6 N-terminal domain laterally engages the ORC&#xb7;Cdc6 ring in a manner that is incompatible with productive Mcm2-7 docking, while deletion of this Orc6 region alleviates the CDK-mediated inhibition of Mcm7 recruitment. Our findings support a model in which Orc6 promotes the assembly of an autoinhibited ORC&#xb7;DNA&#xb7;Cdc6 intermediate to block origin licensing in response to CDK phosphorylation and to avert DNA re-replication.

### Keywords
Ms2_ms3, Orc, Phosphorylation, Xlms, Crosslinking ms, Cleavable, Xlinkx, Dsso, Cid

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Bleichert lab, Yale University, USA
FMI Basel

### Submitter
Jan Seebacher

### Lab Head
Dr Franziska Bleichert
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Bleichert lab, Yale University, USA


