### Accession
PXD035459

### Title
Multi-omics Analysis of naive B cells of patients harboring the C104R mutation in TACI

### Description
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most prevalent form of symptomatic primary immunodeficiency in humans. The genetic cause of CVID is still unknown in about 70% of cases. 10% of CVID patients carry heterozygous mutations in the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 13B gene (TNFRSF13B), encoding TACI. Mutations in TNFRSF13B alone may not be sufficient for the development of CVID, as 1% of the healthy population carry these mutations. The common hypothesis is that TACI mutations are not fully penetrant and additional factors contribute to the development of CVID. To determine these additional factors, we investigated the perturbations of transcription factor (TF) binding and the transcriptome profiles in unstimulated and CD40L/IL21-stimulated naïve B cells from CVID patients harboring the C104R mutation in TNFRSF13B and compared them to their healthy relatives with the same mutation. In addition, the proteome of stimulated naïve B cells was investigated. For functional validation, intracellular protein concentrations were measured by flow cytometry. Our analysis revealed 8% less accessible chromatin in unstimulated naïve B cells and 25 % less accessible chromatin in class-switched memory B cells from affected and unaffected TACI mutation carriers compared to healthy donors. The most enriched TF binding motifs in TACI mutation carriers involved members from the ETS, IRF and NF-B TF families. Validation experiments supported dysregulation of the NF-B and MAPK pathways. In steady state, naïve B cells had increased cell death pathways and reduced cell metabolism pathways; while after stimulation, enhanced immune responses and decreased cell survival was detected. Using a multi-omics approach, our findings provide valuable insights into the impaired biology of naïve B cells from TACI mutation carriers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and enzymatic digestion After stimulation, between 54.000- 189.000 cells per sample were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and dry pellets were flash frozen and stored at -80°C. Cell lysis and protein extraction were performed by resuspending each pellet in 50 µl of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and sonicating it for 15 minutes at 4°C (Bioruptor, Diagenode). For each sample, up to 100 µg of protein extract were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 20 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Protein digestion with 1 µg of LysC (FUJIFILM Wako) was carried out in 8M urea, 50 mM ABC, for 2 hours at room temperature, after which the digestion buffer was diluted to final 2M urea with 50 mM ABC and digestion with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) was carried out overnight at room temperature. The following day, digestion was stopped by adding acetonitrile (ACN) to 2% and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.3% and the samples were cleared by centrifugation for 5 minutes at maximum speed. The supernatants were then desalted with C18 StageTips, from which purified peptides were eluted with 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid. Finally, the elution buffer was evaporated by vacuum centrifugation and purified peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% TFA. For LC-MS/MS analysis, up to 1 µg of purified peptides from each sample were injected as single-shot measurements. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) into a column (75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length) in house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH), and eluted over a 150-min linear gradient of 5-30% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) with a 250 nl/min flow rate. The Q Exactive HF was operated with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent mode with a survey scan range of 300-1,650 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, maximum injection time of 20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. Up to ten most abundant ions with charge 2-5 were isolated with a 1.8 m/z isolation window and subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z, maximum injection time of 55 ms and AGC target of 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s to avoid repeated sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software, v.1.6.7.0 [31]. Searches were performed by the integrated Andromeda search engine [32] against the Human UniProt database (June 2019) and a common contaminants database to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of < 1%. Enzyme specificity was “Trypsin/P” with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum length of 7 required for peptide identification. N‐terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Match between runs was enabled to transfer identifications across measurements based on mass and normalized retention times, with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Label‐free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm [33] with a minimum peptide ratio count of 1 required for quantification.  Data were filtered by removing proteins only identified by site, reverse peptides, and potential contaminants, and label-free protein quantification intensities were log2 transformed. Further analysis was performed with RStudio. Normalization and imputation using a left-censored method that replaces missing values taking them from a normal distribution with 0.3 width and 1.8 downshift were applied with the R Bioconductor package DEP (version 1.12.0). Next, differentially expressed proteins were identified using the t-test from the R package limma (version 3.46.0) with alpha = 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most prevalent form of symptomatic primary immunodeficiency in humans. The genetic cause of CVID is still unknown in about 70% of cases. Ten percent of CVID patients carry heterozygous mutations in the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 13B gene (<i>TNFRSF13B</i>), encoding TACI. Mutations in <i>TNFRSF13B</i> alone may not be sufficient for the development of CVID, as 1% of the healthy population carry these mutations. The common hypothesis is that TACI mutations are not fully penetrant and additional factors contribute to the development of CVID. To determine these additional factors, we investigated the perturbations of transcription factor (TF) binding and the transcriptome profiles in unstimulated and CD40L/IL21-stimulated na&#xef;ve B cells from CVID patients harboring the C104R mutation in <i>TNFRSF13B</i> and compared them to their healthy relatives with the same mutation. In addition, the proteome of stimulated na&#xef;ve B cells was investigated. For functional validation, intracellular protein concentrations were measured by flow cytometry. Our analysis revealed 8% less accessible chromatin in unstimulated na&#xef;ve B cells and 25% less accessible chromatin in class-switched memory B cells from affected and unaffected TACI mutation carriers compared to healthy donors. The most enriched TF binding motifs in TACI mutation carriers involved members from the ETS, IRF, and NF-&#x3ba;B TF families. Validation experiments supported dysregulation of the NF-&#x3ba;B and MAPK pathways. In steady state, na&#xef;ve B cells had increased cell death pathways and reduced cell metabolism pathways, while after stimulation, enhanced immune responses and decreased cell survival were detected. Using a multi-omics approach, our findings provide valuable insights into the impaired biology of na&#xef;ve B cells from TACI mutation carriers.

### Keywords
Naïve b cells, Cd40l stimulation, Dna accessibility, Taci, Rna-seq, Proteomics, Atac-seq, Tnfrsf13b, Nf-b, Transcription factor, Cvid

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg. Breisacher Strae 115, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vincenzo Vela 6 - CH-6500 Bellinzona

### Submitter
Matteo Pecoraro

### Lab Head
Dr Bodo Grimbacher
Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg. Breisacher Strae 115, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.


