### Accession
PXD045500

### Title
Benchmarking CHIMERYS using Wide Window Acquisition and Classical Narrow Isolation Window Data Dependent Acquisition

### Description
A comprehensive proteome map is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Although great improvements in sample preparation, instrumentation and data analysis already yield-ed impressive results, current studies suffer from a limited proteomic depth and dynamic range there-fore lacking low abundant or highly hydrophobic proteins. Here, we combine and benchmark advanced micro pillar array columns (µPAC) operated at nanoflow with wide window acquisition (WWA) and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine for data analysis to maximize chromatographic separation power, sensitivity and proteome coverage.  The wide window acquisition method merges the strengths of DDA and DIA. WWA uses a broad isolation window (≥4 Th) for data-dependent precursor selection. Similar to DIA, precursor ions close to those selected are co-fragmented, producing chimeric spectra that boost IDs and improve coverage of low-abundance peptides, which would otherwise be missed. WWA is particularly powerful when combined with the AI-driven CHIMERYS search algorithm, which allows confident identification of up to eleven peptides from a single chimeric spectrum. Developed by MSAID, the CHIMERYS algorithm makes use of accurate fragment spectrum predictions trained on millions of spectra, which allows to utilize additional spectral properties such as relative signal intensities for drastically improved identification rates. Entrapment experiments were conducted searching mouse immunoprecipitation samples with MS Amanda 2.0 and CHIMERYS by applying an additional custom-made decoy database, which demonstrated excellent protein, peptide and PSM FDR control from 1% upwards for both search engines. Combining wide precursor isolation widths of 4-12 Th with the CHIMERYS search engine identified 51-74% more proteins and 59-150% more peptides for single cell, immunoprecipitation and multi-species samples in comparison to a standard proteomics workflow employing MS Amanda 2.0 and an isolation width of 1 Th. Application of different isolation widths revealed that the optimal isolation window size varies according to sample amount and complexity with 12 Th resulting in the highest number of identifications for single cell-equivalent injection amounts, while 4 Th provided best results for classical bulk inputs of 400ng. Evaluation of coefficients of variation also yielded improved results for WWA over classical DDA when assessing single cell, 40 cell and 250pg bulk HeLa lysates. Overall, WWA and CHIMERYS resulted in substantially improved proteomic depth and quantification for all sample types tested and will provide a highly valuable toolset for the proteomics community.

### Sample Protocol
SAMPLE PREPARATION HeLa samples For the isolation width experiments, HeLa (Thermo, Pierce HeLa Protein Digest Standard, 88328) was diluted using 0.1% TFA to reach 1 ng/L for 1 ng injections, 10 ng/L for 10 ng injections, 200 ng/L for 100 and 200 ng injections and 800 ng/L for 400 ng injections, respectively. To mimic single cell level injections, HeLa digest was diluted to 250 pg/L in 0.1% TFA including 5% DMSO, and 1L of this mix was used for injection. For the single cell and low input experiments, 250 pg HeLa Pierce was injected from a 2.5 ng/L solution in 0.1% TFA/ 5% DMSO and 10 ng from a 5 ng/L solution. Triple proteome mix HYE HeLa (H) (Thermo, Pierce HeLa Protein Digest Standard, 88328), yeast (Y) (Promega, MS Compatible Yeast Protein Extract, Digest, S. cerevisiae, 100ug, V7461) and E. coli digests (E) (Waters, MassPREP E. coli Digest Standard, 186003196) were combined at a ratio of H:Y:E = 8:1:1, in 0.1% TFA. Samples were prepared in glass autosampler vials (Fisherbrand™ 9mm Short Thread TPX Vial with integrated glass micro-inserts, Cat. No. 11515924). Mouse immunoprecipitation (IP) samples (Flag1) Mouse immunoprecipitation samples (containing “Flag1” in nomenclature) were generated as detailed in PXD037985. LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS Sample peptides were either separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano with a trap-and-elute regime (“Flag1” IP samples used for entrapment experiment) or using a either a trap-and-elute or direct injection regime on a Vanquish Neo UHPLC. For all samples, the respective LC was hyphenated to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo). An electrospray voltage of 2.4 kV was applied at the integrated liquid junction of an EASY-Spray emitter. To avoid electric current from affecting the upstream separation column, a stainless steel 50 µm internal bore reducing union (VICI; C360RU.5S62) was electrically connected to the grounding pin at the pump module. Peptide separation was carried out at 50°C and ionization realized using an EASY-Spray™ bullet emitter (10 µm ID, ES993; Thermo). For single cell, 40 cell and low input samples (≤10ng) a 5 cm PAC prototype column was used for peptide separation at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, which was either installed in direct injection mode (for isolation width evaluation, file tag 20220630 or 20220707) or in trap-and-elute configuration (for single cell, 40 cell and other 250pg & 10ng runs) using a trap column (Thermo, PepMap C18, 5mm×300μm, 5μm particles, 100 Å). The gradient was either 30 min with a total run time of 50 min (for isolation width evaluation, file tag 20220630 or 20220707) or 20 min with a total run time of 40 min (for single cell, 40 cell and other 250pg & 10ng runs) using fast loading and equilibration. Flow rate was set to 250 nL/min and m/z range for MS1 to 375-1200. The single FAIMS CV was -50V and MS1 resolution was 120,000. AGC target was set to custom with 300% and the max ion injection time mode to auto. MS1 data type was profile and 5.00E+3 the intensity threshold for precursor ion selection. MS2 resolution was 60,000, first mass 120 m/z in MS2 with the Top10 abundant precursors being fragmented between MS1 scans. Normalized AGC target in MS2 was 75% and collision energy 30% NCE. Fragmented precursors were set on an exclusion list after the first isolation for 120s. Maximum injection time was 118ms and MS2 data type centroid.  For higher input samples (≥200 ng) either a 50 cm PAC neo column (isolation width evaluation, sample tag 20220719) or a 110 cm PAC prototype column (comparison CHIMERYS vs Amanda, sample tag 202200503) was used. Column configuration was direct injection at 300 nL/min flow. The gradient was either 60 min long with a total run time of 95 min (for isolation width evaluation, file tag 20220719) or 120 min long with a total run time of 182 min (comparison CHIMERYS vs Amanda, sample tag 202200503) using fast loading and equilibration in both cases.  The m/z range for MS1 to 375-1200 (isolation width evaluation) or 380-1200 (comparison CHIMERYS vs Amanda). Compensation voltages for FAIMS were -45, -55 & -65 for isolation width evaluation files and -45, -55, -65 & -75 for CHIMERYS vs Amanda files. MS1 resolution was 60,000 and the AGC target set to custom with 100% and the maximum ion injection time mode to auto. MS1 data type was profile and 1.00E+4 the intensity threshold for precursor ion selection. MS2 resolution was 15,000, the first mass to auto in MS2 with the cycle times fixed at 3s over all CVs (1s/CV for 3 CVs and 0.75s/CV for 4 CVs). Normalized MS2 AGC target was standard and collision energy 30% NCE. Fragmented precursors were excluded after initial isolation for 30s (isolation width evaluation) or 40s (CHIMERYS vs MS Amanda comparison). Maximum injection time was auto and MS2 data type centroid. Immunoprecipitation samples for entrapment experiment For LC-MS/MS settings of the two IP samples (“Flag1”) please see submission PXD037985.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from raw data were imported to Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 3.0.0.757, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed either using MS Amanda 2.0 or CHIMERYS as indicated against a combined database of human (uniprot reference, version 2022-03-04, 20,509 entries), yeast (uniprot reference, version 2015-01-13, 4,877 entries) and E. coli (uniprot reference, version 2021-11-19, 4,350 entries) as well as common contaminants (PD_Contaminants_IGGs_v17_tagsremoved, 344 entries). For HeLa samples (exclusively containing human digest), yeast and E. coli databases were removed for searches. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine (K) and arginine (R) except when followed by proline (P) and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine (M) was set as variable modification. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator and results were filtered for 1% FDR on peptide and protein level. Abundance of identified peptides was determined by label-free quantification (LFQ) using IMP-apQuant without match between runs (MBR) for all samples except for the assessment of the coefficients of variation. For the entrapment experiments to evaluate the FDR control, two mouse co-immunoprecipitation runs, one DDA and one WWA run, were searched against the mouse Uniprot reference database (2022-03-04; 21,962 sequences and 11,728,099 residues) as well as a decoy database created from the target database in a way similar   to a tool provided by Lukas Käll (https://github.com/percolator/mimic). In short, tryptic in silico digestion of the target database was performed without any missed cleavages allowed. The resulting peptide sequences were grouped into short peptides (<6 amino acids) and unique peptides. Amino acids within any unique peptide were then shuffled with the C-terminal amino acid being conserved. Shuffled peptides with sequences identical to unique peptide sequences of the target database were removed. The remaining shuffled peptides and the short peptides, which were not shuffled, were reassigned to their respective position within the protein of origin to form the final shuffled decoy database. Both raw files were searched for the following set FDR levels at PSM, peptide and protein level: 0.05%, 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, 2%, 5% and 10% with both MS Amanda 2.0 and CHIMERYS.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteomic analysis is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Despite tremendous progress in proteomics, current studies still suffer from limited proteomic coverage and dynamic range. Here, we utilize micropillar array columns (&#xb5;PACs) together with wide-window acquisition and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine to achieve excellent proteomic comprehensiveness for bulk proteomics, affinity purification mass spectrometry and single cell proteomics. Our data show that &#xb5;PACs identify &#x2264;50% more peptides and &#x2264;24% more proteins, while offering improved throughput, which is critical for large (clinical) proteomics studies. Combining wide precursor isolation widths of m/z 4-12 with the CHIMERYS search engine identified +51-74% and +59-150% more proteins and peptides, respectively, for single cell, co-immunoprecipitation, and multi-species samples over a conventional workflow at well-controlled false discovery rates. The workflow further offers excellent precision, with CVs &lt;7% for low input bulk samples, and accuracy, with deviations &lt;10% from expected fold changes for regular abundance two-proteome mixes. Compared to a conventional workflow, our entire optimized platform discovered 92% more potential interactors in a protein-protein interaction study on the chromatin remodeler Smarca5/Snf2h. These include previously described Smarca5 binding partners and undescribed ones including Arid1a, another chromatin remodeler with key roles in neurodevelopmental and malignant disorders.

### Keywords
Hela, Yeast, Orbitrap exploris 480, Micropillar array chromatography, Single cells, Vanquish neo, Trap-and-elute, Wide window acquisition, E. coli, Direct injection

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


