### Accession
PXD003795

### Title
Protein kinase A-dependent phosphorylation stimulates the transcriptional activity of hypoxia-inducible factor 1, part 2

### Description
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of genes encoding proteins that enable cells to adapt to reduced O2 availability. HIF-1 controls physiological processes that are dysregulated in cancer and heart disease, including angiogenesis, energy metabolism, and immunity. These disease processes are also characterized by increased activation of adenosine and β-adrenergic receptors, which triggers the synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), the allosteric regulator of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). We performed a proteomic screen in cardiomyocytes and identified PKA as a HIF-1α-interacting protein. PKA interacted with HIF-1α and phosphorylated Thr63 and Ser692 in vitro, coimmunoprecipitated with HIF-1α from cell lysates, and enhanced HIF transcriptional activity and target gene expression in human HeLa cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA inhibited the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1α in an O2-independent manner that required phosphorylation of Thr63 and Ser692 and was not affected by mutation of Pro402 and Pro564. PKA also stimulated the binding of the coactivator p300 to HIF- 1α to enhance its transcriptional activity and this effect was lost upon mutation of Asn803. These data establish a potential link between stimuli that increase cAMP concentrations and HIF-1α-dependent changes in gene expression, which contribute to the pathophysiology of cancer and heart disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: NRCMs were isolated as described (30). Human cardiomyocytes were purchased from PromoCell. NRCMs, H9c2, HeLa and HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS, and penicillinstreptomycin at 37°C in a 5% CO2/95% air (20% O2) incubator. The β-adrenergic agonists isoproterenol and phenylephrine were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Dibutyryl-cAMP was from ENZO Life Sciences. Forskolin, IBMX, H89 and MG132 were from Selleckchem. Myr-PKI was from R&D Systems. For pharmacological studies, cells were pre-incubated in serum-free media (SFM) for 30 min. Treatments were performed in SFM (supplemented with 0.1% FBS for studies longer than 20 h). To induce hypoxia, cells were placed in a modular incubator chamber (Billups-Rothenberg), which was flushed with a 1% O2/5% CO2/94% N2 gas mixture, and incubated at 37°C. Cells were transfected using PolyJet (SignaGen). MS analysis of HIF-1α-interacting proteins: Digestion conditions were described previously (28). Briefly, excised bands were pH equilibrated in 25 mM NH4HCO3; reduced and alkylated in 10 mM DTT, 55 mM iodoacetamide, and 25 mM NH4HCO3; and digested in 10 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 24 h. Tryptic peptides were recovered by first incubating gel slices in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 30 min and then in acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 30 min on a shaker. Extracted peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB 1-cc Extraction Cartridges (Waters), dried to completion and stored at -80 °C until ready for MS. If necessary, dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to repetitive desalting using 0.6 μl C18 ZipTips (Millipore) until dried peptides were visibly clear. Liquid chromatography (LC) and tandem MS (MS/MS) were performed in the Johns Hopkins Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core using an EASY-nLC 1000 (mobile phase A was 0.1% fluoroacetic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% fluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile) connected to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source (27). A portion of the peptide digest was pressure-loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100 trap precolumn (75 μm x 2 cm) packed with C18 reverse-phase resin (3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) and separated on a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (50 μm x 15 cm) packed with C18 reverse-phase resin (2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient of 2–40% buffer B for 30 min, 40–98% buffer B for 3 min, then holding at 98% buffer B for 7 min. The nano-source capillary temperature was set to 275 °C with a spray voltage of 2 kV. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap Elite at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400–1600 m/z) with an AGC target of 1x106 ions over a maximum of 500 ms. The 10 most intense peaks from MS1 scans, with signals exceeding 1000 counts, were set to trigger MS2 scans in the linear ion trap. The following MS/MS settings were used: AGC target = 5e4; MS/MS = 1 μscan, 100 ms max ion accumulation time, collision energy = 35% and rapid resolution scan rate. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled with +1 and unassigned charge states not selected for MS2 analyses. Dynamic exclusion was used with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mzXML and mgf format using Msconvert version 3.0.3858 from ProteoWizard (29) for peaklist generation. Data were searched using the X! Tandem algorithm (30), version 2009.10.01.1, and OMSSA algorithm (31), version 2.1.9. The dataset was searched against the concatenated target/decoy Rat Uniprot (32) database as of October 9, 2013. The search parameters were as follows: fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of carbamylation (K), oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY); enzyme: trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages, parent tolerance: 0.08 Da; fragment tolerance: 1.00 Da. Post-search analysis was performed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (33), version v4.6 rev 1, with protein group and peptide probability thresholds set to 95% and 99% respectively, with one or more peptides required for identification. PeptideProphet (34) was used for peptide validation and iProphet (35) was used to further refine identification probabilities. Lastly, ProteinProphet (36) was used to infer protein identifications from the resulting combined peptide list and to group ambiguous hits. Protein Group and Peptide False Discovery Rates were calculated automatically using a target-decoy method for the above probability thresholds. Protein isoforms were only reported if a peptide comprising an amino acid sequence that was unique to the isoform was identified. The final nonredundant protein groups were analyzed with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity Systems).

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of genes encoding proteins that enable cells to adapt to reduced O2 availability. Proteins encoded by HIF-1 target genes play a central role in mediating physiological processes that are dysregulated in cancer and heart disease. These diseases are also characterized by increased production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), the allosteric activator of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Using glutathione S-transferase pull-down, coimmunoprecipitation, and mass spectrometry analyses, we demonstrated that PKA interacts with HIF-1&#x3b1; in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA phosphorylated Thr(63) and Ser(692) on HIF-1&#x3b1; in vitro and enhanced HIF transcriptional activity and target gene expression in HeLa cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA inhibited the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1&#x3b1; in an O2-independent manner that required the phosphorylation of Thr(63) and Ser(692) and was not affected by prolyl hydroxylation. PKA also stimulated the binding of the coactivator p300 to HIF-1&#x3b1; to enhance its transcriptional activity and counteracted the inhibitory effect of asparaginyl hydroxylation on the association of p300 with HIF-1&#x3b1;. Furthermore, increased cAMP concentrations enhanced the expression of HIF target genes encoding CD39 and CD73, which are enzymes that convert extracellular adenosine 5'-triphosphate to adenosine, a molecule that enhances tumor immunosuppression and reduces heart rate and contractility. These data link stimuli that promote cAMP signaling, HIF-1&#x3b1;-dependent changes in gene expression, and increased adenosine, all of which contribute to the pathophysiology of cancer and heart disease.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hif, Cardiomyocyte, Pka, Cancer cell, Hypoxia, Camp

### Affiliations
Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg L. Semenza
Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.


