### Accession
PXD015008

### Title
MELK mediates the stability of EZH2 throught site-specific phosphorylation in extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma

### Description
Oncogenic EZH2 is overexpressed and extensively involved in the pathophysiology of different cancers including extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTL). However, the mechanisms regarding EZH2 upregulation is poorly understood, and it still remains untargetable in NKTL. In this study, we examine EZH2 protein turnover in NKTL and identify MELK kinase as a regulator of EZH2 ubiquitination and turnover. Using quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, we observed a MELK-mediated increase of EZH2 S220 phosphorylation along with a concomitant loss of EZH2 K222 ubiquitination, suggesting a phosphorylation-dependent regulation of EZH2 ubiquitination. MELK inhibition through both chemical and genetic means led to ubiquitination and destabilization of EZH2 protein. Importantly, we determine that MELK is upregulated in NKTL, and its expression correlates with EZH2 protein expression as determined by tissue microarray derived from NKTL patients. Interestingly, FOXM1, which connected MELK to EZH2 signaling in glioma, was not involved in mediating EZH2 ubiquitination. Furthermore, we identify USP36 as the deubiquitinating enzyme which deubiquitinates EZH2 at K222. These findings uncover an important role of MELK and USP36 in mediating EZH2 stability in NKTL. Moreover, MELK overexpression led to decreased sensitivity to Bortezomib treatment in NKTL based on deprivation of EZH2 ubiquitination. Therefore, modulation of EZH2 ubiquitination status by targeting MELK may be a new therapeutic strategy for NKTL patients with poor Bortezomib response.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, HEK293T cells were incubated in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) medium containing 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo) supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C(6)15N(4) L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C(6)15N(2) L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope. 'heavy') or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids ('light'), respectively. SILAC labeled HEK293T cells were transfected with all lysine-mutated ubiquitin (K0-ub) plus EZH2 with or without MELK. After 48h, cells were harvested and lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor, followed by co-IP with anti-EZH2 antibody. Beads were eluted in 30ul 1x SDS loading buffer and boiled for 5min at 95C. Samples were run on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo) for 10min at 170V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% ethanol) and reduced in 10mM DTT for 1h at 56C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2ug trypsin (Promega) at37C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phased column (25cm long, 75um inner diamter; New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9um resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flowof 225nl/min was used. Spray voltage  was set to 2.2kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection of 20ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labelled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, STY-phosphorylation and K-ubiquitination were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Knonw contaminants, protein groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic EZH2 is overexpressed and extensively involved in the pathophysiology of different cancers including extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTL). However, the mechanisms regarding EZH2 upregulation is poorly understood, and it still remains untargetable in NKTL. In this study, we examine EZH2 protein turnover in NKTL and identify MELK kinase as a regulator of EZH2 ubiquitination and turnover. Using quantitative mass spectrometry analysis, we observed a MELK-mediated increase of EZH2 S220 phosphorylation along with a concomitant loss of EZH2 K222 ubiquitination, suggesting a phosphorylation-dependent regulation of EZH2 ubiquitination. MELK inhibition through both chemical and genetic means led to ubiquitination and destabilization of EZH2 protein. Importantly, we determine that MELK is upregulated in NKTL, and its expression correlates with EZH2 protein expression as determined by tissue microarray derived from NKTL patients. FOXM1, which connected MELK to EZH2 signaling in glioma, was not involved in mediating EZH2 ubiquitination. Furthermore, we identify USP36 as the deubiquitinating enzyme that deubiquitinates EZH2 at K222. These findings uncover an important role of MELK and USP36 in mediating EZH2 stability in NKTL. Moreover, MELK overexpression led to decreased sensitivity to bortezomib treatment in NKTL based on deprivation of EZH2 ubiquitination. Therefore, modulation of EZH2 ubiquitination status by targeting MELK may be a new therapeutic strategy for NKTL patients with poor bortezomib response.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Melk, Silac, Extranodal natural killer/t-cell lymphoma (nktl), Ezh2

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


