### Accession
PXD040306

### Title
Depletion and reconstitution of 5S RNP complexes in early pre60S ribosomes

### Description
We purified pre60S ribosomes from yeast using Nsa1-FtpA as bait in Tandem Affinity Purification experiments. We tested the depletion of RPF2, using a Galactose-depletion system, to obtain ribosomal particles depleted of 5S RNP complexes. Sample A1: Control group (wild type strain) grown in YPGal; Sample A2: Control group (wild type strain) grown in YPGlu; Sample A3: Control group (Gal::HA-RPF2 strain) grown in YPGal; and Sample A4: Test group (Gal::HA-RPF2) shifted from YPGal to YPGlu for 6 hours to achieve 5S RNP depletion. Sample N1: Purified pre-60S Nsa1-associated with 5S RNP depleted after Sucrose gradient separation; Sample N2: Purified pre-60S Nsa1-associated with 5S RNP reconstituted after Sucrose gradient separation.

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces were washed for 15 min sequentially with 200μL of Milli-Q water, 200μL of acetonitrile, 200μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 200μL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (50:50 v/v). Gel pieces were finally washed with 100μL of acetonitrile for 10 min and briefly dried in speed Vac.  Reduction cysteine residues was achieved by adding 50 µl (or enough volume to cover gel pieces) at 10 mM DTT followed by incubation at 56oC for 1hr, then centrifugation to discard supernatant.   Alkylation was performed by adding of 50 mM (equal volume of DTT as above) iodoacetamide prepared in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and incubation on a shaker at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Sample was centrifuged, and resulting supernatant was discarded.  In-gel digestion was carried out with trypsin at a final concentration of 12μg/mL (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubation at 30oC for 16 hr on a shaker.  Acetonitrile (equal volume used to cover gel pieces as above) was added and peptide mixtures were extracted by shaking at 30oC for 15 min. The resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. Peptides in the gel pieces were further extracted first by adding of 5% formic acid and shaking for 15 min then by adding the same volume of 100% acetonitrile and shaking for another 45min. The supernatant was then collected and transferred to the first fraction. The gel pieces were finally washed with acetonitrile for 10 min and the three pooled fractions were dried in speed-Vac and stored at-20°C until further Analysis.   Samples were reconstituted in 50 µl 1% formic and aliquot of sample was analysed on LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer that is interfaced with 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system. Sample was loaded on to a 2 cm trapping column (PepMap C18 100A – 300mm. Part number: 160454. Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 5 µl/min flow rate using a loading pump and analyzed on a 50 cm analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm 75um ID, Part number: ES803) at 300 nl/min flow rate that is interfaced to the mass spectrometer using Easy nLC source and electro sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. LC buffers used are the following:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 15 µl were loaded at 10µL/min onto a trap column which was equilibrated with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column that is maintained at constant temperature of 50oC. The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 2% to 5% buffer B in 6 min, from 5% to 35% buffer B in 64 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 72 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 15 min and re-equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 17 min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro was operated in data dependent positive ionization mode. The source voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the capillary temperature was 250oC. Lock mass set at 445.120024. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, ion injection time of 20 ms, resolution 60,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) 1x106) acquired in profile mode, followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (ITMS), activation type CID, min signal 5000, Isolation width 2.0, NCE 35.0, default charge state 2, activation Q 0.250, Activation time 10.

### Data Protocol
Co-precipitating proteins were identified by 1D nLC–ESI-MS/MS using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
The 5S ribonucleoprotein (RNP) is assembled from its three components (5S rRNA, Rpl5/uL18 and Rpl11/uL5) before being incorporated into the pre-60S subunit. However, when ribosome synthesis is disturbed, a free 5S RNP can enter the MDM2-p53 pathway to regulate cell cycle and apoptotic signaling. Here we reconstitute and determine the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the conserved hexameric 5S RNP with fungal or human factors. This reveals how the nascent 5S rRNA associates with the initial nuclear import complex Syo1-uL18-uL5 and, upon further recruitment of the nucleolar factors Rpf2 and Rrs1, develops into the 5S RNP precursor that can assemble into the pre-ribosome. In addition, we elucidate the structure of another 5S RNP intermediate, carrying the human ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which unravels how this enzyme can be sequestered from its target substrate p53. Our data provide molecular insight into how the 5S RNP can mediate between ribosome biogenesis and cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Depletion, 5s rnp, Ribosomes, Reconstitution, Pre60s

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Ed Hurt
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg


