### Accession
PXD011110

### Title
Wheat and Arabidopsis employ different strategies to optimize the adjustment of photosynthesis to fluctuating light under drought stress

### Description
Drought is a major cause of crop yield loss worldwide. Plants can adopt different mechanisms to survive under water deficit, where stomatal closure leads to CO2 limitation. This requires increased dissipation of light energy as heat by non-photochemical quenching (NPQ), changes in the structural configuration of light-harvesting complexes, or changes in the mode of photosynthetic electron flow (i.e. linear vs. cyclic). Under field conditions, where light intensity can change rapidly, this problem becomes even more challenging. Particularly the slow release from photoprotection (NPQ relaxation) was recently shown to cause significant loss of potential yield. We analyzed the acclimation of two different wheat varieties and compared their molecular acclimation strategy to Arabidopsis under moderate drought stress at a slow soil dehydration rate, mimicking realistic field conditions. We monitored their photosynthetic activity under fluctuating light intensities and integrated functional and structural data, based on a detailed analysis of photosynthetic parameters combined with biochemical analysis and unbiased shot-gun proteomics. Contrary to previous models based on the damage of photosynthetic complexes as consequence of drought, we found that plants actively preserve and fine-tune their photosynthetic machinery under drought to adjust the photosynthetic electron transfer to fast changes of light intensity. Strikingly, Arabidopsis and wheat use different molecular strategies for this acclimation. While clear differences in NPQ relaxation and phosphorylation levels of photosynthetic proteins were observed in wheat, Arabidopsis modified the light energy distribution among photosynthetic complexes without changing PSII-LHCII phosphorylation. The fine-tuning of NPQ relaxation can therefore represent a potential trait for crop breeding.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Total protein was extracted from wheat leaf extract with an adapted protocol from (Roustan et al., 2017). In detail, protein were extracted with 2 ml of extraction buffer (100mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0; 5% SDS, 10% glycerol; 1.4M sucrose; 10mM DTT; supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails as indicated by the supplier (Roche, Cat. No. 05 892 791 001 and Cat. No. 04 906 837 001) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 5 min with periodic vortexing. Immediately after the extraction, 1 ml Roti-phenol was added to samples, which were then vortexed and incubated during 5 min before centrifugation at 21,000 ×g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Phenol extraction was repeated a second time with 500 µl of Roti-phenol. Phenol fractions were pooled together and counter extracted with 1 ml of extraction buffer and centrifuged at 21,000 ×g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Protein precipitation was performed by mixing the phenol fraction with 2.5 volumes of 0.1M ammonium acetate in methanol. After a 16 h incubation period at −20 °C, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000 ×g. The protein pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate, one time with acetone and air dried at room temperature. Protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails as indicated by the supplier (Roche, Cat. No. 05 892 791 001 and Cat. No. 04 906 837 001). Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad Bradford Assay with BSA as a standard. 100 μg of total protein per sample was first reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at concentration of 5 mM at 37 °C for 45 min. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in darkness at room temperature (RT) for 60 min. Alkylation was stopped by increasing DTT concentration to 10 mM and incubating the samples in the dark at RT for 15 min. Then the urea concentration was diluted to 2 M with 50 mM AmBic/10 % acetonitrile (ACN). CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 2 mM. Trypsin digestion (Poroszyme immobilized trypsin; 5:100 v:w) was performed at 37 °C overnight. Protein digests were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) and carbon graphite SPE as described by (Furuhashi et al., 2014). After both SPEs, the corresponding eluates were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  LC-MS for proteomics: Peptide pellets were solved in 10 µL of 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA). Equivalent of 0.5 µg total protein was loaded on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) for peptides separation. Peptides were eluted using a 240 min linear gradient from 2 to 40 % of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1 % [v/v] FA in 90 % [v/v] ACN) with 300 nL/min flow rate generated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) using the following mass analyzer settings: ion transfer capillary temperature 275°C, full scan range 350-1800 m/z, FTMS resolution 120000. Each FTMS full scan was followed by up to ten data dependent (DDA) CID tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) in the linear triple quadrupole (LTQ) mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using list size 500 m/z values with exclusion width ±10 ppm for 60 s. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned and +1 charged ions were excluded from MS/MS acquisitions. For injection control automatic gain control (AGC) for full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap was set to 5 x 105 ion population, the maximum injection time (max IT) was set to 200ms. Orbitrap online calibration using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10123 from polydimethylcyclosiloxane was used. Multistage activation was enabled with neural losses of 24.49, 32.66, 48.999, 97.97, 195.94, and 293.91 Da for the 10 most intense precursor ions. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled and the trap was set to gather 5 x 103 ions for up to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction: Total protein was extracted from wheat leaf extract with an adapted protocol from (Roustan et al., 2017). In detail, protein were extracted with 2 ml of extraction buffer (100mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0; 5% SDS, 10% glycerol; 1.4M sucrose; 10mM DTT; supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails as indicated by the supplier (Roche, Cat. No. 05 892 791 001 and Cat. No. 04 906 837 001) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 5 min with periodic vortexing. Immediately after the extraction, 1 ml Roti-phenol was added to samples, which were then vortexed and incubated during 5 min before centrifugation at 21,000 ×g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Phenol extraction was repeated a second time with 500 µl of Roti-phenol. Phenol fractions were pooled together and counter extracted with 1 ml of extraction buffer and centrifuged at 21,000 ×g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Protein precipitation was performed by mixing the phenol fraction with 2.5 volumes of 0.1M ammonium acetate in methanol. After a 16 h incubation period at −20 °C, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000 ×g. The protein pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate, one time with acetone and air dried at room temperature. Protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails as indicated by the supplier (Roche, Cat. No. 05 892 791 001 and Cat. No. 04 906 837 001). Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad Bradford Assay with BSA as a standard. 100 μg of total protein per sample was first reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at concentration of 5 mM at 37 °C for 45 min. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in darkness at room temperature (RT) for 60 min. Alkylation was stopped by increasing DTT concentration to 10 mM and incubating the samples in the dark at RT for 15 min. Then the urea concentration was diluted to 2 M with 50 mM AmBic/10 % acetonitrile (ACN). CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 2 mM. Trypsin digestion (Poroszyme immobilized trypsin; 5:100 v:w) was performed at 37 °C overnight. Protein digests were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) and carbon graphite SPE as described by (Furuhashi et al., 2014). After both SPEs, the corresponding eluates were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  LC-MS for proteomics: Peptide pellets were solved in 10 µL of 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA). Equivalent of 0.5 µg total protein was loaded on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) for peptides separation. Peptides were eluted using a 240 min linear gradient from 2 to 40 % of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1 % [v/v] FA in 90 % [v/v] ACN) with 300 nL/min flow rate generated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) using the following mass analyzer settings: ion transfer capillary temperature 275°C, full scan range 350-1800 m/z, FTMS resolution 120000. Each FTMS full scan was followed by up to ten data dependent (DDA) CID tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) in the linear triple quadrupole (LTQ) mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using list size 500 m/z values with exclusion width ±10 ppm for 60 s. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned and +1 charged ions were excluded from MS/MS acquisitions. For injection control automatic gain control (AGC) for full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap was set to 5 x 105 ion population, the maximum injection time (max IT) was set to 200ms. Orbitrap online calibration using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10123 from polydimethylcyclosiloxane was used. Multistage activation was enabled with neural losses of 24.49, 32.66, 48.999, 97.97, 195.94, and 293.91 Da for the 10 most intense precursor ions. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled and the trap was set to gather 5 x 103 ions for up to 50 ms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Photosynthesis, Drought, Wheat

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Departement of Ecogenomics and System Biology, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, AUSTRIA

### Submitter
Valentin Roustan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Markus Teige
Departement of Ecogenomics and System Biology, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, AUSTRIA


