### Accession
PXD041897

### Title
Identify the proteins interacting with STX17

### Description
To identify the specific proteins interacting with STX17, HEK293T cells stably expressing Flag-STX17 were lysed and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody, and eluted for Commassie blue staining and then subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing Flag-STX17 were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1μg/ml Aprotinin, 1 μg/ml Pepstatin A, 1 μg/ml Leupeptin, 200 mM NaF, 200 mM Na3VO3) for 10 min at 4°C. After centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatants were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag M2 Affinity Gel for 12 h at 4°C. Precipitated immunocomplexes were washed three times in lysis buffer and eluted with the 3×Flag peptide for 2 h at 4°C, then boiled in 2× sample buffer. Then samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and analyzed by commassie blue staining.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.25 µl/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.0.27.10 software and there is a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1600 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 2 seconds data-dependent MS/MS scans in an Ion Routing Multipole at 32 normalized collision energy (HCD).  The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed；carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications; precursor ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm for all MS acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer; and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired in the Orbitrap. High confidence score filter (FDR < 1%) was used to select the “hit” peptides and their corresponding MS/MS spectra were manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stx17, Immunoprecipitation assays

### Affiliations
tsinghua university
School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

### Submitter
chongchong zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yueguang Rong
School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.


