### Accession
PXD017723

### Title
Fyn- and Abl-driven interactome and post-translational modifications of DCBLD1 and DCBLD2

### Description
Three related datasets are included, all from immunoprecipitations of FLAG-tagged DCBLD1 and DCBLD2 (human) from 293 cells. Letters at the end of file names denote regions of each gel lave from highest (“A”) to lowest (“B”-X) molecular weight. File names containing “SILAC” are part of a dataset composed of 3 biological replicates (“T1”,”T2”,”T3” in file name) run of 10% or 15% gels (“10” or “15” in file name). DCBLD1 or DCBLD2 were immunoprecipitated from cells alone (light SILAC condition) or with Fyn/Abl (heavy SILAC condition). “Mock”, “Fyn” alone, or “Abl” alone in file names denote control immunoprecipitates, in which the light condition was a mock transfection and the heavy was either a mock or had Fyn/Abl expressed alone. Trypsin was used as the proteolytic enzyme. File names beginning with “Label_free” are part of datasets from LC-MS/MS analysis of DCBLD1 or DCBLD2 immunoprecipitates from 293 lysates. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, immunoprecipitates were digested with trypsin and GluC. Only DCBLD1 and DCBLD2 protein bands were analyzed via LC-MS/MS. File names containing “zebrafish” are part of datasets from LC-MS/MS analysis of DCBLD2 immunoprecipitates from 293 extracts that were then incubated with zebrafish extracts. These datasets include tryptic peptides from both human and zebrafish proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie. Protein bands were excised as stated above for each dataset. Proteins were subjected to a proteolytic digest (enzymes indicated above) and extracted peptides were dried. Peptides were separated on an easy-nLC 1200 over 85 min and electrosprayed into a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed via SEQUEST either requiring tryptic peptides (for SILAC and zebrafish datasets) or with no enzyme specified (Label_free dataset).

### Publication Abstract
The Discoidin, CUB, and LCCL domain-containing protein (DCBLD) family consists of two type-I transmembrane scaffolding receptors, DCBLD1 and DCBLD2, which play important roles in development and cancer. The nonreceptor tyrosine kinases FYN and ABL are known to drive phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in YXXP motifs within the intracellular domains of DCBLD family members, which leads to the recruitment of the Src homology 2 (SH2) domain of the adaptors CT10 regulator of kinase (CRK) and CRK-like (CRKL). We previously characterized the FYN- and ABL-driven phosphorylation of DCBLD family YXXP motifs. However, we have identified additional FYN- and ABL-dependent phosphorylation sites on DCBLD1 and DCBLD2. This suggests that beyond CRK and CRKL, additional DCBLD interactors may be regulated by FYN and ABL activity. Here, we report a quantitative proteomics approach in which we map the FYN- and ABL-regulated interactomes of DCBLD family members. We found FYN and ABL regulated the binding of several signaling molecules to DCBLD1 and DCBLD2, including members of the 14-3-3 family of adaptors. Biochemical investigation of the DCBLD2/14-3-3 interaction revealed ABL-induced binding of 14-3-3 family members directly to DCBLD2.

### Keywords
Clcp1, Esdn, Dcbld1, Dcbld2

### Affiliations
Department of Biology
Professor, Department of Biology, University of Vermont

### Submitter
Bryan Ballif

### Lab Head
Dr Bryan Ballif
Professor, Department of Biology, University of Vermont


