### Accession
PXD017536

### Title
The secretome of skin cancer cells HaCat and A431

### Description
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the most prominent tumor of non-melanoma skin cancers and the most aggressive tumor among keratinocyte carcinoma of the skin, showing a high potential for local invasion and metastasis. The cSCC incidences increased dramatically in recent years and the disease occurs more commonly than any other malignancy. The secretome of cancer cells is currently the focus of many studies in order to identify new marker proteins for different types of cancer and to investigate its influence on the tumor microenvironment. In our study we evaluated whether the secretome of cSCC cells has an impact on keratinocytes, the surrounding tissue cells of cSCC. Therefore, we analyzed and compared the secretome of human A431 cancer cells and of HaCaT keratinocytes by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
4 mL CM were concentrated to 80 μL using Amicon® Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa by centrifugation (3760xg, 4 °C). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. 30 μL of a solution of protein sample and 2x Laemmli buffer (1:1) was heated up to 95 °C for 5 min and loaded on a gel. Gels run at 10 mA for 30 min and were afterwards stained using InstantBlue. Gels were cut, and the resulting bands were first washed with H2O, followed by a washing step with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced in 45 mM dithioerythritol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 55 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the solution was removed and bands were alkylated twice with 0.1 M iodacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min. Gel bands were then washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and gel pieces were comminuted, covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with 250 ng Trypsin/Lys-C at 37 °C. Samples were dried using a speed-vac and reconstituted in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nano liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC MS/MS). Samples were analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS. Liquid chromatography was performed with an EASYnLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 2 μg of digest were loaded on the trapping column with a flow of 5 μL/min. Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min with an EASY-Spray™ C18 column (Thermo Scientific) with the following gradient: from 5% B to 25% B in 260 min followed by 25% B to 50% B in 60 min, with B being composed of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and A being MS-grade water with 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed with an Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) instrument equipped with EASY-Spray™ ion source. Mass spectra were acquired in cycles of one MS scan from 300 m/z to 2000 m/z and up to five data dependent MS/MS scans of the most intensive peptide signals.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification (FDR < 1%) and quantification the MaxQuant software platform was used. In brief, spectra were searched using MaxQuant V1.6.1 and the human subset of the UniProt database. LFQ values of HaCaT- and A431-CMs were quantitatively compared using the label-free quantification strategy. The statistics (Student’s t-test), the hierarchical clustering and the Volcano plot analysis was done with Perseus V 1.5.3.2..

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the most prominent tumor of non-melanoma skin cancers and the most aggressive tumor among keratinocyte carcinoma of the skin, showing a high potential for local invasion and metastasis. The cSCC incidences increased dramatically in recent years and the disease occurs more commonly than any other malignancy. The secretome of cancer cells is currently the focus of many studies in order to identify new marker proteins for different types of cancer and to investigate its influence on the tumor microenvironment. In our study we evaluated whether the secretome of cSCC cells has an impact on keratinocytes, the surrounding tissue cells of cSCC. Therefore, we analyzed and compared the secretome of human A431 cancer cells and of HaCaT keratinocytes by mass spectrometry. In a second experiment, keratinocytes were exposed to the secretome of A431 cells and vice versa and the transcriptome was analyzed by next-generation sequencing. HaCaT cells incubated with A431 conditioned medium revealed a significantly activated mammalian target of rapamycin pathway with a concomitant increase in proliferation and migration. In conclusion, our data demonstrate the impact of the secretome of cancer cells on the transcription machinery of the cells surrounding the tumor, leading to a tumorigenic cell fate.

### Keywords
Keratinocytes; mtor; secretome; squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany


