### Accession
PXD000248

### Title
Characterization of individual mouse cerebrospinal fluid proteomes

### Description
Through non-terminal CSF extractions in C57Bl/6 mice and high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of individual murine samples, we report the most comprehensive proteome characterization of individual murine CSF to date. Utilizing stringent protein inclusion criteria that required the identification of at least two unique peptides (1% false discovery rate at the peptide level) we identified a total of 566 unique proteins, including 128 proteins from three individual CSF samples that have been previously identified in brain tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) offers key insight into the status of the CNS. Characterization of murine CSF proteomes can provide a valuable resource for studying CNS injury and disease in animal models. However, the small volume of CSF in mice has thus far limited individual mouse proteome characterization. Through nonterminal CSF extractions in C57Bl/6 mice and high-resolution 2D-LC MS/MS analysis of individual murine samples, we report the most comprehensive proteome characterization of individual murine CSF to date. We identified a total of 566 unique proteins, including 128 proteins from three individual CSF samples that have been previously identified in brain tissue. Our methods and analysis provide a mechanism for individual murine CSF proteome analysis. The data are available in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000248 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000248).

### Keywords
Mouse, Csf, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head


