### Accession
PXD027186

### Title
GFP-DLC1 interactome in MCF7 breast cancer cells

### Description
The Rho GTPase activating protein Deleted in Liver Cancer 1 (DLC1) is frequently downregulated through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in various malignancies, leading to aberrant Rho GTPase signaling and thus facilitating cancer progression. The aim of this project was to identify novel interaction partners, that could be involved in the regulation of DLC1 proteasomal degradation.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were transfected with constructs encoding GFP-tagged DLC1 or GFP as a control and lysed in 1% TEB buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, and 20 mM β-glycerophosphate plus Complete protease inhibitors without EDTA (Roche)). GFP proteins were immunoprecipitated using GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek, Martinsried, Germany). Beads were washed with 1% TEB and PBS followed by elution with 0.1 M glycine (pH 2.5) and neutralization with 1/10 volume of 1 M Tris (pH 8.0). Protein expression and immunopurification were verified by parallel immunoblotting. Proteins were purified on an NuPAGE 12% gel (Invitrogen) and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin as described previously. After desalting using C18 stage tips peptide mixtures were run on an EasyLC nano-HPLC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were separated using a 127 minute segmented gradient from 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000. Accumulation target value of 1000000 charges was set. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap using CID at the ion accumulation target value of 5000 and default CID settings. Sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8. Database search was performed against a Homo sapiens database, and 285 commonly observed contaminants, plus the bait GFP-DLC1 sequence. Trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine residues, acetylation of lysine and the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and at the fragment ion level 0.5 Da was set for CID fragmentation. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at an FDR of 0.01, estimated by the target-decoy approach. The iBAQ algorithm was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The Rho GTPase activating protein Deleted in Liver Cancer 1 (DLC1) is frequently downregulated through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in various malignancies, leading to aberrant Rho GTPase signaling and thus facilitating cancer progression. Here we show that in breast cancer cells, dysregulation of DLC1 expression occurs at the protein level through rapid degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Using mass spectrometry, we identify two novel DLC1 interaction partners, the ubiquitin-ligase HECTD1 and the deubiquitinating enzyme ubiquitin-specific-processing protease 7 (USP7). While DLC1 protein expression was rapidly downregulated upon pharmacological inhibition of USP7, siRNA-mediated knockdown of HECTD1 increased DLC1 protein levels and impaired its degradation. Immunofluorescence microscopy analyses revealed that the modulation of HECTD1 levels and USP7 activity altered DLC1 abundance at focal adhesions, its primary site of action. Thus, we propose opposing regulatory mechanisms of DLC1 protein homeostasis by USP7 and HECTD1, which could open up strategies to counteract downregulation and restore DLC1 expression in cancer.

### Keywords
Mcf7, Dlc1, Rhogap, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Stuttgart, Germany, Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Monilola Olayioye
University of Stuttgart, Germany, Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology


