### Accession
PXD022023

### Title
FAX-RIC enables robust RNA interactome profiling in multicellular organisms in vivo

### Description
Formaldehyde crosslinking based profiling of RNA interactome in the mosue tissue, liver.

### Sample Protocol
RNA interactome profiling in mouse liver using peptide-level FAX-RIC Mice liver samples were a kind gift from Hyun-Woo Rhee Lab (SNU). Animal experiments with C57BL/6 mice were performed in accordance with the governmental and institutional laws and recommendations (Approval no. SNU-180521-2-3). Mouse liver tissue was cut by a lobe and submerged in the formaldehyde solution of 4 % in PBS for 10 minutes with occasional shaking. Crosslinking reaction was quenched by submerging the tissue in 200 mM Tris (pH 7.0) in PBS buffer for 5 minutes. The tissue was weighed on scale and ~20 mg of liver samples was used for each of three replicate dT pull down experiments and total RNA interactome extraction experiments via RNeasy column (Qiagen). The tissue was first lysed in 4M GuSCN, 800 mM LiCl, 10 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA and 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), and 3 volumes of ethanol was added to the sample followed by 1hr incubation at -20 °C.  Precipitated samples were centrifuged down at x16000 g for 15 minutes and supernatant was removed followed by 70 % ethanol wash twice at x8000 g. The sample was reconstituted with the 0.05 % LDS, 100 mM LiCl, 10 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA, and 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and trypsin was added 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at RT for 4 hours. Prepared lysate was subjected to peptide-level FAX-RIC protocol as described above for HeLa cell. For total RNA interactome experiment, after the trypsin treatment twice the volume of RLT buffer was added to the sample and RNA sample preparation by RNeasy column was done as described in the product manual followed by heat incubation 65 °C overnight and LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis Analytical capillary columns (100 cm x 75 µm i.d.) and trap columns (3 cm x 150 µm i.d) were packed in-house with 3 µm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The long analytical column was placed in a column heater (Analytical Sales and Services, Pompton Plains, NJ) regulated to a temperature of 45 °C. Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) was operated at a flow rate of 350 nL/min over 2 hours with linear gradient ranging from 95 % solvent A (water with 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % of solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid). The enriched samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house customized nanoelectrospray ion source. Precursor ions were acquired (m/z 300 – 1500 at 120k resolving power and the isolation of precursor for MS/MS analysis was performed with a 1.4 Th. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 30 % collision energy was used for sequencing with a target value of 5E4 ions determined by automatic gain control. Resolving power for acquired MS2 spectra was set to 30k at m/z 200 with 150 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant database search analysis. Protein quantificaiton was done by label free based quantification, LFQ intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse liver rbp rna interactome

### Affiliations
Seoul National University IBS
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Yongwoo Na

### Lab Head
Dr Yongwoo Na
Seoul National University IBS


