### Accession
PXD017607

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics analysis of prostate cancer cells

### Description
In this study, we applied SILAC-based quantitative proteomics analysis to identify hypoxia response proteome in prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
DU145 cells were cultured in SILAC light and heavy media. Heavy labeled cells were subject to hypoxia treatment for 12 hours. Cells were harvested and lysed. Proteins were mixed equally and subject to tryptic digestion, basic reversed phase fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with Maxquant. Statistical analysis were performed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanistic understanding of hypoxia-responsive signaling pathways provides important insights into oxygen- and metabolism-dependent cellular phenotypes in diseases. Using SILAC-based quantitative proteomics, we provided a quantitative map identifying over 6300 protein groups in response to hypoxia in prostate cancer cells and identified both canonical and novel cellular networks dynamically regulated under hypoxia. Particularly, we identified SDE2, a DNA stress response modulator, that was significantly downregulated by hypoxia, independent of HIF (hypoxia-inducible factor) transcriptional activity. Mechanistically, hypoxia treatment promoted SDE2 polyubiquitination and degradation. Such regulation is independent of previously identified Arg/N-end rule proteolysis or the ubiquitin E3 ligase, CDT2. Depletion of SDE2 increased cellular sensitivity to DNA damage and inhibited cell proliferation. Interestingly, either SDE2 depletion or hypoxia treatment potentiated DNA damage-induced PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) monoubiquitination, a key step for translesion DNA synthesis. Furthermore, knockdown of SDE2 desensitized, while overexpression of SDE2 protected the hypoxia-mediated regulation of PCNA monoubiquitination upon DNA damage. Taken together, our quantitative proteomics and biochemical study revealed diverse hypoxia-responsive pathways that strongly associated with prostate cancer tumorigenesis and identified the functional roles of SDE2 and hypoxia in regulating DNA damage-induced PCNA monoubiquitination, suggesting a possible link between hypoxic microenvironment and the activation of error-prone DNA repair pathway in tumor cells.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Silac, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities


