### Accession
PXD022290

### Title
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition shed microvesicle proteome

### Description
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a highly conserved morphogenic process defined by the loss of epithelial characteristics and the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype. EMT is associated with increased aggressiveness, invasiveness, and metastatic potential in carcinoma cells. To assess the contribution of extracellular vesicles following EMT, we conducted a proteomic analysis of shed microvesicles released from Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, and MDCK cells transformed with oncogenic H-Ras (21D1 cells).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDS sample buffer, and proteins separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Imperial™ Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to manufacturer's instructions. Gel lanes were cut into equal slices and individual gel slices were subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation and trypsinization. Briefly, gel bands were reduced with 10 mm DTT (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) for 30 min, alkylated for 20 min with 25 mm iodoacetic acid (Fluka, St. Louis, MO), and digested with 150 ng trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp, Freehold, NJ) for 4.5 h at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 50 μl 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate, concentrated to ∼10 μl by centrifugal lyophilization and one technical replicate analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed as described previously using MaxQuant, and dog (canine) and human (global) reference proteome. Search parameters included carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shed microvesicles, Proteome, Extracellular vesicle, Emt

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.


### SDRF

