### Accession
PXD027324

### Title
Mouse Plasma TMT-MS3 Discovery Proteomics Profiling

### Description
The aim of this project was to profile the proteome of mouse-derived plasma in order to identify those that showed significant quantitative differences following acute periods of running.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse plasma samples were depleted of high abundance proteins and protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Samples were further digested by trypsin, labelled with TMT reagents and combined into one single sample. Sample was fractionated by SCX chromatography with 10 fractions subjected to LC-MS/MS data acquisition and analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra was processed using Thermo's Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The spectra was searched against the mouse subset of the UniProt/TrEMBL database using the Sequest algorithm, evaluated for a positive false discovery rate of less than 1% using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Physical activity is a strong positive physiological modulator of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Although the underlying regulatory mechanisms are still unknown, systemic processes must be involved. Here we show that platelets are activated after acute periods of running, and that activated platelets promote neurogenesis, an effect that is likely mediated by platelet factor 4. Ex&#xa0;vivo, the beneficial effects of activated platelets and platelet factor 4 on neural precursor cells were dentate gyrus specific and not observed in the subventricular zone. Moreover, the depletion of circulating platelets in mice abolished the running-induced increase in precursor cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus following exercise. These findings demonstrate that platelets and their released factors can modulate adult neural precursor cells under physiological conditions and provide an intriguing link between running-induced platelet activation and the modulation of neurogenesis after exercise.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Queensland Brain Institute The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Katherine Ganio

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Walker
Queensland Brain Institute The University of Queensland


