### Accession
PXD035083

### Title
Proteomic responses of two spring wheat cultivars to combined drought and aphid Metopolophium dirhodum) infestation

### Description
In the field, plants usually have to face combined effects of abiotic and biotic stresses. In our study, two spring wheat cultivars Septima and Quintus were subjected to three water regimes (70, 50, 40 % soil water capacity SWC), aphid (Metopolophium dirhodum) infestation or the combination of both stresses, i.e., drought (50, 40% SWC) and aphids. The study has a 2x3x2 factorial design with three biological replicates. Our previous study (Saska et al. 2022) investigated plant morphophysiological characteristics and aphid life table. In the present study, the results of proteomic analysis using 2D-DIGE followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF protein identification are presented. Drought, but also aphid infestation led to alterations in 113 protein spots including proteins assigned to a variety of biological processes ranging from signalling via energy metabolism, redox regulation, stress and defense responses to secondary metabolism indicating a long-term adaptation to adverse conditions. The absence of specific proteins involved in plant response to herbivorous insects indicates a loss of resistance to aphids in modern wheat cultivars during the breeding process. Septima revealed enhanced tolerance with respect to Quintus as indicated by higher values of morphophysiological characteristics (above-ground biomass, leaf length, osmotic potential per full water saturation) and rel. abundance of proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration and ATP biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Spots were treated with an EVO 2 liquid handling workstation (TECAN). Spots were washed twice for 20 minutes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% methanol. Spots were then dried with 75% acetonitrile (2 times, 20 minutes) before being incubated with 40 ng trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 6 hours. Peptides were then extracted with 50% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and air dried before spotting on MALDI target with CHCA as matrix.

### Data Protocol
Selected protein spots were analysed by mass spectrometer MALDI-TOF (SciexTOF/TOFTM 5800, SCIEX). Peak list was extracted with ProteinPilot TM software (SCIEX) and protein identification was performed using MASCOT server with NCBI Triticeae (txid147389 downloaded from NCBI on 23.4.2021 with 518563 sequences; 220219273 residues). At least two unique peptides confirmed by fragmentation were assigned to each protein and protein scores greater than 70 and individual ion scores greater than 46 were considered as significant and indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05). Allowed amino acids modifications were fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable modifications of tryptophane (dioxidation, transformation to kynurenine), and oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spring wheat; drought; herbivorous insects; combined stress; proteome; 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology
Crop Research Institute, Drnovska 507/73, 161 01 Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Vítámvás
Crop Research Institute, Drnovska 507/73, 161 01 Prague, Czech Republic


