### Accession
PXD038384

### Title
Identification of cell surface proteins in Zdhhc20 KO cells

### Description
An shRNA screen to search for the mediators of pancreatic cancer metastasis identified palmitoyl transferase ZDHHC20 as a protein that mediates this process by promoting the outgrowth of metastatic cells in vivo, We generated a KO of Zdhhc20 using Cas9/CRISPR and sought to determine the changes in the cell surface proteome in KO cells versus parental cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface proteins were isolated by biotinylation with a cell-impermeable labelling reagent Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (¬¬Thermo), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 1 µg of each digested sample was loaded onto Evotips (as prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions) and washed once with aqueous acidic buffer (0.1% formic acid in water) before loading onto the Evosep One system in front of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo).  The Evosep One was fitted with a 15 cm analytical column and the predefined method for a 44 minute separation was employed. The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via an EasySpray ionisation source, with an orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA) mass spectrometer which was operated in positive ionisation mode to acquire data. Instrument settings were: MS1 data were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60k, 4E6 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time, dynamic exclusion of ± 10 ppm and 60 s, a mass range of 300-1500 m/z and profile mode data capture. MS2 data were acquired in the ion trap using a 1.2 m/z isolation window, 2E4 AGC target, 300 ms maximum injection time (inject ions for all available parallelisable time “Universal Method”), CID of 35% collision energy, 10 ms activation time and centroid mode data capture.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.13 using standard settings and searched against the UniProt KB with the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant software suite. Enzyme search specificity was Trypsin/P. Up to two missed cleavages for each peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification with oxidized methionine and protein N-acetylation considered as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was fixed at 1% at the peptide and protein level. Statistical analysis was carried out using the Perseus module of MaxQuant.  Prior to statistical analysis, peptides mapped to known contaminants, reverse hits and protein groups only identified by site were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least two peptides, one of which was unique and two quantitation events were considered for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Pancreatic cancer, Zdhhc20, Cell surface

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road NW1 1AT London United Kingdom

### Submitter
Goran Tomic

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Downward
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road NW1 1AT London United Kingdom


