### Accession
PXD012764

### Title
Phosphoproteomic profiling responds to phosphate starvation in rice

### Description
Phosphorus is one of the most important macronutrients required for plant growth and development. The importance of phosphorylation modification in regulating phosphate (Pi) homeostasis in plants is emerging. We performed phosphoproteomic profiling to characterize proteins whose degree of phosphorylation is altered in response to Pi starvation in rice root.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomic analysis (three biological replicates with ten plants per replicate), 20-d-old plants grown under Pi-sufficient conditions were transferred to Pi-sufficient (0.3 mM Pi) or -deficient (without Pi) conditions for 7 days. Proteins were isolated from roots of the rice plants as previously reported (Qiu et al., 2016).The proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, followed by trypsin digestion (enzyme: protein = 1:50) at 37 °C for 18 h. After the proteins were filtered through 10 kDa filters, peptides in the filtrate were desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge. Peptides were labeled with an iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Subsequently, the phosphopeptide fractions were enriched using TiO2 bulk beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan).The enriched phosphopeptide fractions were analyzed with EASY-nLC™ 1000 Liquid Chromatography System (Thermo Scientific), HTC-PAL autosampler instrumentation (CTC Analytics) and the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected into an EASY-Column (20 mm length x 100 μm diameter; particle size: 5 μm diameter; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 250 nl min-1. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (A) and 0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile (B) in a two-step linear gradient of 0–55% B for 220 min, 55–100% B for 8 min and 100% B for 12 min. The scan range of mass spectrometry (MS) was a mass/charge ratio (m/z) of 350–1800.

### Data Protocol
The phosphopeptides were identified and the phosphorylation sites were predicted using the Mascot software (version 2.2) against the rice genome annotation database (MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project database v7; http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/). Phospho(S/T/Y) and oxidation(M) were set as variable modifications, and two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed. The Proteome Discoverer software(version 1.4) was used to filter the peptides identified(false discovery rates ≤0.01; Phospho RS score ≥50 and Phospho RS site probabilities ≥75%). Quantitative data for each sample were normalized depending on the total peak area.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorus is one of the most important macronutrients required for plant growth and development. The importance of phosphorylation modification in regulating phosphate (Pi) homeostasis in plants is emerging. We performed phosphoproteomic profiling to characterize proteins whose degree of phosphorylation is altered in response to Pi starvation in rice root. A subset of 554 proteins, including 546 down-phosphorylated and eight up-phosphorylated proteins, exhibited differential phosphorylation in response to Pi starvation. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis with the differentially phosphorylated proteins indicated that RNA processing, transport, splicing and translation and carbon metabolism played critical roles in response to Pi starvation in rice. Levels of phosphorylation of four mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including OsMAPK6, five calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) and OsCK2&#x3b2;3 decreased in response to Pi starvation. The decreased phosphorylation level of OsMAPK6 was confirmed by Western blotting. Mutation of OsMAPK6 led to Pi accumulation under Pi-sufficient conditions. Motif analysis indicated that the putative MAPK, casein kinase 2 (CK2) and CDPK substrates represented about 54.4%, 21.5% and 4.7%, respectively, of the proteins exhibiting differential phosphorylation. Based on the motif analysis, 191, 151 and 46 candidate substrates for MAPK, CK2 and CDPK were identified. These results indicate that modification of phosphorylation profiles provides complementary information on Pi-starvation-induced processes, with CK2, MAPK and CDPK protein kinase families playing key roles in these processes in rice.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa； phosphate starvation； phosphoproteomic；rice；root

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, Sichuan, China
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Jian Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Yang
Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, Sichuan, China


