### Accession
PXD020047

### Title
Molecular repertoire of Deinococcus radiodurans after 1 year of exposure outside the International Space Station within the Tanpopo mission

### Description
Abstract Background  The extraordinarily resistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans withstands harsh environmental conditions present in outer space. Deinococcus radiodurans was exposed for one year outside the International Space Station within Tanpopo orbital mission to investigate microbial survival and space travel. In addition, a ground-based simulation experiment with conditions, mirroring those from Low Earth orbit, was performed.   Methods  We monitored Deinococcus radiodurans cells during early stage of recovery after Low Earth orbit exposure using electron microscopy tools. Furthermore, proteomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses were performed to identify molecular mechanisms responsible for the survival of Deinococcus radiodurans in Low Earth orbit.   Results  D. radiodurans cells exposed to low Earth orbit conditions do not exhibit any morphological damage. However, an accumulation of numerous outer-membrane associated vesicles was observed. On levels of proteins and transcripts, a multifaceted response was detected to alleviate cell stress. The UvrABC endonuclease excision repair mechanism was triggered to cope with DNA damage. Defense against reactive oxygen species is mirrored by the increased abundance of catalases and is accompanied by the increased abundance of putrescine which works as scavenging molecule. In addition, several proteins and mRNAs, responsible for regulatory and transporting functions showed increased abundances. The decrease in primary metabolites indicate alternations in the energy status, which is needed to repair damaged molecules.   Conclusion  Low Earth orbit induced molecular rearrangements trigger multiple components of metabolic stress response and regulatory networks in exposed microbial cells. Presented results show that the non-sporulating bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans survived long-term Low Earth orbit exposure if wavelength below 200 nm are not present, which mirrors the UV spectrum of Mars, where CO2 effectively provides a shield below 190 nm. These results should be considered in the context of planetary protection concerns and the development of new sterilization techniques for future space missions.

### Sample Protocol
Tanpopo mission exposure For this space exposure experiment, Deinococcus radiodurans (ATCC 13939) cells were placed inside wells of aluminium plates until 1000 µm of cell layers were reached, desiccated and positioned inside an exposure panel designed by the Tanpopo space mission team [33]. To reach the required thickness of cell layers, multiple 3 µL aliquots of cell suspension containing ~108 cells/mL were added and air-dried. The cell suspension was taken from an overnight culture, grown in TGB medium (1 % tryptone, 0.2 % glucose, 0.6 % beef extract) at 30 °C in an incubator shaking at 150 rpm. SiO2 filters were put on top of the plates to cut off harmful UV radiation shorter than 200 nm [55]. The exposure panels were on board the SpaceX Dragon commercial cargo spaceship, which launched on April 15th, 2015 from Cape Canaveral (USA) by the Space-X Falcon-9 rocket. They were manually attached to the exposed experiment handrail attachment mechanism (ExHAM) on the Japanese exposure facility of the international space station, which was transferred to its final position on May 26th, 2015. For one year, samples were exposed to a total UV fluence of 3.1*103 kJ/m2 (200-315 nm), total cosmic radiation of 250-298 mGy, temperature fluctuations between –21.0 ± 5 °C and 23.9 ± 5 °C, pressure between 10–7 Pa and 10–4 Pa and 0 % humidity. Space exposed (LEO) cells returned after one year on August 26th, 2016 on board the SpaceX Dragon C11, which landed in the Pacific Ocean. Ground control cells (Ground Control) were prepared simultaneously and stored in a desiccator during all exposure time. Exposure to simulated LEO environmental factors  D. radiodurans cells deposited in dried form on Tanpopo exposure plates as for the mission were exposed in PSI 5 of the Astrobiology Space Simulation facilities at DLR Cologne equipped with a SiO2 window and a temperature control plate to a final pressure of 10-5 Pa for 90 days (Sim_exp). Samples were in parallel exposed to UV radiation of 3.4 x 103 kJm-2 with wavelengths > 200 nm from a solar simulator SOL2 (Dr. Hönle GmbH) and temperature cycles from -21 °C to +24 °C by an attached cryostat (Lauda). Unexposed simulation controls (Sim_ctrl) were stored inside a desiccator with silica gel at 21 °C.

### Data Protocol
Intracellular protein extraction After QIAzol extraction and phase separation, the lower, phenolic phase was transferred into a fresh tube for protein purification. To further wash the samples, 550 µL of H2O were added to the samples, centrifuged at 10000 g/5 min/RT and the lower phase was transferred into a new tube. To precipitate the proteins, 1.5 mL of 0.1 M NH4Ac in MeOH (with 0.5 % 2-mercaptoethanol) were added and the samples were put at -20 °C overnight. On the following day, proteins were centrifuged at 10000 g/15 min/4 °C. The pellets were subsequently washed three times with acetone and centrifuged at 10000 g/5 min/4 °C. After the final washing step, pellets were air dried and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.  Extracellular protein extraction To identify proteins represented in the extracellular milieu, the extracellular medium/supernatant of each replicate was analyzed. To remove remaining bacteria first, the supernatant samples were filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane (Watson). To each sample, trichloroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 10 % (V/V) and samples were incubated on ice for 2 h. To pellet the proteins, samples were centrifuged at 38000 g/30 min/4 °C and the supernatant was discarded. Pellets were washed three times with acetone and centrifuged at 10000 g/5 min/4 °C. After the final washing step, pellets were air dried and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Molecular stress response, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Low earth orbit, Deinococcus radiodurans

### Affiliations
Deputy of the Department of Biophysical Chemistry Head of Space Biochemistry Group Elisa Richter Fellow Representative of Austria and Executive Council Member of the European Astrobiological Network EANA
Molecular Systems Biology,
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Emanuel Ott

### Lab Head
Dr Tetyana Milojevic
Deputy of the Department of Biophysical Chemistry Head of Space Biochemistry Group Elisa Richter Fellow Representative of Austria and Executive Council Member of the European Astrobiological Network EANA


