### Accession
PXD004643

### Title
PP1 interactome during heart failure development

### Description
The PP1 interactome plays a central role in HF pathogenesis and is dysregulated at the level of the R-subunits in the failing heart, resulting in differential phosphorylation status of proteins across different subcellular compartments.With the combination if immunoaffinity purification and mass spectrometry we were able to map the PP1 interactome in a mouse model with dilated cardiomyopaty, which is the most common form of primary cardiomyopaty leading to HF.

### Sample Protocol
Ventricles from WT mice and from mice subjected to TAC or HeLa cells were lysed with PBS 0.1% Tween20 will be subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) using antibodies against PP1c. The eluates were then separated on a SDS-PAGE the proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and in-gel digestion with trypsin.  The peptides were separated on a nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)with an Agilent 1290 Infinity System coupled to an Orbitrap Q-exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Label free analysis was performed.

### Data Protocol
The RAW output files were loaded into MaxQuant Version 1.5.3.30 and searched with either the mouse or human FASTA file from UniProt  with the following default parameters: Methionine oxidation and N-term protein acetylation set as variable modifications , cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, Max charge peptide = 6, minimum peptide length = 7, FT MS/MS tolerance = 0.05 Da, IT MS/MS tolerance= 0.6Da, peptide and protein identification set to 1% FDR. For label-free quantification (LFQ), match between runs was selected with a maximum shift time window of 2 minutes. Proteins that were only identified by site, reverse hits, or contaminants were filtered out from the resultant protein list generated by MaxQuant. Furthermore all immunoglobulin proteins were filtered out before statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pp1, Heart failure, Immunoprecipitation, Ppi, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Utrecht University

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Utrecht University


