### Accession
PXD039389

### Title
Identification of new potential molecular actors related to fiber quality in flax through Omics

### Description
One of the biggest challenges to a more widespread utilization of natural fibers from flax and other fiber plants is to obtain a better understanding of the different factors underlying the observed variability in fiber quality. To do this, we measured fiber morphometric parameters from seven different flax varieties (4 spring fiber, 2 winter fiber and 1 winter oil) and undertook Partial Least-Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA) of transcriptomic data obtained from the same varieties in an attempt to identify high-information molecular markers. The calculation of Pearson correlation coefficients identified 5 putative gene-markers strongly correlated with morphometric features. Proteomic analysis on the two varieties showing the most discriminant and significant differences regarding to morphometrics identified an additional 4 protein-markers. The majority of the obtained markers are involved in lipid metabolism and the senescence process. Further comparative analysis of the obtained expression data with fiber mechanical measurements (strength, maximum force, area) obtained after field-retting for all 7 varieties allowed us to identify 4 highly-correlated putative molecular markers for the mechanical parameters. Three genes, connected directly or indirectly to cell wall metabolism (Expansin-related protein 3 precursor, beta-glucosidase and ascorbate peroxidase), and one gene coding an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate (NADP-malic enzyme 3).  Based on our results, we hypothesize that a reduced number of RNA and protein functional markers can be used to more accurately monitor and/or predict fiber yield and quality properties in different flax varieties, thereby contributing to an Agriculture 4.0 for this economically-important species.

### Sample Protocol
Spots were treated with an EVO 2 liquid handling workstation (TECAN). Spots were washed twice for 20 minutes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% methanol. Spots were then dried with 75% acetonitrile (2 times, 20 minutes) before being incubated with 40 ng trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 6 hours. Peptides were then extracted with 50 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and air dried before spotting on MALDI target with CHCA as matrix.

### Data Protocol
Selected protein spots were analysed by mass spectrometer MALDI-TOF (SciexTOF/TOFTM 5800, SCIEX). Peak list was extracted with ProteinPilot TM software (SCIEX) and protein identification was performed using MASCOT server with a linum database downloaded from phytozome (Lusitatissimum_200_V1.0 with 43484 sequences; 17356610 residues) and an EST database downloaded from NCBI on 14th Februarry 2014 (1,721,400 sequences; 329,774,722 residues). At least two unique peptides confirmed by fragmentation were assigned to each protein and protein scores greater than 60 and individual ion scores greater than 46 were considered as significant and indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05). Allowed amino acids modifications were fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable modifications of tryptophane (dioxidation, transformation to kynurenine), and oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
One of the biggest challenges for a more widespread utilization of plant fibers is to better understand the different molecular factors underlying the variability in fineness and mechanical properties of both elementary and scutched fibers. Accordingly, we analyzed genome-wide transcription profiling from bast fiber bearing tissues of seven different flax varieties (4 spring, 2 winter fiber varieties and 1 winter linseed) and identified 1041 differentially expressed genes between varieties, of which 97 were related to cell wall metabolism. KEGG analysis highlighted a number of different enriched pathways. Subsequent statistical analysis using Partial Least-Squares Discriminant Analysis showed that 73% of the total variance was explained by the first 3 X-variates corresponding to 56 differentially expressed genes. Calculation of Pearson correlations identified 5 genes showing a strong correlation between expression and morphometric data. Two-dimensional gel proteomic analysis on the two varieties showing the most discriminant and significant differences in morphometrics revealed 1490 protein spots of which 108 showed significant differential abundance. Mass spectrometry analysis successfully identified 46 proteins representing 32 non-redundant proteins. Statistical clusterization based on the expression level of genes corresponding to the 32 proteins showed clear discrimination into three separate clusters, reflecting the variety type (spring-/winter-fiber/oil). Four of the 32 proteins were also highly correlated with morphometric features. Examination of predicted functions for the 9 (5&#xa0;+&#xa0;4) identified genes highlighted lipid metabolism and senescence process. Calculation of Pearson correlation coefficients between expression data and retted fiber mechanical measurements (strength and maximum force) identified 3 significantly correlated genes. The genes were predicted to be connected to cell wall dynamics, either directly (Expansin-like protein), or indirectly (NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold superfamily protein). Taken together, our results have allowed the identification of molecular actors potentially associated with the determination of both <i>in-planta</i> fiber morphometrics, as well as <i>ex-planta</i> fiber mechanical properties, both of which are key parameters for elementary fiber and scutched fiber quality in flax.

### Keywords
Cell wall ., Transcriptomics, Flax (linum usitatissimum l.), Proteomics, Fiber, Retting

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology
University of Lille, France

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Estelle Goulas
University of Lille, France


