### Accession
PXD016034

### Title
A rare-codon-based translational program of cell proliferation

### Description
The codon usage of mRNAs controls the speed of translation elongation, which is primarily determined by the abundance of cognate tRNAs.  By profiling mRNA expression around the cell cycle we found that mRNAs that are relatively upregulate in the G2/M phase are enriched in rare codons. To understand the impact of this codon bias on translation, we have cultured NIH 3T3 cells with different concentrations of fetal calf serum (FCS), 1, 2, 5, and 10%, respectively, to induce distinct proliferation rates and thus distinct proportions of cells in the culture in the G2/M phase. We then estimated the levels of all proteins and mRNAs, and the change in translation efficiency (proteins per mRNA) in highly (10% FCS) relatively to less highly proliferating cells (lower FCS concentrations).

### Sample Protocol
Cells  were lysed in 50 μL of lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5) using 10 cycles of sonication (30 sec on, 30 sec off, Bioruptor, Diagenode). Protein concentration was determined by Reducing Agent Compatible BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample aliquots containing 100 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were cleaned up using PreOmics Cartridges (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufactures instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, the peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. For each sample aliquots of 0.5 μg of peptides were analysed by LC-MS. Chromatic separation was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated using a stepwise gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 50% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min (5-12% B by 5 min, 12-35% B by 65 min and  35-50% B by 90 min). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds. For MS1, 1e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 50 ms and scanned at a resolution of 240,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap at a target setting of 1e4 ions, accumulation time of 35 ms. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.1), the mgf files were searched against a database containing normal and reverse sequences of UniProt entries of Mus Musculus (2019/03/07) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 34,794 sequences. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were imported into Progenesis QI software and the list with quantified peptides was exported. The quantitative data were further processed and statistically analyzed using the SafeQuant software tool. In brief, the false-discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. For quantification, the analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak areas across all LC-MS runs and summation of peak areas per protein. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical using Bayes moderated t-statistics. Finally, the calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Trna pools, Translation elongation, Lfq, Codon usage, Translation control, Rare codons

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel


