### Accession
PXD037674

### Title
LC-MS/MS quantification of proteome derived from wild-type and agp2Δ mutant strains of Yeast.

### Description
Characterization of wild-type and agp2Δ mutant strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome derived from their respective crude plasma membrane fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample was in-gel reduced and alkylated, then digested with the addition of Promega sequencing grade modified trypsin and incubation overnight at 37oC. Resulting peptides were extracted before drying and resuspending in aqueous 0.1% TFA for LC-MS.  LC-MS/MS was performed with elution from a 50 cm C18 EasyNano PepMap column over 1 h driven by a Waters mClass UPLC onto an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer operated in DDA TopSpeed mode with a 1 s cycle time.  MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser at 120K resolution and MS2 spectra were acquired in parallel in the linear ion trap following HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Resulting LC-MS chromatograms in Thermo .raw format were imported into Progenesis QI for peak picking and alignments.  A concatenated MS2 peak list in .mgf format was exported and searched using the Mascot search program against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae subset of the SwissProt proteome, appended with common proteomic contaminants.  Matched peptides were filtered using the Percolator algorithm to achieve a 1% peptide spectral match false discovery rate, as assessed empirically against a reverse database search.   Peptide identifications were imported onto Progenesis QI-aligned LC-MS chromatograms and matched between acquisitions.  Identified MS1 peak areas were integrated and compared for relative peptide quantification of non-conflicting peptide sequences.  Relative protein quantification was inferred from underlying peptide values following normalisation to total peptide intensity.  Final accepted protein quantifications were filtered to require a minimum of two quantified peptides. Statistical testing was performed using anova with p-values converted to q-values for multiple test correction using the Hochberg and Benjamini approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crude plasma membrane, Yeast, Agp2, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar
Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University Qatar, Doha, Qatar

### Submitter
Ramya Ramadoss

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dindial Ramotar
Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar


