### Accession
PXD013874

### Title
Essential role of GEXP15, a specific Protein Phosphatase type 1 partner in Plasmodium berghei in asexual erythrocytic proliferation and transmission

### Description
The essential and distinct functions of Protein Phosphatase type 1 (PP1) catalytic subunit in eukaryotes are exclusively achieved through its interaction with a myriad of regulatory partners. In this work, we report the molecular and functional characterization of Gametocyte EXported Protein 15 (GEXP15), a Plasmodium specific protein, as a regulator of PP1.  In vitro interaction studies demonstrated that GEXP15 physically interacts with PP1 through the RVxF binding motif in P. falciparum and P. berghei. Functional assays showed that GEXP15 was able to increase the PP1 activity and the mutation of the RVxF motif completely abolished this regulation. Immunoprecipitation assays of tagged GEXP15 or PP1 in P. berghei followed by immunoblot or mass spectrometry analyses confirmed their interaction and showed that they are present both in schizont and gametocyte stages in shared protein complexes involved in the spliceosome and proteasome pathways and known to play essential role in parasite development. Phenotypic analysis of viable GEXP15 deficient P. berghei blood parasites showed that they were unable to develop lethal infection in BALB/c mice or to establish experimental cerebral malaria in C57BL/6 mice. Further, although deficient parasites produced gametocytes they did not produce any oocysts/sporozoites indicating a high fitness cost in the mosquito. Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of GEXP15 deficient schizonts revealed a profound defect with a significant decrease in the abundance and an impact on phosphorylation status of proteins involved in regulation of gene expression or invasion. Moreover, the depletion of GEXP15 seemed to impact mainly the abundance of some specific proteins of female gametocytes. Our study provides the first insight into the contribution of a PP1 regulator to Plasmodium virulence and suggests that GEXP15 affects both the asexual and sexual life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Purified schizonts or gametocytes of PbPP1-HA, PbPP1-mCherry, PbGEXP15-mCherry and parental wild-type parasites used as control, were suspended in 50 mM Tris, 0.5% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), pH 8. After 10 freeze-thaw cycles and sonication, soluble fractions were obtained after repeated centrifugations at 13000 rpm at 4°C. Anti-HA agarose beads (Life Technologies) or RFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek) were mixed overnight at 4°C with parasite soluble extracts in 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), pH 7.5. Beads were washed and elution was performed in Laemmli buffer. Then after 3 min at 95°C, samples were loaded on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE for western blot or mass spectrometry analyses. Western blots were carried out as described above and probed with anti-RFP pAb (1:1000, MBL) followed by goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (1:20000, Sigma-Aldrich). Then, the membrane was stripped and probed with mouse sera anti-GEXP15 (1:100) followed by Mouse TrueBlot® Ultra: Anti-Mouse Ig HRP (1:2000, eBioscience). After denaturation at 100°C in 5% SDS, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 1mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, and 10mM Tris pH 8 buffer for 3min, protein samples were fractionated on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. The electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered 1cm into the separating gel. The gel was briefly labeled with Coomassie Blue, and five bands, containing the whole sample, were cut. In gel, digestion of gel slices was performed as previously described (30). An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for separation of the protein digests. Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reversed phase column (75µm × 150mm, 2µm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific, temperature 35°C). Trapping was performed during 4min at 5μL/min, with solvent A (98% H2O, 2%ACN and 0.1% FA). Elution was performed using two solvents A (0,1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Gradient separation was 3min at 5% B, 37 min from 5% B to 30% B, 5min to 80% B, and maintained for 5min. The column was equilibrated for 10min with 5% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analyzed by Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage was 1.9kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 300-1200 range with resolution 35,000 (m/z 200). The target value was 5.00E + 05. Ten most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 4 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 5.0E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250msec for full MS scans and 100 msec for tandem mass spectrum. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were interpreted using the search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.2 Da for precursor and 0.2 Da for fragment ions, against a composite target decoy database (2*22,202 total entries) built with Mus musculus Uniprot database (10090 – 17,008 entries), Plasmodium berghei PlasmoDB database (Release 41.0 - 5 December 2018 – 5,076 entries) fused with the sequences of PbPP1-HA or PbGEXP15-mCherry, recombinant trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (118 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine propionamidation were searched as variable modifications. Up to one trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. For each sample, peptides were ﬁltered out according to the cut-oﬀ set for proteins hits with one or more peptides longer than nine residues. Ion and identity score were fixed to obtain a 1% false positive rate.

### Publication Abstract
The essential and distinct functions of Protein Phosphatase type 1 (PP1) catalytic subunit in eukaryotes are exclusively achieved through its interaction with a myriad of regulatory partners. In this work, we report the molecular and functional characterization of Gametocyte EXported Protein 15 (GEXP15), a Plasmodium specific protein, as a regulator of PP1. In vitro interaction studies demonstrated that GEXP15 physically interacts with PP1 through the RVxF binding motif in P. berghei. Functional assays showed that GEXP15 was able to increase PP1 activity and the mutation of the RVxF motif completely abolished this regulation. Immunoprecipitation assays of tagged GEXP15 or PP1 in P. berghei followed by immunoblot or mass spectrometry analyses confirmed their interaction and showed that they are present both in schizont and gametocyte stages in shared protein complexes involved in the spliceosome and proteasome pathways and known to play essential role in parasite development. Phenotypic analysis of viable GEXP15 deficient P. berghei blood parasites showed that they were unable to develop lethal infection in BALB/c mice or to establish experimental cerebral malaria in C57BL/6 mice. Further, although deficient parasites produced gametocytes they did not produce any oocysts/sporozoites indicating a high fitness cost in the mosquito. Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of GEXP15 deficient schizonts revealed a profound defect with a significant decrease in the abundance and an impact on phosphorylation status of proteins involved in regulation of gene expression or invasion. Moreover, depletion of GEXP15 seemed to impact mainly the abundance of some specific proteins of female gametocytes. Our study provides the first insight into the contribution of a PP1 regulator to Plasmodium virulence and suggests that GEXP15 affects both the asexual and sexual life cycle.

### Keywords
Pp1, Plasmodium, Ip-ms, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Lille
Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Inserm U1019-CNRS UMR 8204, Université de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue du Professeur Calmette, F-59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Inserm U1019-CNRS UMR 8204, Université de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue du Professeur Calmette, F-59000 Lille, France


