### Accession
PXD006444

### Title
Proteomic response of Bacillus subtilis 3610 to nanoparticles exposition

### Description
The natural biotope of Bacillus subtilis is the upper layer of soil where it grows as a biofilm. To mimic this physiological development and study the impact of nanoparticles during the formation of a biofilm in a contaminated soil, we have studied the proteomic response of the ancestral strain Bacillus subtilis 3610, which is able to form biofilm contrary to the 168 laboratory strain. The bacteria were grown on soft agar plates containing n-ZnO,  n-TiO2 or ZnSO4 metal ion.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were obtained from a well Bacillus subtilis strain 3610 cultures grown with or without stress, as described above. Cells were incubated in a 200 µl final volume of 20 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 15 µl of 30 mg/ml lysozyme and 4 µl of 1/50 benzonase solution for 20 min at 37°C. This was then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min. Total protein quantification was performed using the Bradford assay. Proteins were solubilized in SDS loading buffer before brief SDS-PAGE separation. They were then in-gel digested using trypsin before 2h nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro, Thermo Scientific). Analytical duplicates were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4) and Uniprot database (SwissProt, Bacillus subtilis (strain 168) taxonomy, February 2017 version). Default parameters were used, except that unqiue peptide was set to 1. 2 miscleavages were allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) was chosen as fixed modification and Oxidation (M)and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable ones. Label-free quantification was performed and match between runs allowed. Analytical duplicates were summed.

### Publication Abstract
Due to the physicochemical properties of nanoparticles, the use of nanomaterials increases every year in industrial and medical processes. At the same time, the increasing number of bacteria becoming resistant to many antibiotics, mostly by a horizontal gene transfer process, is a major public health concern. We herein report, for the first time, the role of nanoparticles in the physiological induction of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria. Besides the most well-known impacts of nanoparticles on bacteria, i.e. death or oxidative stress, two nanoparticles, n-ZnO and n-TiO<sub>2</sub>, significantly and oppositely impact the transformation efficiency of Bacillus subtilis in biofilm growth conditions, by modification of the physiological processes involved in the induction of competence, the first step of transformation. This effect is the consequence of a physiological adaptation rather than a physical cell injury: two oligopeptide ABC transporters, OppABCDF and AppDFABC, are differentially expressed in response to nanoparticles. Interestingly, a third tested nanoparticle, n-Ag, has no significant effect on competence in our experimental conditions. Overall, these results show that nanoparticles, by altering bacterial physiology and especially competence, may have profound influences in unsuspected areas, such as the dissemination of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Bacillus subtilis 3610, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
CNRS

### Submitter
Thierry Rabilloud

### Lab Head
Dr Rabilloud  
CNRS


