### Accession
PXD025640

### Title
Fungi hijack a plant apoplastic endoglucanase to release a ROS scavenging β-glucan decasaccharide to subvert immune responses

### Description
Plant pathogenic and beneficial fungi have evolved several strategies to evade immunity and cope with host-derived hydrolytic enzymes and oxidative stress in the apoplast, the extracellular spaces of plant tissues. Fungal hyphae are surrounded by an inner, insoluble cell wall layer and an outer, soluble extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) matrix. Here we show by proteomics and glycomics that these two layers have distinct protein and carbohydrate signatures, implicating different functions. The barley (Hordeum vulgare) β-1,3-endoglucanase HvBGLUII, which belongs to the widely distributed apoplastic GH17 family, is not active on fungal walls, but releases a conserved β-1,3;1,6-glucan decasaccharide (β-GD) from the EPS matrices of fungi with different lifestyles and taxonomic positions. This low molecular weight β-GD is resilient to further enzymatic hydrolysis by β-1,3-endoglucanases due to the presence of three β-1,6-linked glucose substituents and can scavenge reactive oxygen species via oxidative self-degradation. Additionally, exogenous application of β-GD leads to enhanced fungal colonization in barley. Our data highlights the hitherto undescribed capacity of this often-overseen fungal EPS layer to act as an outer protective barrier important for fungal accommodation within the hostile environment at the apoplastic plant-microbe interface.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were isolated from the EPS matrix, cell wall, and the culture filtrate obtained from axenic cultures of S. indica GFP strain grown in different media (CM, YPD and TSB). Protein isolation from the cell wall. Mycelia collected from S. indica GFP strain was ground in liquid N2 and resuspended in 1X PBS buffer containing 1 mM PMSF and 1% NP-40 using an ULTRA-TURRAX. The resuspended mixture was incubated at 4°C in a rotating wheel for 30 minutes.  The pellet obtained after centrifugation (8000xg) was resuspended in 1X PBS buffer containing 1 mM PMSF and 0.1% IGEPAL using an ULTRA-TURRAX. The pellet obtained after centrifugation (8000xg) was washed three times with Milli-Q water. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in Laemmli buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and β-mercaptoethanol and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes.  Protein isolation from the culture filtrate: Protein isolation from the EPS matrix: The EPS matrix obtained from the culture media by cryogelation was washed four times with Milli-Q water and was directly boiled in Laemmli buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and β-mercaptoethanol at 95°C for 10 minutes. The culture supernatant left-over from the EPS matrix isolation step was first filtered using a Whatman filter paper and then using a 0.22 µM syringe filter. Approximately 30 ml of EPS matrix depleted culture supernatant was treated with 5 ml of 95% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubated overnight at 4°C. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifuging (10,000xg) for one hour at 4°C. The isolated proteins were washed at least three times with 100% acetone. The dried protein pellet was resuspended in Laemmli buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and β-mercaptoethanol and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes. The proteins isolated from the EPS matrix, cell wall, and culture filtrate were separated using 10% SDS PAGE gel for 15 minutes and subsequently stained using the Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB). The visible band was cut and prepared by in-gel digestion for mass spectrometric analysis as described in PMID 24646099.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis including peptide and protein identificaion and MS1 based quantification was carried out with MaxQuant 1.6.12.0 essentially with standard parameters except enabling  label-free quantification , iBAQ quantification and 'match between runs'. Fasta sequences from UP000007148 (UniProt KB release 02/2020) and one added entry for oGFP were used for seaches.

### Publication Abstract
Plant pathogenic and beneficial fungi have evolved several strategies to evade immunity and cope with host-derived hydrolytic enzymes and oxidative stress in the apoplast, the extracellular space of plant tissues. Fungal hyphae are surrounded by an inner insoluble cell wall layer and an outer soluble extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) matrix. Here, we show by proteomics and glycomics that these two layers have distinct protein and carbohydrate signatures, and hence likely have different biological functions. The barley (Hordeum vulgare) &#x3b2;-1,3-endoglucanase HvBGLUII, which belongs to the widely distributed apoplastic glycoside hydrolase 17 family (GH17), releases a conserved &#x3b2;-1,3;1,6-glucan decasaccharide (&#x3b2;-GD) from the EPS matrices of fungi with different lifestyles and taxonomic positions. This low molecular weight &#x3b2;-GD does not activate plant immunity, is resilient to further enzymatic hydrolysis by &#x3b2;-1,3-endoglucanases due to the presence of three &#x3b2;-1,6-linked glucose branches and can scavenge reactive oxygen species. Exogenous application of &#x3b2;-GD leads to enhanced fungal colonization in barley, confirming its role in the fungal counter-defensive strategy to subvert host immunity. Our data highlight the hitherto undescribed capacity of this often-overlooked EPS matrix from plant-associated fungi to act as an outer protective barrier important for fungal accommodation within the hostile environment at the apoplastic plant-microbe interface.

### Keywords
Soluble extracellular polysaccharide matrix, Hordeum vulgare, Serendipita indica, Eps, Endophyte

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory BMFZ Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory BMFZ Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


