### Accession
PXD034960

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of cellular nuclear protein TMT markers from  rat spinal cord tissue samples in neuropathic pain model

### Description
To further reveal the mechanism of neuropathic pain, we simulated neuropathic pain by constructing a chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve (CCI) model, followed by quantitative proteomic analysis of rat spinal cord cell nuclei at 1 day, 7 days and sham-operated groups after CCI. A total of 3 samples from each group were used. A total of 5039 proteins were identified in this study, of which 4469 proteins contained quantitative information. Differential proteins were defined by a threshold of change >1.3-fold and t-test p-value <0.05.v

### Sample Protocol
First rat spinal cord samples were removed from -80 °C and spinal cord cell nucleoproteins were extracted using the nucleoprotein extraction Kit. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. For LC-MS/MS Analysis, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) and subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Rat database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. For bioinformatics analysis, enrichment analyses of differential expressed proteins were performed with the tools Gene Ontology annotation (GOA) proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database and protein pathways were annotated with the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of gene transcription in the spinal dorsal horn (SDH) plays a critical role in the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain. In this study, we investigated whether the transcription factor STAT2 affects neuropathic pain and evaluated its possible mechanisms. A proteomic analysis showed that the nuclear fraction of STAT2 protein in the SDH was downregulated after chronic constriction injury of the rat sciatic nerve, which was associated with the development of neuropathic pain. Similarly, siRNA-induced downregulation of STAT2 in the SDH of na&#xef;ve rats also resulted in pain hypersensitivity. Using RNA-sequencing analysis, we showed that reduction of nuclear STAT2 after chronic constriction injury was associated with increased expression of microglial activation markers, including the class II transactivator and major histocompatibility complex class II proteins. In addition, siRNA-induced downregulation of STAT2 promoted microglial activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in the SDH. Taken together, these results showed that chronic constriction injury caused downregulation of nuclear STAT2 in the SDH, which may result in microglial activation and development of neuropathic pain. Our findings indicate that restoration of nuclear expression of STAT2 could be a potential pathway for the treatment of neuropathic pain.

### Keywords
Spinal cord, Rat, Lc-msms, Nuclear protein

### Affiliations
Department of Anesthesiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University

### Submitter
Zhifeng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Changsheng Huang
Department of Anesthesiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China


