### Accession
PXD027168

### Title
Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Mutant and Wildtype SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Protein

### Description
The COVID-19 pandemic is arguably the most important global threat to humankind that the world has seen in a century. SARS-CoV-2 has now reached 196 countries across all continents with over 159 million confirmed cases with 3.3 million deaths todate. Currently, our knowledge on how and why SARS-CoV-2 causes severe COVID-19 is continually evolving. Here, we identified three consecutive SNPs (G28881A, G28882A, G28883C) resulting in the Nucleocapsid (N) protein amino acid mutations R203K and G204R (simply termed KR mutation) by large-scale SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing from clinical swab samples of patients. The nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-CoV-2, the highly abundant structure protein within the infected cells, serves multiple functions during viral infection, which besides RNA binding, playing essential roles in viral transcription, replication, and translation. We investigated the impact of this KR mutation on the functional properties of N protein in terms of host protein interaction and phosphorylation status by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and affinity purification with MagStrep beads (IBA Lifesciences) was manually performed according to the published protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, after transfection (48 hours) cells were collected with 10mM EDTA in 1xPBS and washed twice with cold PBS (1x). The cell pellets were stored at −80 °C. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) for 30 minutes while rotating at 4 °C and then centrifuge at high speed to collect the supernatant. The cell lysate was incubated with prewashed MagStrep beads (30 μl per reaction) for 3 hours at 4 °C. The beads were then washed four times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.05% NP40, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) and then proceed with on-bead digestion. The on-bead digestion was carried out as described before36. For affinity confirmation, bound proteins were eluted using buffer BXT (IBA Lifesciences) and after running on SDS-PAGE were subjected to silver staining and western-blot using anti-strep-II antibody (ab76949. For mass spectrometry analysis an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (MS) (Lumos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed using the Maxquant software (version 1.5.3.30). The uniprot human database and 262 common contaminant sequences were combined and used for the database search. The “revert” protein sequence was chosen in the decoy mode option for all Maxquant searches. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The variable modifications included oxidation at methionine residues, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine residues, and N-terminal protein acetylation. The enzyme limits were set at full trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. A positive peptide identification was required to contain a minimum of seven amino acids and a maximum of five modifications. The mass tolerances of the precursor ion of were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and main searches, respectively. The mass tolerances of the fragment ions were set 20 ppm. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of peptide-spectral match (PSM), protein identification and site decoy fraction were all set to 0.01. The label-free quantification of proteins and phosphorylation peptides were performed using Maxquant LFQ

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring SARS-CoV-2 spread and evolution through genome sequencing is essential in handling the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we sequenced 892 SARS-CoV-2 genomes collected from patients in Saudi Arabia from March to August 2020. We show that two consecutive mutations (R203K/G204R) in the nucleocapsid (N) protein are associated with higher viral loads in COVID-19 patients. Our comparative biochemical analysis reveals that the mutant N protein displays enhanced viral RNA binding and differential interaction with key host proteins. We found increased interaction of GSK3A kinase simultaneously with hyper-phosphorylation of the adjacent serine site (S206) in the mutant N protein. Furthermore, the host cell transcriptome analysis suggests that the mutant N protein produces dysregulated interferon response genes. Here, we provide crucial information in linking the R203K/G204R mutations in the N protein to modulations of host-virus interactions and underline the potential of the nucleocapsid protein as a drug target during infection.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Data dependent acqusition (dda), Lc-ms/ms, Nucleocapsid protein

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Pathogen Genomic Group, Thuwal 23500-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Muhammad Shuaib

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Shuaib
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Pathogen Genomic Group, Thuwal 23500-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


