### Accession
PXD040727

### Title
A rapid workflow for high-throughput FFPE-based quantitative proteomics

### Description
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples are an invaluable resource to study the underlying molecular mechanisms of the diseases and when coupled with laser capture microdissection (LCM, isolation of sub histological regions of the tissue sections is readily obtained for further analysis. LCM-based FFPE tissue proteomics is gaining clinicopathological significance particularly in biomarker discovery driven research, beyond its conventional morphology-based application in laboratory diagnosis. Processing of laser capture microdissected tissue sections can be challenging for quantitative proteomic analysis due to lower amount of protein retrieved and losses during the sample processing. A robust, streamlined and automated sample preparation workflow for efficient processing of large cohort of LCM samples which is a primary requisite for biomarker type of studies is needed. Here, we propose a new sample processing workflow for processing of FFPE samples and enable scalable, automated extraction of clean peptides from unprocessed or H&E-stained FFPE tissue sections for deep bottom-up protein profiling and quantification.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue block from a normal renal biopsy sample was retrieved and serially sectioned at 10 Î¼m thickness on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membrane slides. The slides were deparaffinized and then the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections were reviewed. The cortical tubulointerstitial area was selected for the LCM and subsequent processing.The H&E-stained FFPE tissue was used for LCM using a PALM Laser Microbeam scope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Jena, Germany). With microscope-aided visualization of the H&E-stained FFPE sections, the tubulointerstitial regions of interest were annotated. The tubulointerstitial tissue, on an average, in each sample was matched and represented by 3 serial sections with a total surface area of approximately 20 mm2. These regions were captured with the RoboLPC function using laser energy between 55% to 70%. The microdissected tissue samples were processed using three different protocols i.e., standard, AFA aided extraction with overnight digestion (referred to as AFA overnight) and AFA aided extraction and accelerated trypsin digestion (referred to as AFA accelerated).  In standard protocol, the microdissected tissue samples (n = 16) were collected in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes containing LCM digest buffer (0.002% zwitterionic, 20 mm TEAB buffer at pH 8.2) and vortexed to homogenize the microdissected tissue and then spun at 14,000xg for 2 min to pellet the buffer and tissue. The heat-induced reverse cross-linking of the formaldehyde bonds and protein extraction was done at 98Â°C for 1h with shaking at 800rpm in a ThermoMixer equipped with an insulating ThermoTop to ensure even heating and no evaporation of the buffer. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma). The samples were cooled on ice and following a short spin were subjected to ultrasonication-based lysis using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) at 4ËšC for 10 cycles (30 sec on/ 30 sec off) to further extract proteins from the tissue. The samples were alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark on a ThermoMixer at 800 rpm. Proteolytic digestion was performed following the addition of Mass Spec grade Trypsin/LysC (1:10 trypsin: protein ratio; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) followed by AFA overnight incubation at 37ËšC. Final peptide concentrations were determined by fluorescent peptide assay (ThermoFisher). Acidification was done using 5 Î¼l of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (pH<2).  In AFA overnight protocol, the microdissected tissue samples (n = 16) were collected in a 96 well AFA-TUBE TPX plate (PN 520291) containing LCM digest buffer (0.002% zwitterionic, 20 mm TEAB buffer at pH 8.2). The wells with samples were strip capped all the time to ensure even heating and no evaporation of the buffer during subsequent processing. A short ultrasonication-based lysis by the adaptive focussed acoustics (AFA) technology on the R230 ultrasonicator (Covaris) was done. The reverse crosslinking of formaldehyde bonds and protein reduction was performed (as described above). Following a second round of treatment with AFA, alkylation and proteolytic digestion was performed (described above). Finally, tryptic digest was acidified using 5 Î¼l of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (pH<2) after peptide quantitation (described above).  In AFA accelerated protocol, the microdissected tissue samples (n = 16) were processed in the similar way as described for the AFA overnight protocol except the proteolytic digestion was aided by AFA using Trypsin/LysC (1:10 trypsin: protein ratio; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with incubation for 1 hour at 37ËšC on the R230 ultrasonicator. Finally, tryptic digest was acidified using 5 Î¼l of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (pH<2) after peptide quantitatio.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data files were searched with Andromeda against the Swissprot human database (ver. 2021_04) in MaxQuant (ver1.6.17) with parameters set for full trypsin specificity with oxidized Met and N-term protein acetylation allowed as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification.  Mass tolerances were set at 4.5ppm for MS1 and 20ppm for MS2 and protein identifications with a 1 peptide minimum were filtered at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Laser capture microdissection (LCM) has become an indispensable tool for mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of specific regions obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples in both clinical and research settings. Low protein yields from LCM samples along with laborious sample processing steps present challenges for proteomic analysis without sacrificing protein and peptide recovery. Automation of sample preparation workflows is still under development, especially for samples such as laser-capture microdissected tissues. Here, we present a simplified and rapid workflow using adaptive focused acoustics (AFA) technology for sample processing for high-throughput FFPE-based proteomics. We evaluated three different workflows: standard extraction method followed by overnight trypsin digestion, AFA-assisted extraction and overnight trypsin digestion, and AFA-assisted extraction simultaneously performed with trypsin digestion. The use of AFA-based ultrasonication enables automated sample processing for high-throughput proteomic analysis of LCM-FFPE tissues in 96-well and 384-well formats. Further, accelerated trypsin digestion combined with AFA dramatically reduced the overall processing times. LC-MS/MS analysis revealed a slightly higher number of protein and peptide identifications in AFA accelerated workflows compared to standard and AFA overnight workflows. Further, we did not observe any difference in the proportion of peptides identified with missed cleavages or deamidated peptides across the three different workflows. Overall, our results demonstrate that the workflow described in this study enables rapid and high-throughput sample processing with greatly reduced sample handling, which is amenable to automation.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Ffpe, Lcm, Kidney

### Affiliations
Professor , department of Laboratory Medicine and pathology, Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Benjamin Madden

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Professor , department of Laboratory Medicine and pathology, Mayo Clinic


