### Accession
PXD020859

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry uncovers protein interactions and functional assemblies in synaptic vesicle membranes

### Description
Synaptic vesicles are storage organelles for neurotransmitters in the pre-synaptic cytosol. When an action potential arrives at the pre-synaptic terminal, they fuse with the pre-synaptic membrane and neurotransmitters are released. In this project, we set out to study the protein interactions formed in synaptic vesicle membranes. For this, we first assessed the proteome of five independent vesicle preparations. Using chemical cross-linking, we then tackled the interactions of the major protein components. To gain further insights, we combined this approach with a chemical labelling strategy. Specific protein interactions were then studied after (i) treating the vesicles with Botulinum neurotoxin B, (ii) binding the soluble SNARE complex, and (iii) fusion of the vesicles with empty liposomes. Our findings reveal stable interaction modules in synaptic vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptic vesicles were purified from rat brain as previously described (Huttner, et al., 1983; Nagy, et al., 1976). The typical protein concentration of purified synaptic vesicles was 2 g/l. The proteins of synaptic vesicles were separated by gel electrophoresis. Gel electrophoresis was performed using the NuPAGE system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Protein bands were stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain solution (Expedeon).  Entire gel lanes were cut into 23 equally sized gel slices. The proteins were then hydrolysed with trypsin as described previously (Shevchenko, et al., 2006). For this, the proteins were first reduced with dithiothreitol and reduced cysteine residues were then alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were hydrolysed with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Extracted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile/ 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. For chemical cross-linking of synaptic vesicle proteins, synaptic vesicles (protein concentration 2 g/g) were cross-linked with 10 mM BS3 for 1h at 25°C and 300 rpm in a thermomixer. The proteins were then precipitated with 1 vol. ice-cold ethanol and 1/10 vol. 3M sodium acetate, pH 5.3 at -20°C. The protein pellet was washed with 80 % (v/v) ice-cold ethanol and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  For tryptic hydrolysis, the protein pellet was dissolved in 20 l 1 % (m/v) RapiGest (Waters) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5. Proteins were then reduced with 20 l 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 for 1h at 37°C. Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 20 l 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 for 1h at 37°C in the dark. For tryptic digestion, the concentration of RapiGest was diluted to 0.1 % (m/v) with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio followed by incubation at 37°C overnight. RapiGest was then degraded by addition of 40 l of 5 % (v/v) trifluoric acid followed by incubation for 2h at 37°C. Degraded RapiGest was removed by centrifugation and tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Cross-linked di-peptides were enriched by peptide size-exclusion chromatography on an SuperdexTM peptide 3.2/300 column using an ÄKTA pure chromatography system (GE Healthcare). For this, the peptides were dissolved in 60 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoric acid followed by isocratic separation at a flow rate of 50 l/min. Elution of the peptides was monitored at 280 nm. Fractions of 50 l were collected. Fractions containing cross-linked di-peptides as well as linear peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile/ 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. For labelling with sulfo-NHS-acetate, a total protein amount of approx. 30 g was incubated with 5 and 10 mM sulfo-NHS-acetate for 15 min at 23 °C. The proteins were then precipitated and digested with RapiGest and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as described for cross-linked proteins.  For labelling with DEPC, a total protein amount of approx. 30 g was incubated with 5 and 10 mM DEPC for 10 min at 37 °C. The proteins were then precipitated as described above. The protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea in 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 followed by incubation for 15 min at room-temperature. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 23°C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 23°C. The solution was then diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 to a final concentration of 2 M urea. Tryptic hydrolysis was performed at 37 °C overnight (enzyme:protein 1:20). Generated peptides were desalted using ZipTips (Merck).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data were searched against the uniprot database (taxonomy rattus norvegicus; 31,568 proteins; UniProt proteome ID: UP000002494; 26 Sep 2018) using MaxQuant v1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the following database search settings: enzyme, trypsin; mass accuracy of precursor ions in main search, 4.5 ppm; mass accuracy of fragment ions in main search, 0.5 Da; number of allowed missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine; quantification, iBAQ (Schwanhausser, et al., 2011). The database search results were further processed with Perseus v1.6.2.3. For this, typical contaminants as well as protein hits with MaxQuant scores <100 and those which were only identified by their modified peptides were removed from the results list. The median iBAQ intensities obtained for all proteins from all replicates were visualised in scatter plots. The 400 most abundant proteins were selected for a synaptic vesicle protein database. For identification of modified sites from labelling experiments, raw data were searched against the generated database using MaxQuant v1.6.3.3 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Database search parameters were: enzyme, trypsin;  mass accuracy for precursor ions in main search, 4.5 ppm; mass accuracy for fragment ions, 0.5 Da; maximum number of missed cleavages, 4; variable modifications, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine, serine, threonine and tyrosine, carboethoxylation of histidine, lysine, cysteine, serine, threonine and tyrosine including neutral losses from histidine, lysine, serine and threonine,  formyl-carboethoxylation of histidine, di-carboethoxylation of histidine and urethane-carboethoxylation of histidine including neutral loss (see (Barth, et al., 2020) for details). The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled. Modified sites with probability scores <0.75 and peptide scores <80 were discarded. For identification of cross-linked peptides, raw data were searched against the generated database using pLink v2.3.2 with the following search parameters: enzyme, trypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages, 2; minimum peptide mass, 600; maximum peptide mass, 6000; minimum peptide length, 4; maximum peptide length, 60; mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions, 20 ppm; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine; fragmentation, HCD; cross-linker, BS3 (i.e. reactive towards lysine residues and protein N-termini); false-discovery rate, 0.05. Results tables were formatted using the CroCo software (Bender and Schmidt, 2020). Potential cross-links were manually checked for spectral quality. For validation, fragment ion series of at least 4 adjacent fragments should be observed for both peptides with reasonable intensity. Only cross-links which were observed in at least two replicates and validated in at least one fragment spectrum were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Synaptophysin, Synaptobrevin-2, Synaptic vesicles, Mass spectrometry, Protein networks

### Affiliations
Interdisciplinary Research Centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Centre, Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
Interdisciplinary Research Centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Centre, Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany


