### Accession
PXD009310

### Title
The platelet releasate in healthy population and pregancy

### Description
Upon activation, platelets release a multitude of soluble and vesicular signals, collectively termed the ‘platelet releasate’ (PR). This PR plays an important role in haemostasis, wound healing and the inflammatory response. We and others have used qualitative/quantitative proteomic approaches to characterise the PR; however, with reports of marked inter-individual variability, confident and reliable insights have been hindered. Here we aimed to provide a reproducible and quantifiable proteomic analysis and establish a 'core' human PR, as well as to assess its variability in healthy human pregnancy where increased platelet activation is observed. 896 proteins from thrombin-induced PRs were quantified across 32healthy donors, with 277 proteins forming a ‘core’ PR with low variability. All 277 core PR proteins were identified in pregnancy. Furthermore 69 proteins were found differentially released from platelets in healthy human pregnancy. In summary, the PR comprises a ‘core’ set of proteins between healthy individuals. This dynamic proteome significantly changes in physiologic and pathologic conditions. Thus, the PR is a barcode for the health status of an individual at a given time.

### Sample Protocol
Human platelets were obtained from healthy adult volunteers in accordance with approved guidelines from University College Dublin, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, Dublin and the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin. Washed platelets were isolated and activated with 1U/ml thrombin under constant stirring for 5 mins using a Chronolog-700 platelet aggregometer. Platelets were removed by sequential centrifugation and platelet releasate was isolated. PR samples were solubilised in RIPA buffer and proteins precipitated overnight. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in urea, disulphide bonds reduced and protected. PR samples were digested with Lys-C followed by Trypsin. Peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips and resuspended in 1% formic acid. Samples were analysed using a Thermo-Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system. each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75μm ID), pulled using a laser puller, packed with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9μm; 12cm in length) reverse-phase media and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 60 minutes (flow rate = 250nL/min) direct into a Q-Exactive MS. The MS was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320°C, and with a potential of 2300V applied to the frit. All data was acquired while operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600m/z) was performed using the Q-Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using high-energy collision dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.5.0.30. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a human FASTA (August 2016) obtained from UniProt.  MQ analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20ppm the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6ppm and 20ppm, respectively. The search included fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of 2 miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide/protein identification.  For the PR analysis across healthy population we used label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. LFQ intensities were assigned to identified proteins by comparing the area under the curve of the signal intensity for any given peptide. Protein IDs were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database, proteins only identified by site, and common contaminants. LFQ values were Log2 transformed unless otherwise indicated.  A protein was included in our ‘core’ PR if it was found in 32 from 32 donors.  For pregnancy analysis total protein apprach (TPA) was used. A protein was inculded if it was found in at least 50% of at least one (pregnant (PC) or non-pregnant (NP)) group.

### Publication Abstract
Upon activation, platelets release a powerful cocktail of soluble and vesicular signals, collectively termed the "platelet releasate" (PR). Although several studies have used qualitative/quantitative proteomic approaches to characterize PR; with debated content and significant inter-individual variability reported, confident, and reliable insights have been hindered. Using label-free quantitative (LFQ)-proteomics analysis, a reproducible, quantifiable investigation of the 1U mL<sup>-1</sup> thrombin-induced PR from 32 healthy adults was conducted. MS proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD009310. Of the 894 proteins identified, 277 proteins were quantified across all donors and form a "core" PR. Bioinformatics and further LFQ-proteomic analysis revealed that the majority (84%) of "core" PR proteins overlapped with the protein composition of human platelet-derived exosomes. Vesicles in the exosomal-size range were confirmed in healthy-human PR and reduced numbers of similar-sized vesicles were observed in the PR of a mouse model of gray platelet syndrome, known to be deficient in platelet alpha-granules. Lastly, the variability of proteins in the PR was assessed, and reproducible secretion levels were found across all 32 healthy donors. Taken together, the PR contains valuable soluble and vesicular cargo and has low-population variance among healthy adults, rendering it a potentially useful platform for diagnostic fingerprinting of platelet-related disease.

### Keywords
Human, Pregnancy, Lc-ms/ms, Platelets, Platelet releasate

### Affiliations
SBBS, Conway Institute, UCD, Belfield, Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Maguire
SBBS, Conway Institute, UCD, Belfield, Dublin


