### Accession
PXD013265

### Title
Integration of metabolomics and transcriptomics to reveal metabolic characteristics and key targets associated with cisplatin resistance in non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
Continuous exposure to cisplatin can induce drug resistance to limit efficacy, however, the underlying mechanisms correlated to cisplatin resistance are still unclear. Drug-sensitive A549 cells and cisplatin-resistant A549/DDP cells were used to explore the potential metabolic pathways and key targets associated with cisplatin resistance by integrating untargeted metabolomics with transcriptomics. The results of comprehensive analyses showed that 19 metabolites were significantly changed in A549/DDP vs A549 cells, and some pathways had a close relationship with cisplatin resistance, such as the biosynthesis of aminoacyl-tRNA, glycerophospholipid metabolism, and glutathione metabolism. Moreover, transcriptomics analysis showed glutathione metabolism was also obviously affected in A549/DDP, which indicated that glutathione metabolism played an import role in the process of drug resistance. Meanwhile, transcriptomics analysis suggested the four enzymes related to glutathione metabolism - CD13, GPX4, RRM2B, and OPLAH - as potential targets of cisplatin resistance in NSCLC. Further studies identified the over-expressions of these four enzymes in A549/DDP. The elucidation of mechanism and discovery of new potential targets may help us have a better understanding of cisplatin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Reagents A549 cells were obtained from ATCC, cisplatin - resistant A549/DDP cells were established as described previously [9]. Cisplatin was purchased from Sigma (Germany). HPLC grade methanol、acetonitrile、formic acid were purchased from Merck company (Germany), Watson's distilled water was used as Deionized Water. RNA kit was purchased from Takara company (Japan). CCK8 kit and BCA assay kit were provided by Beyotime Biotechnology Corporation (Shanghai, China).  Cell Culture and CCK8 Assay A549 and A549/DDP cells were cultured in DMEM (Hyclone) media with 10% FBS (Sigma) at 37°C with 5% CO2, the viability of A549 and A549/DDP cells was evaluated by using CCK8 kit. Cells were seeded in 96-well plates at 3500 cells per well, after 24 hours, different concentrations of cisplatin (0 - 150 μM) were added to the plate and then incubated for another 48 h at 37°C. After that, the CCK8 solution was put into the wells and incubated for 1 h before the measurement of the optical density (OD) at 450 nm according to the instructions. RNA-Seq Analysis  Total RNA was extracted from the cells seeded in six well plates by using RNA kit (Takara) following the manufactor instructions. RNA-seq analysis was completed by Beijing genomics institute through the BGISEQ-500 system. Raw data were filtered by using SOAP nuke and saved as FASTQ format [10]. Clean reads were mapped to reference transcriptome by using Bowtie2 and HISAT software, the gene expression level was calculated by RSEM. Gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway enrichment were conducted by DAVID. UPLC/Q-TOF/MS The UPLC/Q-TOF/MS was performed by using an Agilent 1290 Infinity UPLC, coupled with an Agilent 6538 UHD and an Accurate-Mass Q-TOF/MS. The separation was carried out on a Waters HILIC column (1.7 μm, 100×3.0 mm) with mobile phase consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) ( 0~2 min，5% B；2~13 min，5%→95% B；13~15 min，95% B), the flow rate was 0.4 ml/min and the injection volume was set to 3 μl. The data was detected by MS detector under positive and negative ion modes respectively. The optimized system conditions were performed as follows: Gas flow rate 11 L/min, gas temperature at 350℃, nebulizer 50 Psi, Capillary 4 KV (+)/3.5 KV (-), Mass range m/z 50~1500. Samples Preparation A549 and A549/DDP cells were cultured in 6 cm dishes, when grew nearly 90%, cells were divided into 4 groups (n=12): A549 (-), A549 (+), A549/DDP (-), A549/DDP (+). A549 (+) and A549/DDP (+) groups were incubated with 50 μM cisplatin for 48 hours, while A549 (-) and A549/DDP (-) groups were incubated without cisplatin. Cells were washed twice with PBS before precooled methanol added to the cell culture dishes, then the suspension was transferred into 1.5 ml Ep tube and centrifuged at 13000 rpm at 4℃ for 10 minutes. 1 ml supernate was collected to dry under nitrogen, then dissolved by 200 μl 50% acetonitrile with inter standard 2-Chloro-L-phenylalanine. After the mixture was vortexed for 90 s and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4℃, the supernatant was pipetted into vials for analysis. To validate the experimental accuracy and stability, 20 μl cell sample from each group was transferred into a vial and mixed to be the quality control (QC) sample. Western Blot Analysis After 48 hours of cell culture, the cells from different groups were lysed in cell lysis buffer and the protein concentrations were quantified with the BCA assay kit. The collected samples were heated and separated by different consistencies of sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS – PAGE), followed by transferring to PVDF membranes. The membranes were incubated with designated primary antibodies against E-Cadherin, p-/ERK1/2, p-/STAT3, p-/AKT, CD13, GPX4, RRM2B, OPLAH, GAPDH and β-actin at 4 °C overnight after blocked with 5% nonfat milk. GAPDH and β-actin were selected as the housekeeping genes. All these antibodies were purchased from CST (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., USA). At last, the membranes underwent second incubation with suitable secondary antibodies at room temperature. Chemiluminescence signals were observed and analyzed by using an enhanced chemiluminescence system (Fusion FX7 Spectra; Vilber Lourmat, Eberhardzell, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The western blot data was performed using prism 6 software, and represented as mean ± SD, a P-value of 0.05 or less was considered as statistical significance. The principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least-squares discrimination analysis (PLS-DA) were used to analyze the UPLC-Q-TOF/MS data by using SIMCA-P software (13.0). Those metabolites satisfied with variable influence in the projection (VIP)>1, |Pcorr|>0.52 and p<0.05 were considered as potential biomarkers. Potential metabolites were identified by the online database HMDB (http://www.hmdb.ca) and Metlin ((http://www.metlin.scripps.edu), pathway analysis was visualized by the web-based tool Kegg (https://www.kegg.jp) and Metaboanalyst (http:// www.metaboanalyst.ca)

### Publication Abstract
Continuous exposure to cisplatin can induce drug resistance to limit efficacy; however, the underlying mechanisms correlated with cisplatin resistance are still unclear. Drug-sensitive A549 cells and cisplatin-resistant A549/DDP cells were used to explore the potential metabolic pathways and key targets associated with cisplatin resistance by integrating untargeted metabolomics with transcriptomics. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013265. The results of comprehensive analyses showed that 19 metabolites were significantly changed in A549/DDP versus A549 cells, and some pathways had a close relationship with cisplatin resistance, such as the biosynthesis of aminoacyl-tRNA, glycerophospholipid metabolism, and glutathione metabolism. Moreover, transcriptomics analysis showed that the glutathione metabolism was also obviously affected in A549/DDP, which indicated that the glutathione metabolism played an important role in the process of drug resistance. Meanwhile, transcriptomics analysis suggested the four enzymes related to glutathione metabolism-CD13, GPX4, RRM2B, and OPLAH-as potential targets of cisplatin resistance in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Further studies identified the overexpression of these four enzymes in A549/DDP. The elucidation of mechanism and discovery of new potential targets may help us have a better understanding of cisplatin resistance.

### Keywords
Metabolomics;transcriptomics;cisplatin resistance; nsclc

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai 9th People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
1.	Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai 9th People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine

### Submitter
shi yuhuan

### Lab Head
Dr Yongfang Yuan1
Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai 9th People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


