### Accession
PXD036105

### Title
Acute pharmacological degradation of ERK5 does not inhibit cellular immune response or proliferation

### Description
Over the past few decades, interest in the role that extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) plays in various diseases, particularly cancer and inflammation, has grown. Phenotypes observed from genetic knockdown or deletion of ERK5 suggested that targeting ERK5 could have therapeutic potential in various disease settings, motivating the development of potent and selective ATP-competitive ERK5 inhibitors. However, these inhibitors were unable to recapitulate the effects of genetic loss of ERK5, suggesting that ERK5 may have key kinase-independent roles. To investigate potential non-catalytic functions associated with ERK5, we report here the development of INY-06-061, a potent and selective heterobifunctional degrader of ERK5. In contrast to results reported through genetic knockdown of ERK5, INY-06-061-induced ERK5 degradation did not induce anti-proliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines or suppress inflammatory responses in primary endothelial cells. Thus, we have developed and characterized a chemical tool useful for validating phenotypes reported to be associated with genetic ERK5 ablation and for guiding future ERK5-directed drug discovery efforts.

### Sample Protocol
MOLT4 cells were treated with DMSO (biological triplicate) or INY-06-061 (100 nM), INY-05-091 (250 nM) or INY-05-128-01 (250 nM) degrader for 5 h and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Cell lysis and Tandem Mass Tagged (TMT) tryptic peptides were prepared for LC-MS analysis following procedures published (Donovan et al., 2018). Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 μm inner diameter EasySpray ES903 microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each analysis used a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 × 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 s for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 × 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursor set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (February 2020) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (304.2071 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (Team, 2014).Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Recent interest in the role that extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) plays in various diseases, particularly cancer and inflammation, has grown. Phenotypes observed from genetic knockdown or deletion of ERK5 suggested that targeting ERK5 could have therapeutic potential in various disease settings, motivating the development ATP-competitive ERK5 inhibitors. However, these inhibitors were unable to recapitulate the effects of genetic loss of ERK5, suggesting that ERK5 may have key kinase-independent roles. To investigate potential non-catalytic functions of ERK5, we report the development of INY-06-061, a potent and selective heterobifunctional degrader of ERK5. In contrast to results reported through genetic knockdown of ERK5, INY-06-061-induced ERK5 degradation did not induce anti-proliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines or suppress inflammatory responses in primary endothelial cells. Thus, we developed and characterized a chemical tool useful for validating phenotypes reported to be associated with genetic ERK5 ablation and for guiding future ERK5-directed drug discovery efforts.

### Keywords
Degrader, Targeted protein degradation, Erk5

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


