### Accession
PXD004156

### Title
An efficient method for protein extraction from low protein concentration solutions compatible with the proteomic analysis of latex-producing organelles

### Description
The extraction of high-purity proteins from the washing solution (WS) of rubber tree latex-producing organelles (also termed rubber particles) in laticifers for proteomic analysis is challenging due to the low concentration of proteins in the WS. Recent studies have revealed that proteins in the WS might play crucial roles in natural rubber biosynthesis. To further examine the involvement of these proteins in natural rubber biosynthesis, we designed an efficiency method to extract high-purity WS proteins. We improved our current borax and phenol-based (BPP) method by adding re-extraction steps with phenol (REP) to improve the yield from low-protein concentration samples. With this new method, we extracted WS proteins that were suitable for proteomics. Indeed, compared to the original BPP method, the REP method improved both the quality and quantity of isolated proteins. By repeatedly extracting from low-protein concentration solutions using the same small amount of phenol, the REP method yielded enough protein of sufficiently high-quality from starting samples containing less than 0.02 mg of proteins per mL. This method was successfully applied to extract the rubber particle proteins from the WS of natural rubber latex samples. The REP-extracted WS proteins were resolved by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), and 28 proteins were positively identified by mass spectrometry. This method has the potential to become widely used for the extraction of proteins from low-protein-concentration solutions for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Target protein spots were manually excised from 2-DE gels and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion . Proteins were identified using MALDI TOF/TOF MS as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were collected with an AB 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA). The spectra were analyzed using Mascot Distiler software (Matrix Science) and searched against the Viridiplantae clade (Green Plants 20151026, including 3289819 sequences) using the non-redundant NCBI (NCBInr) database with Mascot software Version 2.2 (Matrix Science). The identification was considered positive only for Mascot scores exceeding the threshold of 50 and maximum peptide coverage levels as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
The extraction of high-purity proteins from the washing solution (WS) of rubber particles (also termed latex-producing organelles) from laticifer cells in rubber tree for proteomic analysis is challenging due to the low concentration of proteins in the WS. Recent studies have revealed that proteins in the WS might play crucial roles in natural rubber biosynthesis. To further examine the involvement of these proteins in natural rubber biosynthesis, we designed an efficiency method to extract high-purity WS proteins. We improved our current borax and phenol-based method by adding reextraction steps with phenol (REP) to improve the yield from low protein concentration samples. With this new method, we extracted WS proteins that were suitable for proteomics. Indeed, compared to the original borax and phenol-based method, the REP method improved both the quality and quantity of isolated proteins. By repeatedly extracting from low protein concentration solutions using the same small amount of phenol, the REP method yielded enough protein of sufficiently high-quality from starting samples containing less than 0.02 mg of proteins per milliliter. This method was successfully applied to extract the rubber particle proteins from the WS of natural rubber latex samples. The REP-extracted WS proteins were resolved by 2DE, and 28 proteins were positively identified by MS. This method has the potential to become widely used for the extraction of proteins from low protein concentration solutions for proteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; protein extraction method; plant proteomics;  rubber particle; washing solution

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Tropical Crop Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Biosciences and Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou Hainan 571101, P.R. China

### Submitter
dan wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuchu Wang
Key Laboratory of Tropical Crop Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Biosciences and Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou Hainan 571101, P.R. China


