### Accession
PXD026280

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ARSA overexpression

### Description
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and type 2 diabetes are closely linked, yet the pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning this bidirectional relationship remain unresolved. Using proteomic approaches, we interrogated hepatocyte protein secretion in two models of murine NASH to reveal striking hepatokine remodelling that is associated with insulin resistance and maladaptive lipid metabolism.  We identify arylsulfatase A (ARSA) as a novel hepatokine that is upregulated in NASH and type 2 diabetes. This submission contains proteomic analysis of quadracep lipid rafts with or without overexpression of ARSA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was solubilised in 50mM Tris, pH 8.0 + 150mM NaCl at 4000g for 45 min, transferred to Eppendorf tubes and the protein content determined. Disulphide bonds were reduced through addition of 10mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 65⁰C for 20min. The sample was mixed with 6.6x volume of 5M Urea, added to Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter (Sigma Aldrich) and spun at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min. This was followed by addition of 200µl Urea, centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min, and discarding of flow-through. Chloroacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10mM for the spin filters to alkylate proteins, samples incubated for 20min in the dark, and spun again. Proteins were washed 3x with 100µL urea and 3x with 100µL 50mM ammonia bicarbonate (pH 8.5), each wash step followed by centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min, and discarding of flow-through. After the last wash step, a digestion solution was added to the spin filter (1µg trypsin/100µg protein in 75µL of 50mM ammonia bicarbonate) and samples incubated at 37⁰C overnight. The following day peptides were eluted by addition of 2x 40µL of 50mM ammonia bicarbonate, and 1x 0.5M NaCl, each step followed by centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min. Elute peptide was acidified with formic acid to final pH 3.0, and peptides purified with Millipore® C18 Ziptips (Sigma Aldrich). This purification step involved activation of Ziptips with methanol, washing with 0.1% formic acid, binding of peptides to Ziptips, a second wash step in 0.1% formic acid, and final elution into 200µL 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus), resuspended in 20µL 0.1% formic acid, sonicated for 10 min at room temperature, centrifuged at 16,000g for 10min, and transferred into HPLC vials for analysis.

### Data Protocol
samples were analysed on Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage, temperature of ion transfer tube and S-lens were set at 1.9 kV, 250 °C and 70%, respectively. The full MS scans were acquired at m/z 375 – 1400, a resolving power of 70,000, an AGC target value of 3.0 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. The top 15 most abundant ions in each full scan MS spectrum was subjected to HCD at a resolving power of 17,500, AGC target value of 5 × 104, maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, isolation window of m/z 1.2 and NCE of 30%. Dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds was enabled. All generated files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) [81] and its implemented Andromeda search engine to obtain protein identifications as well as their label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Database searching was performed with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; up to 2 missed cleavages permitted; mass tolerance of 20 ppm; 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification; and minimum 2 peptides for pair-wise comparison in each protein for label-free quantitation. The MaxQuant result output was further processed with Perseus (Version 1.5.0.40) [82], a module from the MaxQuant suite. After removing reversed and known contaminant proteins, the LFQ values were log2 transformed and the reproducibility across the biological replicates was evaluated by a Pearson’s correlation analysis. The replicates were grouped accordingly, and all proteins were removed that had less than two “valid value” in each group. The missing values were replaced by imputation and two sample t-test (FDR < 5%) were performed to obtain a list of significantly regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arsa, Aav

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjmain Parker
The University of Melbourne


