### Accession
PXD008704

### Title
Uncoupled activation and cyclisation in catmint reductive terpenoid biosynthesis

### Description
Terpenes synthases typically form complex molecular scaffolds by concerted activation and cyclization of linear starting materials in a single active site. We have determined that iridoid synthase, an atypical reductive terpene synthase, catalyses the activation of its substrate 8-oxogeranial into a reactive enol intermediate but does not catalyse the subsequent cyclisation into nepetalactol. This discovery led us to identify a class of nepetalactol-related short-chain dehydrogenase enzymes (NEPS) from catmint (Nepeta mussinii) which catalyse the stereoselective cyclisation of the enol intermediate into nepetalactol isomers. Subsequent oxidation of nepetalactols by NEPS1 provides nepetalactones, metabolites that are well known for both insect-repellent activity and euphoric effect in cats. Structural characterisation of the NEPS3 cyclase reveals it binds to NAD+ yet does not utilise it chemically for a non-oxidoreductive formal [4+2] cyclisation. These discoveries will complement metabolic reconstructions of iridoid and monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets from leaves and depleted leaves were dissolved in 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 8, pellets from trichomes in 1% SDC, 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 8. Protein concentration was determined using the Direct Detect® spectrometer (Merck Millipore, UK). The total protein amount was 400 µg for leaves, 225 µg for depleted leaves and 20 µg for trichomes. Samples were treated with DTT and iodoacetamide to reduce and alkylate cysteine residues. The total trichome sample and 50 µg of the leaf samples were digested with trypsin. SDC was removed by acid precipitation, and aliquots of approx. 1 µg were used for data dependent LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap-Fusion™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Hemel Hempstead, UK) equipped with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System using an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (2 µm, 75 µm x 500mm, Thermo). The samples were loaded and trapped using a pre-column which was then switched in-line to the analytical column for separation. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 6-38% acetonitrile in water/0.1% formic acid at a rate of 0.4% min-1. The column was connected to a 10 µm SilicaTip™ nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) for infusion into the mass spectrometer. Data dependent analysis was performed using a parallel HCD/CID fragmentation method with the following parameters: positive ion mode, orbitrap MS resolution = 60k, mass range (quadrupole) = 300-1500 m/z, MS2 in ion trap, threshold 2e4, isolation window 1.6 Da, charge states 2-5, inject for all available parallelisable time with 3 s cycle time, AGC target 2e3, max inject time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count within 10 s and 60 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±7 ppm. MS scans were saved in profile mode while MSMS scans were saved in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the orbitrap were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30)4 to generate recalibrated peaklist files which were used for database searches with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrixscience, London). A predicted peptide library was generated from the N. mussinii transcriptome2 by translation of predicted open reading frames (minimum size 100 bp, ATG start codon, start/stop codons can be outside sequence). This predicted peptide library was annotated with phmmer5 using Swiss-Prot reference proteins (http://www.uniprot.org/) and used for the Mascot database search using trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus), and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Mascot search results were imported into the Scaffold software and the Scaffold quantitative value (normalised total spectra) was used for a pairwise comparison between trichome and trichome-depleted leaves samples using Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test correction. MEP pathway enzymes were putatively identified by functional annotation. Nepetalactol dehydrogenase candidates were selected by the following criteria: functionally uncharacterised, statistically significant trichome enrichment (p < 0.05) and enzyme class EC 1.1.1.- (oxidoreductase, acting on alcohols, NAD(P)+ dependence).

### Publication Abstract
Terpene synthases typically form complex molecular scaffolds by concerted activation and cyclization of linear starting materials in a single enzyme active site. Here we show that iridoid synthase, an atypical reductive terpene synthase, catalyzes the activation of its substrate 8-oxogeranial into a reactive enol intermediate, but does not catalyze the subsequent cyclization into nepetalactol. This discovery led us to identify a class of nepetalactol-related short-chain dehydrogenase enzymes (NEPS) from catmint (Nepeta mussinii) that capture this reactive intermediate and catalyze the stereoselective cyclisation into distinct nepetalactol stereoisomers. Subsequent oxidation of nepetalactols by NEPS1 provides nepetalactones, metabolites that are well known for both insect-repellent activity and euphoric effects in cats. Structural characterization of the NEPS3 cyclase reveals that it binds to NAD<sup>+</sup> yet does not utilize it chemically for a non-oxidoreductive formal [4&#x2009;+&#x2009;2] cyclization. These discoveries will complement metabolic reconstructions of iridoid and monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Iridoid, Lc-msms, Catmint, Proteomics, Nepetalactone, Trichome

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Chemistry John Innes Centre Norwich Research Park Norwich NR4 7UH
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah O'Connor
Department of Biological Chemistry John Innes Centre Norwich Research Park Norwich NR4 7UH


