### Accession
PXD023044

### Title
IFNγ modulates the immunopeptidome of triple negative breast cancer cells by enhancing and diversifying antigen processing and presentation.

### Description
Peptide vaccination remains a viable approach to induce T-cell mediated killing of tumours. To identify potential T-cell targets for Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) vaccination, we examined the effect of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon-γ (IFNγ) on the transcriptome, proteome and immunopeptidome of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified a total of 84,131 peptides from 9,647 source proteins presented by human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-I and HLA-II alleles. Treatment with IFNγ resulted in a remarkable remoulding of the immunopeptidome, with only a 34% overlap between untreated and treated cells across the HLA-I immunopeptidome, and expression of HLA-II only on treated cells. IFNγ increased the overall number, diversity and abundance of the immunopeptidome, as well as the proportion of coverage of source antigens. The suite of peptides displayed under conditions of IFNγ treatment included many known tumour associated antigens, with the HLA-II repertoire sampling 265 breast cancer associated antigens absent from those sampled by HLA-I. Quantitative analysis of the transcriptome (10,248 transcripts) and proteome (6783 proteins) of these cells revealed 229 proteins and transcripts were commonly differentially expressed, most of which involved in downstream targets of IFNγ signalling including components of the antigen processing machinery such as tapasin and HLA. However, these changes in protein expression did not explain the dramatic modulation of the immunopeptidome following IFNγ treatment.  These results demonstrate the high degree of plasticity in the immunopeptidome TNBC cells following cytokine stimulation and provide evidence that under pro-inflammatory conditions a greater variety of HLA-I and HLA-II vaccine targets are unveiled to the immune system. This has important implications for the development of personalised cancer vaccination strategies.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-I and -II peptides were eluted from MDA-MB-231 cells prior or after treatment with IFNγ in three biological replicates as described in Purcell et al 2019 from 5x108 cells (29). Cells were lysed in 0.5% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet; Roche Molecular Biochemicals) for 45 min at 4 °C. Lysates underwent ultracentrifugation at 40,000g and HLA-I and -II complexes were purified using identical antibodies listed above. The HLA peptide bound molecules were then eluted from the affinity column with 5 column volumes of 10% acetic acid. The eluted HLA-I and -II peptide complexes were loaded onto a 4.6 mm internal diameter x 50 mm monolithic C18 RP-HPLC column (Chromolith Speed Rod; Merck) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using an EttanLC HPLC system (GE Healthcare) with buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and buffer B (80% ACN / 0.1% TFA) as mobile phases as described in

### Data Protocol
Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler, the samples were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN / 0.1% FA at a flow of 250 nl/min for 65 min and analysed with a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In each cycle, a full ms1 scan (resolution: 70.000; AGC target: 3e6; maximum IT: 120 ms; scan range: 375-1800 m/z) preceded up to 12 subsequent ms2 scans (resolution: 17.500; AGC target: 1e5; maximum IT: 120 ms; isolation window: 1.8 m/z; scan range: 200-2000 m/z; NCE: 27).

### Publication Abstract
Peptide vaccination remains a viable approach to induce T-cell mediated killing of tumors. To identify potential T-cell targets for Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) vaccination, we examined the effect of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon-&#x3b3; (IFN&#x3b3;) on the transcriptome, proteome, and immunopeptidome of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified a total of&#xa0;84,131&#xa0;peptides from&#xa0;9,647 source proteins presented by human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-I and HLA-II alleles. Treatment with IFN&#x3b3; resulted in a remarkable remolding of the immunopeptidome, with only a 34% overlap between untreated and treated cells across the HLA-I immunopeptidome, and expression of HLA-II only detected on treated cells. IFN&#x3b3; increased the overall number, diversity, and abundance of peptides contained within the immunopeptidome, as well increasing the coverage of individual source antigens. The suite of peptides displayed under conditions of IFN&#x3b3; treatment included many known tumor associated antigens, with the HLA-II repertoire sampling 17 breast cancer associated antigens absent from those sampled by HLA-I molecules. Quantitative analysis of the transcriptome (10,248 transcripts) and proteome (6,783 proteins) of these cells revealed 229 common proteins and transcripts that were differentially expressed. Most of these represented downstream targets of IFN&#x3b3; signaling including components of the antigen processing machinery such as tapasin and HLA molecules. However, these changes in protein expression did not explain the dramatic modulation of the immunopeptidome following IFN&#x3b3; treatment. These results demonstrate the high degree of plasticity in the immunopeptidome of TNBC cells following cytokine stimulation and provide evidence that under pro-inflammatory conditions a greater variety of potential HLA-I and HLA-II vaccine targets are unveiled to the immune system. This has important implications for the development of personalized cancer vaccination strategies.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Breast cancer, Hla

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


