### Accession
PXD030260

### Title
Plasma proteomic, human Ebola virus disease

### Description
The 2013-2016 Ebola Zaire virus (EBV) outbreak in West Africa resulted in over 28,000 cases and 11,000 deaths. Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a highly virulent systemic disease with a high case fatality rate of ~ 50%. EVD results in hemorrhagic fever marked by an exaggerated systemic inflammatory response, and impaired vascular and coagulation systems. The immune response of patients who either survived or died is characterized by strong differences. Notably, fatalities showed a diminished capacity to mount an appropriate immune response, resulting in high viremia and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production. In this study, we analyzed 38 sequential samples collected from 12 patients: 8 survivors and 4 fatalities. Our analytical strategy combined three protein-based platforms covering three different fractions of the plasma proteome: the undepleted classical plasma proteome, the depleted plasma proteome, and cytokines/chemokines, using LC/MS- and antibody-based assays, resulting in over 1000 quantified host and pathogen proteins. For depletion of the most abundant plasma proteins, we advanced a perchloric acid-based precipitation method. This method is low cost, high-throughput and robust.

### Sample Protocol
Classical plasma proteomics (Cl-PP): Samples were processed using our in-house MStern blotting protocol. In brief, 1μL of plasma was mixed in 100μL of urea buffer. Following reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, 10-15μg of proteins were loaded into individual wells of a 96-well plate containing a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore-Sigma). Protein digestion using trypsin was performed for 2h at 37°C and the tryptic peptides were eluted from the membrane using 40% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were desalted using a 96-well MACROSPIN C18 plate (TARGA, NestGroup) and the eluents were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.     Tissue leakage plasma proteomics (TL-PP): 25μL plasma were diluted with 475μL water, 5 % of perchloric acid (25μL) was added and after vigorous agitation, kept on ice for 15min. Samples were then centrifuged for 15min (4⁰C, 16 000g) and the supernatant aspirated. Mixed with 50μL of 1% TFA and loaded onto a μSPE HLB plate, previously conditioned with 300μL methanol and two times with 500μL of 0.1% TFA, for desalting and removal of perchloric acid. The samples were then digested with 500 ng of trypsin, overnight at 37°C, resuspended in 50μL 0.1% formic acid and 4μL was injected into the LC-MS instrument.     DDA and DIA sample acquisition:  Samples were injected on the same LC-MS system (Eksigent 400 Series UPLC system (Sciex) combined with Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific) for DDA and DIA. Peptides were separated on a PicoChip column (New Objective, Acquity BEH C18, 150 μm x 100 mm, 1.7μm) with a 45min gradient and a total run time of 58min. For the DIA experiment, 15 variable windows were used over the m/z range of 375−1200. The mass spectrometer parameters were set as follows: resolution 35000 @ m/z 200, AGC target 3e6, maximum IT 120 ms, ﬁxed ﬁrst mass m/z 200, NCE 27. The DIA scans preceded an MS1 Full scan with identical parameters yielding a total cycle time of 2.4s.

### Data Protocol
The DDA runs were used to build the spectral library and the DIA were analyzed using Spectronaut v12 (Biognosys). Standard settings were employed. For the perchloric acid protocol, no modifications of cysteines were selected, as no alkylation reagent was used in the protocol. We combined the DDA from previously published plasma/serum proteomics studies  to use as the spectral NeatPP library for this study. Only the DDA runs of this study were used to build the DepletedPP library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Ebola virus disease

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Department of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Precision Vaccines Program, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Arthur VIODE

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Department of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Precision Vaccines Program, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA


