### Accession
PXD007772

### Title
Functional genomics discovery in an emerging livestock parasite, the rumen fluke Calicophoron daubneyi; identifying shifts in rumen functionality.

### Description
Diseases caused by parasitic flatworms of rumen tissues (paramphistomosis) are a significant threat to global food security as a cause of morbidity and mortality in ruminant livestock in subtropical and tropical climates. Calicophoron daubneyi is currently the only paramphistome species commonly infecting livestock species in temperate European climates. However, recorded incidences of C. daubneyi infection in European livestock have been increasing over the last decade. Whilst clinical paramphistomosis caused by adult worms is currently uncommon in Europe, fatalities have been reported in association with severe haemorrhagic enteritis resulting from the migration of immature paramphistomes. Large numbers of mature adults can reside in the rumen, yet to date, the impact on rumen fermentation, and consequently in productivity and economic management of infected livestock have not been resolved. Limited public available nucleotide and protein sequences for C. daubneyi underpin this lack of biological and economic understanding. Here we present for the first time a de novo assembled transcriptome, with functional annotations, for adult C. daubneyi, which provides a reference database for protein and nucleotide sequence identification to facilitate fundamental biology, anthelmintic, vaccine and diagnostics discoveries. This dataset identifies a number of genes potentially unique to C. daubneyi and, by comparison to an existing transcriptome for the related Paramphistomum cervi, identifies novel genes which may be unique to the paramphistome group of platyhelminthes. Additionally, we present the first coverage of the excretory/secretory and soluble somatic proteome profiles for adult C. daubneyi and identify the release of extracellular vesicles from adult C. daubneyi parasites during in vitro, ex-host culture. Finally, we have performed the first analysis of rumen fluke impacting upon rumen fermentation parameters using an in vitro gas production study resulting in a significant increase in propionate production.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of rumen fluke parasites from naturally infected cattle were obtained from a local abattoir (mid Wales, UK). Flukes were washed in warm (39⁰C) phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to remove rumen content contamination on collection, and transported directly to the laboratory. The PBS solution was replaced with a fresh volume for a further 10 minute wash on arrival at the laboratory. Live parasites were then transferred into warm (39 ⁰C) DME culture media (DMEM) supplemented with 15 mM HEPES, 61 mM glucose, 2.2 mM Calcium acetate, 2.7 mM Magnesium sulphate, 1 μM serotonin and gentamycin (5 μg/ml), allowing 1 ml of culture media per fluke. After a 6-hour culture period, parasites were removed from the culture liquid and both parasites and liquid were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to storage at -80 ⁰C. A protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche mini cOmplete™) was added to the liquid samples before being clarified by centrifugation at 45,000 x g for 45 minutes at 4 ⁰C. The resulting supernatant was then concentrated using an Amicon® 400 ml stirred cell unit and an Ultracel® 10 kDa MWCO regenerated cellulose ultrafiltration membrane disc. Concentrated ES proteins were precipitated using an equal volume of ice cold 20% v/v TCA in acetone. Precipitated protein pellets were washed twice in ice cold acetone, dried at -20oC before solubilisation in buffer. Somatic soluble protein samples: whole parasite samples were homogenised in buffer containing 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.4), 0.1% v/v Triton X 100 and a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche mini cOmplete™, UK). Soluble protein samples were clarified by centrifugation at 100, 000 x g for 45 minutes at 4 ⁰C. Proteins were then precipitated and re-solubilised from the supernatant as for ES products. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford assay and 17 cm immobilised pH gradient IPG strips were rehydrated with a total of 250 and 500 µg of protein for the ES and somatic samples respectively. A total sample volume of 300 µl was used to rehydrate and focus the 17 cm pH 3–10 IPG strips at 20 ⁰C for separation in the first dimension. Linear IPG strips were used for somatic samples with non-linear IPG strips used for improved resolution of protein spots with the ES samples. IPG strips were focussed to between 60,000 and 80,000 Vh using the Protean IEF Cell (Bio-Rad UK). Each IPG strip was then equilibrated for 15 min in equilibration buffer (containing 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% glycerol (v/v) and 2% SDS (w/v)) with the addition of DTT at 10 mg/ml followed by a second equilibration with IAA at 25 mg/ml replacing DTT. The IPG strips were separated in the second dimension on the Protean II system using 14% polyacrylamide gels. Gels were then fixed in 40 % (v/v) ethanol, 10 % (v/v) acetic acid and stained using Colloidal Coomassie. Coomassie stained gels were imaged using a GS-800 calibrated densitometer set for coomassie stained gels at 400 dpi. Gel images were analysed using Progenesis PG220 v.2006 using the ‘Mode of non-spot’ background subtraction method. Average gels were created from 4 replicate gels for the somatic and ES samples respectively and normalised spot volumes were calculated using the ‘Total spot volume multiplied by total area’ method to determine the most abundant protein spots. Mass Spectrometry and data analysis - The 50 most abundant spots were identified for both ES and somatic samples on 17 cm SDS-PAGE gels using Progenesis and excised before being subjected to tryptic digest. Digested protein samples were resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid for LC MS/MS analysis on an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF mass spectrometer coupled to a 1200 series HPLC-Chip for separations (Agilent, Cheshire, UK). The HPLC-Chip/Q-TOF system was equipped with a micro auto sampler (1100 series, Agilent), a capillary loading pump (1200 series, Agilent) and a nano pump (1200 series, Agilent) for sample separation. A ProtID Chip (G4240-62005, Agilent) comprising a 40 nl C18 enrichment/trap column and a 75 µm x 43 mm 5 µm C18 separation column was used. 1 µL of sample was injected on to the enrichment column at a flow of 4 µL / minute followed by separation at a flow of 600 nL / minute. Liquid chromatography was performed with a piece-linear gradient using Water with 0.1% v/v Formic Acid (A) and 90% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid (B)(3 to 40% B over 36 minutes, 40 to 100% B over 1 minute, hold at 90% B for 2 minutes). For mass spectrometric analysis, ions were generated using the Chip Cube with a capillary voltage of 1950 V. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed in AutoMS2 mode in the 300 to 1700 range, at a rate of 5 spectra per second, performing MS2 on the 5 most intense ions in the precursor scan. Masses were excluded for 0.1 min after MS/MS was performed. Reference mass locking was used for internal calibration using the mass of 391.2843 Da.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis software using Molecular Feature Extraction and exported as Mascot Generic Files. MSMS data was analysed with MASCOT (Version 2.4.1; www.matrixscience.com) using an MS/MS Ions search on standard settings (Precursor tolerance ± 1.2 Da, Fragment Ion tolerance ± 0.6 Da) for the enzyme Trypsin, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Spectra were searched against the in-house transcript assembly for C. daubneyi described in the current study with sequence hits, MASCOT Score greater than 47, reported compared to the functionally annotated transcript data for protein ID. UniProt identifiers from the transcript BLASTp annotation data which matched to each protein spot following LC MS/MS were then uploaded to the UniProt mapping application (uniprot.org/mapping – accessed 03/12/2015) to obtain descriptive data on the protein matches, organism ID and GOslim information for each matched protein. SignalP and TMHMM matches for ES proteins, along with gene component expression levels as FPKM values were extracted from the transcript annotation data to match each hit.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parasite; rumen

### Affiliations
Aberystwyth University
IBERS, Aberystwyth University

### Submitter
Russ Morphew

### Lab Head
Dr Russell M Morphew
IBERS, Aberystwyth University


