### Accession
PXD001999

### Title
Triple SILAC glycoproteomic analysis of NSCLC cell lines

### Description
Protein glycosylation plays a fundamental role in a multitude of biological processes, and the associated aberrant expression of glycoproteins in cancer has made them attractive targets as biomarkers and therapeutic targets. In this study, we examined differentially expressed glycoproteins in cell lines derived from three different states of lung tumorigenesis: an immortalized bronchial epithelial cell (HBE) line, a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line harboring an activation KRAS mutation and a NSCLC cell line harboring an EGFR activation deletion. Mutations in KRAS and EGFR are two common, distinct, non-overlapping genomic alterations in NSCLC. Using a Triple SILAC proteomic quantification strategy paired with hydrazide chemistry N-linked glycopeptide enrichment, we identified 118 quantifiable glycopeptides in the 3 cell lines derived from 82 glycoproteins. Proteomic profiling revealed that 27 (24%) of the glycopeptides overexpressed in both of the NSCLC cell lines with 6 of the glycopeptides overexpressed only in the EGFR mutant cells and 19 of the glycopeptides overexpressed only in the KRAS mutant cells.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled cell lysates were mixed in equal protein amounts, trpyically digested, oxidized with sodium periodate, and covalently bound to hydrazide resin. Bound glycopeptides were removed using PNGase F enzyme, and anlyaized via LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS spectra were processed using TPP; spectra files were searched using COMET, with var. mods including Methionine + 15.99492, Lysine + 4.02511 (D4), Lysine + 8.01420 (13C615N2), Arginine + 6.02013 (13C6), Arginine + 10.00827 (13C615N4), and Asparagine + 0.984016 and fixed modifications: Cysteine + 57.02510. Resulting files were quantified using QuantiMORE.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation plays a fundamental role in a multitude of biological processes, and the associated aberrant expression of glycoproteins in cancer has made them attractive biomarkers and therapeutic targets. In this study, we examined differentially expressed glycoproteins in cell lines derived from three different states of lung tumorigenesis: an immortalized bronchial epithelial cell (HBE) line, a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line harboring a Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) activation mutation and a NSCLC cell line harboring an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation deletion. Using a Triple SILAC proteomic quantification strategy paired with hydrazide chemistry N-linked glycopeptide enrichment, we quantified 118 glycopeptides in the three cell lines derived from 82 glycoproteins. Proteomic profiling revealed 27 glycopeptides overexpressed in both NSCLC cell lines, 6 glycopeptides overexpressed only in the EGFR mutant cells and 19 glycopeptides overexpressed only in the KRAS mutant cells. Further investigation of a panel of NSCLC cell lines found that Cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes (CREG1) overexpression was closely correlated with KRAS mutation status in NSCLC cells and could be down-regulated by inhibition of KRAS expression. Our results indicate that CREG1 is a down-stream effector of KRAS in a sub-type of NSCLC cells and a novel candidate biomarker or therapeutic target for KRAS mutant NSCLC.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Lung cancer, Speg, Silac

### Affiliations
Univesity of Maryland Baltimore,  School of Dentistry,  Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Li Mao
Univesity of Maryland Baltimore,  School of Dentistry,  Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences


