### Accession
PXD033230

### Title
Glycosaminoglycan linkage region of urinary bikunin as a potentially useful biomarker for β3GalT6-deficient spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome

### Description
The spondylodysplastic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (spEDS) is caused by genetic defects in the B4GALT7 or B3GALT6 genes both deranging the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan linkage region of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In this study we have analyzed the linkage regions of urinary chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of three siblings, diagnosed with spEDS and carrying biallelic pathogenic variants of the B3GALT6 gene. Proteoglycans were digested with trypsin, glycopeptides enriched on anion-exchange columns, depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS. In urine of the unaffected mother, the dominating glycopeptide of bikunin/protein AMBP appeared as only one dominating (99.9%) peak with the canonical tetrasaccharide linkage region modification. In contrast, the samples of the three affected siblings contained two different glycopeptide peaks, corresponding to the canonical tetrasaccharide and to the non-canonical trisaccharide linkage region modifications in individual ratios of 61/38, 73/27, 59/41.We propose that the relative distribution of glycosaminoglycan linkage regions of urinary bikunin glycopeptides may serve as a phenotypic biomarker in a diagnostic test but also as a biomarker to follow the effect of future therapies in affected individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Morning urine was sampled from each of the four individuals and immediately centrifuged at 2000 × g, for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatants were collected, frozen and kept at −20 °C until analysis. Linkage region containing glycopeptides were prepared from urinary proteoglycans using the protocol described in (Noborn et al. Methods in Molecular Biology, 2022) without any modifications. In brief, the protocol includes in-solution trypsin digestion, enrichment by strong anion exchange chromatography, depolymerization with chondroitinase ABC and a series of desalting steps before final lyophilization. This treatment typically generates glycopeptides with residual hexasaccharides of CS/DS chains, including the common linkage region attached to the original core proteins serine residues.  Glycoproteomic analyses were performed in triplicates on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument and the Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were dissolved in 20 μL 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid in dH2O and 3 μL were injected onto an Acclaim Pepmap C18 precolumn (20 × 0.1 mm I.D., 5 μm) and passed to the analytical column (350 × 0.075 mm I.D.) packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch). The gradient was 10–50% B-solvent (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid in dH2O) in A-solvent (0.2% formic acid in dH2O) over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Then, 50–100% B over 5 min, with a final hold at 100% B for 10 min. MS scans were done in positive ionization mode at 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200); an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 106 and a mass range of m/z 600–2000. The MS/MS (MS2) spectra were collected in the data-dependent mode with a duty cycle time of 3s and a dynamic exclusion of 10 s. The most abundant 2(+)   7(+) charged precursor ions for each MS scan were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy (NCE) levels of 20%, 30% and 35%. The isolation window was set to 2.5 m/z units, the MS2 mass range was m/z 100-2000 at 30,000 resolution and MS2 data was collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Mascot distiller (Matrix Science) and manual verification and complementary fragmentation analysis of the glycopeptide spectra using the Qual browser of the Xcalibur software. This glycoproteomic technique allows for identification of the type of GAG chains, their linkage regions, the identity of the original proteoglycan and their sites for glycosylation (Noborn et al. Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2015). In this study, we also employed the ion intensities of both 2(+) and 3(+) precursor ions of relevant glycopeptides for estimation of the relative amounts of glycopeptides with structural differences found only in the linkage region; i.e. canonical versus non-canonical linkage regions both harboring two sulfate modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The spondylodysplastic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (spEDS) is caused by genetic defects in the <i>B4GALT7</i> or <i>B3GALT6</i> genes both deranging the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan linkage region of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In this study, we have analyzed the linkage regions of urinary chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of three siblings, diagnosed with spEDS and carrying biallelic pathogenic variants of the <i>B3GALT6</i> gene. Proteoglycans were digested with trypsin, glycopeptides enriched on anion-exchange columns, depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC, and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS. In urine of the unaffected mother, the dominating glycopeptide of bikunin/protein AMBP appeared as only one dominating (99.9%) peak with the canonical tetrasaccharide linkage region modification. In contrast, the samples of the three affected siblings contained two different glycopeptide peaks, corresponding to the canonical tetrasaccharide and to the non-canonical trisaccharide linkage region modifications in individual ratios of 61/38, 73/27, and 59/41. We propose that the relative distribution of glycosaminoglycan linkage regions of urinary bikunin glycopeptides may serve as a phenotypic biomarker in a diagnostic test but also as a biomarker to follow the effect of future therapies in affected individuals.

### Keywords
Linkeropathies, Bikunin, Tandem mass spectrometry, Glycoproteomics, Liquid chromatography, Β3galt6, Ehlers-danlos syndrome, Glycopeptides, Glycosaminoglycan linkage region

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.


