### Accession
PXD002462

### Title
Human Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Interaction Network

### Description
As the remarkable prevalence of activated protein tyrosine kinases (TKs) as oncoproteins and their mutations being identified in numerous cancers, the control of protein tyrosine phosphorylation has been considered to play a central role in ensuring the homeostasis of cellular physiology and thus, preventing tumorigenesis. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) can contribute to this equilibrium of protein tyrosine phosphorylation and thereby antagonize the oncogenic activities of tyrosine kinases, therefore, PTPs are prominently considered to act as tumor suppressors. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the protein-protein interaction network for this PTP family, we isolated the ~ 70 PTP-associated protein complexes from HEK293T cells and provided a systematically proteomic analysis for this tumor suppressor family.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (ver. 28). (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 2.0 for precursor ions and 1.0 for fragment ions. The database searched was the Human IPI databases version 3.6. The number of entries in the database was 160,900 which included both the target (forward) and the decoy (reversed) human sequences. Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database.

### Publication Abstract
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation, which plays a vital role in a variety of human cellular processes, is coordinated by protein tyrosine kinases and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). Genomic studies provide compelling evidence that PTPs are frequently mutated in various human cancers, suggesting that they have important roles in tumor suppression. However, the cellular functions and regulatory machineries of most PTPs are still largely unknown. To gain a comprehensive understanding of the protein-protein interaction network of the human PTP family, we performed a global proteomic study. Using a Minkowski distance-based unified scoring environment (MUSE) for the data analysis, we identified 940 high confidence candidate-interacting proteins that comprise the interaction landscape of the human PTP family. Through a gene ontology analysis and functional validations, we connected the PTP family with several key signaling pathways or cellular functions whose associations were previously unclear, such as the RAS-RAF-MEK pathway, the Hippo-YAP pathway, and cytokinesis. Our study provides the first glimpse of a protein interaction network for the human PTP family, linking it to a number of crucial signaling events, and generating a useful resource for future studies of PTPs.

### Keywords
Human, Tap-ms, Hek293t, Lc-msms, Ptp

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology
MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Xu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
MD Anderson Cancer Center


