### Accession
PXD016496

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana N-terminal Acetylome

### Description
Quantitative study of the N-terminal acetylome variations in Arabidopsis thaliana, looking at the effect of a N-acetyltransferase KO.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from Arabidopsis rosettes. N-termini were labeled with D3-Acetyl groups, then digested. N-ter acetylated peptides were isolated from the non-modified one using SCX chromatography. Enriched fractions were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectroetry data were processed using the Mascot Distiller software for identification and quantification. Results were then parsed using the eNcounter script to better assign and quantify the N-terminal acetylation data.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation is a highly frequent protein modification. However, comparatively little is known about its enzymatic machinery. N-&#x3b1;-acetylation (NTA) and &#x3b5;-lysine acetylation (KA) are known to be catalyzed by distinct families of enzymes (NATs and KATs, respectively), although the possibility that the same GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) can perform both functions has been debated. Here, we discovered a new family of plastid-localized GNATs, which possess a dual specificity. All characterized GNAT family members display a number of unique features. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses revealed that these enzymes exhibit both distinct KA and relaxed NTA specificities. Furthermore, inactivation of GNAT2 leads to significant NTA or KA decreases of several plastid proteins, while proteins of other compartments were unaffected. The data indicate that these enzymes have specific protein targets and likely display partly redundant selectivity, increasing the robustness of the acetylation process in&#xa0;vivo. In summary, this study revealed a new layer of complexity in the machinery controlling this prevalent modification and suggests that other eukaryotic GNATs may also possess these previously underappreciated broader enzymatic activities.

### Keywords
Nat, Arbadiopsis, Silpronaq, Acetylome, Quantitation, N-termini

### Affiliations
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 23, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 23, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France


