### Accession
PXD016702

### Title
Seamount sheath water: years-long retention of deep-ocean water traced by bacterioplankton

### Description
Seamounts, often rising hundreds of metres above the surrounding seafloor, obstruct the flow of deep-ocean water. While the resultant entrainment of deep-water by seamounts is predicted from ocean circulation models, its empirical validation has been hampered by the large scale and slow rate of the interaction. To overcome these limitations we use the growth of planktonic bacteria to assess the interaction rate. The selected study site, Tropic Seamount, in the North-Eastern Atlantic represents the majority of isolated seamounts, which do not affect the surface ocean waters. We prove deep-water is entrained by the seamount by measuring 2.3 times higher bacterial concentrations in the seamount-associated or ‘sheath’ water than in deep-ocean water unaffected by seamounts. Genomic analyses of the dominant sheath-water bacteria confirm their planktonic origin, whilst proteomic analyses indicate their slow growth. According to our radiotracer experiments, the doubling time of sheath-water bacterioplankton is 1.5 years. Therefore, for bacterioplankton concentration to reach 2.3 times higher in the ambient seawater, the seamount would need to retain deep-ocean water for more than 3.5 years. We propose that turbulent mixing of the retained sheath-water could stimulate bacterioplankton growth by increasing the cell encounter rate with the ambient dissolved organic molecules. If some of these molecules chelate hydroxides of iron and manganese, bacterioplankton consumption of the organic chelators would result in precipitation of insoluble hydroxides. Hence precipitated hydroxides would form ferromanganese deposits as a result of the bacterioplankton-mediated deep-water seamount interaction.

### Sample Protocol
A custom-made deep (down to 6,000 m) water in situ incubator was deployed at 1064 m. The incubator can be operated using an on deck control unit or can be preprogramed for pressure-activated operations. In this case the incubator bottles were closed manually and the tubing connectors were engaged to add 13C-Lysine tracer at 10 nmol l-1 final concentration. Pumps were switched on to mix the tracer with water, sampled by the paired bottles. After the incubation for 20 hours the incubator was brought on board ship. Bacterioplankton was concentrated directly into the filter-cartridges and prepared for sorting on board as described above. For targeted proteomic analysis, 2–5 × 106 cells from the populations 1 and 2 were flow sorted directly on 0.2 µm filters and filters stored at -80°C until further processing.  Peptides were extracted from the sorted cells deposited on filters by repeated freeze-thawing to lyse the cells and subsequent tryptic protein digestions with sequencing grade modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin). Proteins were removed and supernatant was desalted on Millipore µC18 ZipTip column (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), based on reversed phase (RP) chromatography. Peptides were separated by Easy-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachussets) with self-packed analytical columns (100 μm × 20 cm) containing C18 RP material (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) and measured on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Based on data dependent MS/MS mode, a Full Scan was done, recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by the analysis of the 10 most intense precursor ions in the LTQ analyzer. Singly charged ions were not taken into account for MS/MS analysis and lock mass option was enabled throughout all analyses.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification based on this reference database was done with the Sorcerer 2 (SageN research) software. Taxonomic hits from 16S taq-sequencing of sorted populations were used to create a dataset specific protein reference database with publicly available genomic sequences from environmental samples and cultured representatives. Data analysis was done with the Scaffold 4 (version Scaffold_4.4.8, Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, Oregon) software. Identified proteins of the expressed proteome were classified into categories of orthologous groups manually based on general function categories. To convert leucine uptake rate into biomass production by bacterioplankton leucine content in measured peptides was calculated: on average leucine made 6.86% of all AA by weight or 7.31 mol %.

### Publication Abstract
Seamounts, often rising hundreds of metres above surrounding seafloor, obstruct the flow of deep-ocean water. While the retention of deep-water by seamounts is predicted from ocean circulation models, its empirical validation has been hampered by large scale and slow rate of the interaction. To overcome these limitations we use the growth of planktonic bacteria to assess the retention time of deep-ocean water by a seamount. The selected Tropic Seamount in the North-Eastern Atlantic is representative for the majority of isolated seamounts, which do not affect the surface ocean waters. We prove deep-water is retained by the seamount by measuring 2.4&#xd7; higher bacterial concentrations in the seamount-associated or 'sheath'-water than in deep-ocean water unaffected by seamounts. Genomic analyses of flow-sorted, dominant sheath-water bacteria confirm their planktonic origin, whilst proteomic analyses of the sheath-water bacteria, isotopically labelled in situ, indicate their slow growth. According to our radiotracer experiments, it takes the sheath-water bacterioplankton 1.5 years to double their concentration. Therefore, the seamount should retain the deep-ocean water for 1.8 years for the deep-ocean bacterioplankton to grow to the 2.4&#xd7; higher concentration in the sheath-water. We propose that turbulent mixing of the seamount sheath-water stimulates bacterioplankton growth by increasing cell encounter rate with ambient dissolved organic molecules.

### Keywords
Seamount bacterioplankton; ferromanganese encrusted guyot; isotope-tracer bioassay; in situ incubator; flow cytometry; flow sorted cell proteomics; next generation sequencing

### Affiliations
Institut für Mikrobiologie Universität Greifswald Felix Hausdorff Str.8 17489 Greifswald Tel.:  (+49) 03834 420 5903 Fax.: (+49) 03834 420 5002
Institute of Microbiology University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Minia Antelo

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institut für Mikrobiologie Universität Greifswald Felix Hausdorff Str.8 17489 Greifswald Tel.:  (+49) 03834 420 5903 Fax.: (+49) 03834 420 5002


