### Accession
PXD025032

### Title
Characterization of a mitochondria associated phosphocreatine phosphatase in thermogenic adipocytes

### Description
Adaptive thermogenesis has attracted much attention because of its ability to raise systemic energy expenditure and counter obesity and diabetes. Recent data have indicated that thermogenic fat cells utilize creatine to stimulate futile substrate cycling, dissipating chemical energy as heat. This model was based on the super-stoichiometric relationship between creatine added to mitochondria and O2 consumed, and this project aims at providing direct evidence for the molecular basis of this futile creatine cycling activity. In this project, we found that thermogenic fat cells contain robust phosphocreatine hydrolase (PCr’ase) activity, attributable to tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), which was identified by the quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of a purified mitochondrial protein fraction containing the PCr’ase activity. TNAP hydrolyzes phosphocreatine to initiate a futile cycle of creatine dephosphorylation and phosphorylation; it is localized to mitochondria of thermogenic fat cells, where the futile creatine cycling occurs. Furthermore, we demonstrated in this project the essential role of TNAP in activating the futile creatine cycling and increasing whole body energy expenditure using genetic and pharmacological approaches. We also found that the genetic depletion of TNAP in murine adipose tissue causes rapid-onset obesity, with no change in movement or feeding behavior of the animals. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we showed that genetic depletion of TNAP causes an upregulation of UCP1, as well as other proteins involved in oxidative metabolism, to compensate for a dampened thermogenesis. In summary, the data we acquired in this project illustrate the critical role of TNAP as a phosphocreatine phosphatase in the futile creatine cycling and adipose thermogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019). Adipose tissues were homogenized in SDS lysis buffer (2.0 % SDS w/v, 250 mM NaCl, PhosStop (Roche) phosphatase inhibitors, EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Promega), and 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 60C for 30 minutes, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes, and chloroform/methanol precipitated. Samples were then solubilized in 8 M urea dissolved in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and protein content was quantified. 500 μg of protein/sample was diluted to 4 M urea with digestion buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 8.5) and digested with LysC (Wako) (2 μg/μl) 1:100 for 2 hours. Samples were then diluted to 2M urea and further digested with Lys-C (2 μg/μl) 1:100 and Trypsin (0.5 μg/μl) 1:100 overnight at 37C. In the morning, samples were diluted to 1M urea, and further digested with Trypsin (0.5 μg/μl) 1:100 for 6 hours at 37C. Samples were then acidified with 200 μl 25% acetic acid and centrifuged at max speed for 5 minutes, and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (50 mg, Sep-Pak, Waters). 50 ug of digested peptides were labeled with tandem mass tag (TMTpro) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific), combined into one fraction, acidified with 20 µL of 20 % FA (pH ~2), and subjected to C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg). Next, basic pH reversed-phase HPLC, followed by MS analysis was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
MS data processing was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Adaptive thermogenesis has attracted much attention because of its ability to increase systemic energy expenditure and to counter obesity and diabetes<sup>1-3</sup>. Recent data have indicated that thermogenic fat cells use creatine to stimulate futile substrate cycling, dissipating chemical energy as heat<sup>4,5</sup>. This model was based on the super-stoichiometric relationship between the amount of creatine added to mitochondria and the quantity of oxygen consumed. Here we provide direct evidence for the molecular basis of this futile creatine cycling activity in mice. Thermogenic fat cells have robust phosphocreatine phosphatase activity, which is attributed to tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP). TNAP hydrolyses phosphocreatine to initiate a futile cycle of creatine dephosphorylation and phosphorylation. Unlike in other cells, TNAP in thermogenic fat cells is localized to the mitochondria, where futile creatine cycling occurs. TNAP expression is powerfully induced when mice are exposed to cold conditions, and its inhibition in isolated mitochondria leads to a loss of futile creatine cycling. In addition, genetic ablation of TNAP in adipocytes reduces whole-body energy expenditure and leads to rapid-onset obesity in mice, with no change in movement or feeding behaviour. These data illustrate the critical role of TNAP as a phosphocreatine phosphatase in the futile creatine cycle.

### Keywords
Obesity, Adipocyte, Thermogenesis, Phosphocreatine, Tnap

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Spiegelman
Dana Farber Cancer Institute


