### Accession
PXD027178

### Title
Response of Endozoicomonas to coral host cues and thermal stress

### Description
Endozoicomonas are prevalent, abundant bacterial associates of marine animal hosts, including corals. Their role in holobiont health and functioning, however, remains poorly understood. To identify putative interactions within the coral holobiont, we characterized a novel Endozoicomonas isolate and assessed its transcriptomic and proteomic responses to tissue extracts of its native host, the Red Sea coral Acropora humilis, at control and elevated temperatures. We show that host cues stimulated differential expression of genes assumed to be involved in the modulation of the host immune response by Endozoicomonas, such as flagellar assembly genes, ankyrins, ephrins, and serpins. Proteome analysis revealed the upregulation of vitamin B1 and B6 biosynthetic as well as glycolytic processes by Endozoicomonas in response to host cues. We further demonstrate that the inoculation of A. humilis with its native Endozoicomonas strain resulted in enhanced holobiont health metrics, such as host tissue protein content and algal symbiont photosynthetic efficiency. Behavioral, physiological, and metabolic changes in Endozoicomonas may be key to the onset and function of mutualistic interactions within the coral holobiont, and our results suggest that the priming of Endozoicomonas to a symbiotic lifestyle may involve modulation of host immunity and the exchange of essential metabolites with other holobiont members. Consequently, Endozoicomonas presumably plays an important role in holobiont nutrient cycling and may therefore be implicated in its health, acclimatization, and ecological adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and purification were based on the filter-aided sample preparation methods of Wisniewski et al. (2009). The cell pellet was resuspended and the proteins solubilised by ultrasonicator probe, 20 × 2 s pulses, in 5% sodium deoxycholate. The dissolved proteins were denatured at 85 °C for 30 min with 1% final concentration β-mercaptoethanol. Lipids and detergent were reduced by washing the aqueous protein sample twice with two volumes ethyl acetate, followed by phase separation and removal of the upper organic phase. Any remaining ethyl acetate was eliminated by 20 min vacuum centrifugation. Samples were concentrated in a 0.5 ml Amicon Ultra 30 kDA centrifugation filter (14,000 × g, Merck Millepore) followed by two washes with 380 µl 50mM Tris buffer, pH 8.1 followed by resuspension in 400 µl total Tris buffer. Protein content of a subsample, acidified and centrifuged (22,000 × g, 5 min) to remove remaining deoxycholate, was quantified by a Qubit fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol was added to 100 µg total protein in the centrifugation filter and incubated for 10 min at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with 20 mM acrylamide for 20 min at room temperature and quenching with a second addition of β-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were then digested with 2 µg trypsin for 18 h and the digested peptides separated by filter centrifugation. Any remaining deoxycholate was precipitated by adding formic acid (1% final) and centrifugation (16,000 g × 1 min). Peptides were desalted by C18 pipette tips (Omix Bond Elut, Agilent Technologies), dried by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at 4 °C. For analysis, peptides were dissolved in 50 µl 0.1% formic acid and quantified by Qubit fluorometry. A 75 min linear gradient (5% to 35% buffer B) was used to separate peptides at 300 nl min−1 (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a 15 cm column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 Å, 3 µm, Thermo Scientific, Auckland, New Zealand) on an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was used to analyse peptides be electrospray ionisation (1.8 kV). Each sample was analysed twice. The Orbitrap acquired precursor mass spectra with a resolution of 120,000 while rejecting singly-charged ions, with an automatic gain target of 7.0e5, maximum injection time 50 ms, and quadrupole isolation enabled. High-energy collision dissociation was used for fragmentation and the twenty most intense precursor spectra analysed by ion trap (maximum injection time 300 ms, automatic gain target 5.0e3) and dynamic exclusion (60 s) enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using MaxQuant (1.6.10.43, Cox et al. 2014, Cox and Mann 2008), with the raw spectra searched against Endozoicomonas protein models generated as above . A minimum of two peptides was required to be considered a valid match, and peptide and protein search false discovery rates had a maximum of 1%. N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation were valid variable modifications and carbamidomethylation a valid fixed modification, with a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages. Peptide search tolerances for the first and main searches were 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, with a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da in the ion trap. Label-free quantification and match between runs were enabled, with a quantification minimum of two unique plus razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Endozoicomonas are prevalent, abundant bacterial associates of marine animals, including corals. Their role in holobiont health and functioning, however, remains poorly understood. To identify potential interactions within the coral holobiont, we characterized the novel isolate Endozoicomonas marisrubri sp. nov. 6c and assessed its transcriptomic and proteomic response to tissue extracts of its native host, the Red Sea coral Acropora humilis. We show that coral tissue extracts stimulated differential expression of genes putatively involved in symbiosis establishment via the modulation of the host immune response by E. marisrubri 6c, such as genes for flagellar assembly, ankyrins, ephrins, and serpins. Proteome analyses revealed that E. marisrubri 6c upregulated vitamin B1 and B6 biosynthesis and glycolytic processes in response to holobiont cues. Our results suggest that the priming of Endozoicomonas for a symbiotic lifestyle involves the modulation of host immunity and the exchange of essential metabolites with other holobiont members. Consequently, Endozoicomonas may play an important role in holobiont nutrient cycling and may therefore contribute to coral health, acclimatization, and adaptation.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Host-microbe interactions, Endozoicomonas, Coral, Coral reef

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon K Davy
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand


