### Accession
PXD035976

### Title
Eps8, Arp2/3 and IRSp53 in TNT formation

### Description
Tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) connect distant cells and mediate cargo transfer for intercellular communication in physiological and pathological contexts. How the cell controls a common pool of proteins to generate these actin-mediated protrusions spanning length scales beyond those attainable by canonical filopodia remains unknown. Through a combination of surface micropatterning, microscopy and optical tweezer-based approaches, we found that Arp2/3-dependent pathways attenuate the extent with which actin polymerizes in nanotubes, limiting the formation and attainable lengths of TNTs. Upon Arp2/3 inhibition Epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (Eps8) exhibited heightened interactions with the inverted Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (I-BAR) domain protein IRSp53 resulting in increased TNTs. In these conditions,  Eps8 interaction with proteins enhancing filament turnover and depolymerization were reduced. Our data reveals how common players in protrusions (Eps8 and IRSp53) drive outward linear actin extension to form TNTs, and that their interaction is enhanced when competing pathways overutilizing actin in branched Arp2/3 networks are inhibited, suggesting a shift in the equilibrium (and proteins usage) between branched and linear actin polymerization  to form different cell protrusions.

### Sample Protocol
800,000 cells were plated in 100 mm dishes and the day after  the transfection with  GFP-empty vector (negative control) and GFP-Eps8-WT that was used as a bait protein. On the next day the GFP- and GFP-Eps8-WT cells were treated either with DMSO (control) or with 50 μM CK-666 for 1 hour. After washing away the drug and lysing the cells, it was proceeded with the GFP-immunoprecipitation as described above until the wash step that was  different; first two washes of 3 minutes each were done in the lysis buffer followed by three washes of 3 minutes each in the dilution buffer.On-bead digestion was performed strictly as described by Chromotek. Briefly, beads were resuspended in digestion buffer (Tris 50 mM pH 7.5, urea 2 M, 1 mM DTT and 5 µg/µl of trypsin (Promega)) for 3 min at 30°C. Supernatants were transfer to new vials and beads were washed twice using Tris 50 mM pH 7.5, urea 2 M and iodoacetamide 5 mM buffer. All washes were pulled and incubated at 32°C for overnight digestion in the dark. Peptides were purified using a C18 based clean up standard protocol done using Bravo AssayMap device (Agilent technology).  LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 30 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 300 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 2% to 35% in 55 min, 35% to 60% in 10 min, 60% to 90% in 5 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 80 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 400 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using the Andromeda search engine (84) against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (55470 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 1st of June 2021). The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. At least 2 peptides (including 1 unique peptides) were asked to report a protein identification. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. iBAQ value was calculated. The match between runs features was allowed for biological replicate only. Quantitative analysis was based on pairwise comparison of protein intensities. Values were log-transformed (log2). Reverse hits and potential contaminant were removed from the analysis. Proteins with at least 2 peptides were kept for further statistics. Intensity values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR) (85). Remaining proteins without any iBAQ value in one of both conditions have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in the other. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the impute.MLE function of the R package imp4p (https://rdrr.io/cran/imp4p/man/imp4p-package.html). Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma (86). An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p (87) using the robust method described in Giai Gianetto et al. 2016 to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tnt eps8 irsp53

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Michael henderson
Institut Pasteur


