### Accession
PXD038332

### Title
Translation-coupled resolution of RNA-protein crosslinks

### Description
The aim of the measurements was to investigate RNA damage and RNA-protein crosslinks (RPC) formation in the context of aldehyde-induced toxicity. For this, a photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking (PAR-CL) strategy using 4-thiouridine (4-SU) and UVA-radiation was used. The submitted dataset contains data from LC-MS/MS measurements of crosslinks between proteins and poly-adenylated mRNAs (mRPCs). The measurements included the following six samples sets: Sample set 1 (9 runs = 3 conditions in 3 replicates): RPCs after formaldehyde (FA) and 4-SU + UVA treatment isolated using the protein-x-linked RNA extraction (XRNAX) protocol (doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.004) Conditions: RPCs from untreated HAP1 =Ctrl RPCs from HAP1 treated with FA RPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA  Sample set 2 (12 runs = 4 conditions in 3 replicates): mRPCs after 4-SU + UVA treatment using poly-A pulldown Conditions: mRPCs from untreated HAP1=Ctrl mRPCs from HAP1 treated with UVA but without 4-SU (0h after irradiation) mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU but without UVA  mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA (0h after irradiation) Sample set 3 (24 runs = 6 conditions in 4 replicates): mRPCs after 4-SU + UVA and Ub-E1i treatment  using poly-A pulldown Conditions: mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA and Ub-E1i (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) Sample set 4 (24 runs = 6 conditions in 4 replicates): mRPCs after 4-SU + UVA and MG132 treatment isolated using poly-A pulldown Conditions: mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA and MG132 (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) Sample set 5 (24 runs = 6 conditions in 4 replicates): mRPCs after 4-SU + UVA and ANS treatment using isolated poly-A pulldown Conditions: mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) mRPCs from HAP1 treated with 4-SU + UVA and ANS (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) Sample set 6 (24 runs = 6 conditions in 4 replicates ): mRPCs after 4-SU+UVA in AAVS1 control and RNF14 KO cells using poly-A pulldown mRPCs from HAP1 AAVS1 control cells (clone #6) treated with 4-SU+UVA (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation) mRPCs from HAP1 RNF15 KO cells (clone #15) treated with 4-SU+UVA (0h, 0.5h and 1h after irradiation)  Abbreviations: 4-SU: 4-thiouridine ANS: Anisomycine, a translation elongation inhibitor  FA: Formaldehyde MG132: proteasome-inhibitor  mRPCs: crosslinks between proteins and poly-adenylated mRNAs isolated by Poly-A pulldown RPCs: crosslinks between proteins and RNA isolated by XRNAX Ub-E1i: ubiquitin E1 inhibitor (E1i, TAK-243) UVA: Ultraviolet A

### Sample Protocol
After RNA digestion, samples were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge and diluted in 15 µl 8 M Urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced using dithioerythritol (final concentration: 5 mM) for 30 min at 37°C. Subsequently, alkylation of cysteines was done with iodoacetamide (final concentration: 15 mM) for 30 min and quenched with 15 mM dithioerythritol for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The first digestion step was performed using Lys-C (1:100, enzyme:protein ratio, Wako) at 37°C for 4 h. Prior to tryptic digestion, samples were diluted with H2O to give 1 M Urea. Tryptic digestion was performed (1:50, enzyme:protein ratio, Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. For LC-MS/MS analysis each sample was injected in an Ultimate 3000 nano-chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific) and transferred to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 µm x 2cm, 5 µm particles, 100Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). Separation was performed at 250 nl/min using a 50 cm reversed-phase separation column (PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm 100 Å 75 µm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. For separation, two consecutive gradients from 3% to 25% solvent B in 40 min and from 25% to 40 % B in 5 min were applied. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a top 15 data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Data processing, peptide search and quantification was done with MaxQuant (v.1.6.7.0) and the human subset of the UniProt database.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive aldehydes are abundant endogenous metabolites that challenge homeostasis by crosslinking cellular macromolecules. Aldehyde-induced DNA damage requires repair to prevent cancer and premature aging, but it is unknown whether cells also possess mechanisms that resolve aldehyde-induced RNA lesions. Here, we establish photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking (PAR-CL) as a model system to study RNA crosslinking damage in the absence of confounding DNA damage in human cells. We find that such RNA damage causes translation stress by stalling elongating ribosomes, which leads to collisions with trailing ribosomes and activation of multiple stress response pathways. Moreover, we discovered a translation-coupled quality control mechanism that resolves covalent RNA-protein crosslinks. Collisions between translating ribosomes and crosslinked mRNA-binding proteins trigger their modification with atypical K6- and K48-linked ubiquitin chains. Ubiquitylation requires the E3 ligase RNF14 and leads to proteasomal degradation of the protein adduct. Our findings identify RNA lesion-induced translational stress as a central component of crosslinking damage.

### Keywords
Rna-protein crosslinks

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


