### Accession
PXD001492

### Title
Yeast - phosphoproteome -  Yeast PP4 Interacts with ATR Homolog Ddc2-Mec1 and Regulates Checkpoint Signaling

### Description
To find the Mec1 targets that are responsible for mec1-100 suppression on HU, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic study. Specifically, we screened for modifications that are downregulated in mec1-100, compensated by pph3delta, and left unaffected by rad53delta. To eliminate contributions from Tel1, we used a tel1delta mec1-100 double mutant in the screen. Prior to extraction of proteins, the cultures were arrested in G1 by alpha-factor and released into S phase in the presence of HU.  Samples were analyzed in triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Extracts in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 5 mM EDTA had a protein concentration of about 5.2 mg/ mL. 150 μL 200 mM HEPES were added to 1.5 mL of each of the twelve extracts. Reduction and alkylation of cysteines were performed by adding of 160 μL 45 mM DTT for 30 min followed by adding of 180 μL 100 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min (in the dark), both at room temperature. Before adding of 20 μL 1 mg/ mL LysC (Wako, Japan) the extracts were twofold diluted to keep a final HEPES concentration of 20 mM. First digest was performed overnight at 25 °C. After further twofold diluting of the extracts 100 μL of 0.5 mg/ mL trypsin were added and the second digest was performed at 37 °C overnight. Before phosphopeptide enrichment the digests were desalted using SepPak C18 columns (Waters). The eluates were dried down in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The digests were reconstituted in 150 μL 2.5% triflouroacetic acid (TFA)/ 80% acetonitrile, saturated with phthalic acid and 30 min incubated with 1.5 mg TiO2 beads (Inertsil Titansphere 5µm, GL Science, Japan) using Mobitec tubes (MoBiTec, Germany). The beads were thoroughly washed four times with 200 μL 2.5% TFA/ 80% acetonitrile. Phospho-peptides were eluted with 100 μL 0.3 M NH4OH and 100 μL 0.3 M NH4OH/ 30% acetonitrile. The pH of the eluates was lowered to about 3 by adding 4 μL TFA before drying down in a SpeedVac. The final desalting step was performed on Oligo R3 media (Life technologies) immobilized on C18 GELoader pipette tips (Proxeon). The LC/MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 pump coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a Digital PicoView ion source (New Objective). The peptides were separated on a New Objective analytical column (75 μm x 25 cm, Reprosil, 3 μm) with a gradient from 2 to 30% solvent B in 110 min, 30 to 50% solvent B in 30 min and 50 to 80% solvent B in 5 min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 200 nL/ min. The dried TiO2 eluates were dissolved in 40 μL 0.1% TFA/ 2% acetonitrile and the peptide concentrations determined with a Qubit fluorometer and the Qubit protein assay kit (Life technologies). The injection volumes were adapted accordingly for 1 μg peptides on column.

### Data Protocol
The twelve raw files (wt - 1981-1, -2, -3; rad53delta - 7373-1, 7373-2, 7373-3; mec1-100 tel1delta - 6913-1, 6913-2, 6913-3; mec1-100 tel1delta pph3delta - 7734-1, 7734-2, 7734-3.raw) were loaded into Progenesis-LC and automatically aligned. The alignments were manually corrected were needed. The final alignment scores were 82.5% and better. Features with two charges and more than two isotopes, features with three to six charges having more than three isotopes and spectra with a limit fragment count of 150 were considered for a database search using MASCOT 2.3 (131202_151105MSMS_150.dat). Peptides were identified searching the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD), version Sept. 2011) considering the following settings: Carbamidomethylation at cysteines as fixed modification, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terms and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications, two missed cleavage sites, a peptide mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, trypsin as enzyme, allowing the cleavage after arginine and lysine also if followed by a proline. Finally, in Progenesis-LC features were kept if they had a MASCOT ion score greater than 15 and were identified as phosphopeptides without any other modifications except acetylation at protein N-terminals. The normalization was performed considering only those phosphopeptides. The final feature data list was exported into Excel. Ratios “mutant versus wild type” were calculated from the average of the normalized abundances of the three replicates and the probability of a Student’s t-test was determined accordingly. Only phosphopeptides with a probability of 0.95 were considered for further evaluation. The phosphorylation localization probabilities were determined using phosphoRS within Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 131202_151105MSMS_150.pep.xml).

### Publication Abstract
Mec1-Ddc2 (ATR-ATRIP) controls the DNA damage checkpoint and shows differential cell-cycle regulation in yeast. To find regulators of Mec1-Ddc2, we exploited a mec1 mutant that retains catalytic activity in G2 and recruitment to stalled replication forks, but which is compromised for the intra-S phase checkpoint. Two screens, one for spontaneous survivors and an E-MAP screen for synthetic growth effects, identified loss of PP4 phosphatase, pph3&#x394; and psy2&#x394;, as the strongest suppressors of mec1-100 lethality on HU. Restored Rad53 phosphorylation accounts for part, but not all, of the pph3&#x394;-mediated survival. Phosphoproteomic analysis confirmed that 94% of the mec1-100-compromised targets on HU are PP4 regulated, including a phosphoacceptor site within Mec1 itself, mutation of which confers damage sensitivity. Physical interaction between Pph3 and Mec1, mediated by cofactors Psy2 and Ddc2, is shown biochemically and through FRET in subnuclear repair foci. This establishes a physical and functional Mec1-PP4 unit for regulating the checkpoint response.

### Keywords
S. cereviasiae

### Affiliations
Director of the Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research  Maulbeerstrasse 66 CH-4058 Basel Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Ragna Sack

### Lab Head
Dr Susan M Gasser
Director of the Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research  Maulbeerstrasse 66 CH-4058 Basel Switzerland


