### Accession
PXD013072

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of FSCN1-Interacting Proteins in LSCC cells

### Description
Fascin actin-bundling protein 1 (FSCN1) is an evolutionarily conserved actin-bundling protein that plays a critical role in cell migration, motility, adhesion and cellular interactions. Although multiple clinical studies have implicated the expression of FSCN1 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) progression, the precise mechanism of FSCN1 in the process has not been clearly elucidated. To define FSCN1 function, we characterized FSCN1-interacting proteins in LSCC cells by immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS. After data filtering, 119 proteins with expression in both the Hep-2 and TU-177 cell samples were identified as FSCN1-interacting partners. With in-depth bioinformatics analysis, we linked FSCN1 to critical cellular processes including cell adhesion, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, regulation of protein ubiquitination, ribosomal RNA processing and small molecule metabolism. We discuss the interactions between FSCN1 and some of the newly validated partners. The identification of these potential partners of FSCN1 expands our knowledge of the FSCN1 interactome and provides a valuable resource for understanding the functions of this protein in LSCC progression.

### Sample Protocol
Hep-2 and TU-177 cells were lyzed in Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA) IP Lysis Buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, and complete protease inhibitor mixture). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000×g and 4 °C for 10 min. Prior to IP, cell lysates were pre-cleared by adding 25 μl Protein A/G-Agarose beads (50% slurry) per mL cell lysates and incubating at 4 °C for 30 min on a rotator. Protein A/G-Agarose beads were removed by centrifugation at 1000×g and 4°C for 5 min. The supernatant (cell lysate) was transferred to a fresh centrifuge tube on ice. Then, equal amounts of samples were incubated with rabbit monoclonal anti-fascin antibody (Abcam, ab126772) or isotype-controlled rabbit IgG (Abcam, ab172730) overnight at 4 °C on a rotary device. Protein A/G-Agarose beads (50 µl) were added and incubated at 4 °C for 2 h. The immunoprecipitates (beads) were collected by centrifugation at 1000×g and 4°C for 5 min and washed four times with 1 mL IP Lysis Buffer. Finally, the immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by using Laemmli’s buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE, with protein bands visualized by Coomassie blue staining. Each gel lane was cut into small pieces and destained in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile until depigmentation. Then, 100% acetonitrile was added, and samples were incubated at room temperature with occasional vortexing until gel pieces became white and shrunken. Dried gel pieces were incubated with sufficient trypsin buffer (10 ng/μl) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted for liquid chromatography-high resolution MS analysis with a Dionex Ultimate RSLCnano 3000 system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Fremont, CA). For liquid chromatography separation, a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm×20mm, 2μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and Thermo Easyspray column (75μm×75cm, 2μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) were used at a flow rate of 280 nL/min. Column temperature was set at 55 ºC. Gradient elution was performed with mobile phase A [2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid] and B (80% ACN/0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5% to 8% B over 4 min and then held at 8% B for 2 min, followed by 8% to 28% B over 50 min, 28% to 35% B over 10 min, 36% to 60% B over 4 min and held at 60% B for 3 min. Then the mobile phase B was decreased to 5% in 2 min and equilibrated for 15 min with 5% of B. The Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer was equipped with a heated electrospray ionization source and operated in the positive ionization mode. The spray voltage was 2.1 kV and capillary temperature 320 °C. For data-dependent acquisitions, the scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, scan range 350–1,800 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3E6, maximum injection time 50 ms, and centroid spectrum data type. We selected the top 30 precursors for MS2 analysis, which involved high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z, AGC 5E4, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window ±1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27%, and centroid spectrum data type. In addition, dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration 60 s.

### Data Protocol
After MS data acquisition, Thermo Fisher RAW files were converted to searchable.mgf files by using Proteome Discoverer v3.1 for independent searches with Mascot software v2.3 to query the human database subset (20,984 sequences) of the SwissProt database. The search parameters were carbamido-methylation as a fixed modification of cysteine, oxidation as a variable modification of methionine, trypsin as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages allowed. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were allowed. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot score (≥30) were used for protein identification. Peptide false discovery rate was＜1%.

### Publication Abstract
Fascin actin-bundling protein 1 (FSCN1) is an evolutionarily conserved actin-bundling protein that plays a critical role in cell migration, motility, adhesion, and cellular interactions. Although multiple clinical studies have implicated the expression of FSCN1 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) progression, the precise mechanism of FSCN1 in the process has not been clearly elucidated. To define FSCN1 function, we characterized FSCN1&#x2010;interacting proteins in two cell lines by immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (MS). After data filtering, 119 proteins with expression in both the Hep-2 and TU-177 cell samples were identified as FSCN1-interacting partners. With in-depth bioinformatics analysis, we linked FSCN1 to critical cellular processes including cell adhesion, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, regulation of protein ubiquitination, ribosomal RNA processing, and small molecule metabolism. We discuss the interactions between FSCN1 and some of the newly validated partners. The identification of these potential partners of FSCN1 expands our knowledge of the FSCN1 interactome and provides a valuable resource for understanding the functions of this protein in LSCC progression.

### Keywords
Lscc, Immunoprecipitation, Interactomics, Fscn1, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Shanxi Key Laboratory of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Cancer, Shanxi Medical University,China
Shanxi Medical University

### Submitter
Liu Hongliang

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Binquan
Shanxi Key Laboratory of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Cancer, Shanxi Medical University,China


