### Accession
PXD022677

### Title
Another layer of complexity in Staphylococcus aureus methionine biosynthesis control: Unusual RNase III-driven T-box riboswitch cleavage determines met operon mRNA stability and decay

### Description
In Staphylococcus aureus, de novo methionine biosynthesis is regulated by a unique hierarchical pathway involving stringent-response controlled CodY repression in combination with a T-box riboswitch and RNA decay. The T-box riboswitch residing in the 5' untranslated region (met leader RNA) of the S. aureus metICFE-mdh operon controls downstream gene transcription upon interaction with uncharged methionyl-tRNA. met leader and metICFE-mdh (m)RNAs undergo RNase-mediated degradation in a process whose molecular details are poorly understood. Here, we determined the secondary structure of the met leader RNA and found the element to harbor, beyond other conserved T-box riboswitch structural features, a terminator helix which is a target for RNase III endoribonucleolytic cleavage. As the terminator is a thermodynamically highly stable structure, it also forms posttranscriptionally in met leader/ metICFE-mdh read-through transcripts. Cleavage by RNase III releases the met leader from metICFE-mdh mRNA and initiates RNase J-mediated degradation of the mRNA from the 5'-end. Of note, metICFE-mdh mRNA stability varies over the length of the transcript with a longer lifespan towards the 3'-end. Corresponding variations in protein levels led us to hypothesize that coordinated RNA decay represents another level in the hierarchical methionine biosynthesis control network to adjust methionine biosynthesis enzyme amounts to current metabolic requirements.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus strains were grown in chemically defined medium (CDM) with (CDM +MET) or without methionine (CDM -MET) dwhen not otherwise stated. For strains carrying resistance genes on cloning vectors, antibiotics were used at the following concentrations for selection: 5 or 10 µg ml−1 erythromycin, 10 µg ml-1 chloramphenicol. Bacteria from overnight cultures (CDM +MET) were diluted to an initial optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.05 in fresh medium and grown with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C to mid-exponential growth phase. For methionine-deprived (-MET) conditions bacteria were then washed twice with 1x PBS, resuspended in CDM -MET and incubated for 2 hours with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C. For rifampicin assays under methionine-deprived conditions, bacteria from overnight cultures were washed twice with 1x PBS, resuspended in 2x Basic medium (25 mM Na2HPO4, 20 mM KH2PO4, 3.3 mM MgSO4, 18.5 mM NH4Cl, 17 mM NaCl) and diluted to an initial OD600 of 0.05 in CDM -MET. Bacteria were grown with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C to mid-exponential phase. For protein half-life and synthesis rate determinations bacteria from overnight cultures (CDM +MET) were washed twice with 1x PBS, resuspended in 2x Basic medium and diluted in CDM -MET to an initial OD600 of 0.05. Bacteria were grown with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C to mid-exponential growth phase. Then bacteria were washed once with CDM -MET without arginine and lysine and were resuspended in CDM -MET with 1 mM ‘heavy’ arginine (L-arginine HCl (13C,15N), Silantes GmbH, #201603902) and ‘heavy’ lysine (L-lysine HCl (13C, 15N), Silantes GmbH, #211603902) (instead of the normal ‘light’ (12C, 14N) arginine and lysine), t0 sample was taken and rifampicin was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and 100 µg ml-1, respectively. Bacteria were incubated with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C. Samples were taken 15 and 30 min after rifampicin addition. Samples were put on ice and split in two. One half was immediately pelleted, 1x washed with ice-cold TE-buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, #04693132001) according to manufacturer’s instructions, pellet was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further processing described under ‘Sample Preparation for Proteomics’. The other half of the sample was treated as described for ‘Preparation of total RNA’. In addition, the experiment was performed vice versa (switch from ‘heavy’ arginine and lysine to ‘light’ arginine and lysine containing CDM -MET). The number of biological replicates per time point was 4 (2x ‘light’ > ‘heavy’, 2x ‘heavy’ > ‘light’). For the protein quantification experiment, bacteria were resuspended in light medium after washing (no shifting), the t0 sample was taken and processed as described above. Cell pellets were resuspended in TE-buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.25, 10 mM EDTA) and disrupted with 0.1 mm glass beads and a homogenizer (4 cycles of 30 seconds at 6.5 m/s). Between each cycle, samples were placed on ice for 5 minutes. Glass beads were removed by centrifugation and lysates were subsequently transferred to a new reaction tube. Protein concentration was determined with Roti-Nanoquant (Carl Roth GmbH) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For in solution digest 100 µg protein were reduced with 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 45 minutes at 65 °C and subsequently alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 15 minutes at room temperature before digestion was performed with trypsin (protein-to-enzyme-ratio 200:1) at 37 °C for 14 hours. Digestion was stopped by lowering the pH to 2 by adding trifluoroacetic acid before samples were desalted via C18 columns (Millipore ZipTips) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. LC–MS/MS measurements Tryptic peptides were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) and measured online by ESI-mass spectrometry. LC–MS/MS analyses were performed with an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Orbitrap Elite for the half-life determination or an Orbitrap Velos Pro for the protein quantification (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a self-made analytical column (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5–53 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % acetic acid over 180 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. For MS analysis a full scan in the Orbitrap (m/z 300–1700) with a resolution of 60,000 was followed by CID MS/MS experiments of the twenty most abundant precursor ions acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Relative protein quantification was achieved using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0.) (24) and the Andromeda plug-in (25). The *.raw files were searched against a Staphylococcus aureus strain Newman database (downloaded from Uniprot at July 15, 2018, 2,584 entries). Additionally, MaxQuant’s generic contamination list was included during the search. Database search was performed with following parameters: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modifications, methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini, a maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide and activated ‘match-between-runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match and protein were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The identified proteins from MaxQuant output files were filtered for contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits with the Perseus software (v. 1.6.1.3). Proteins were accepted if at least two unique peptides could be identified in at least two of the four biological replicates. The LFQ-values were log2-transformed, exported and used for statistical analysis using TM4 (26). Statistical significance required a p-value < 0.01 in an ANOVA applying standard Bonferroni correction. For comparison of protein amounts within one sample the intensities of all identified peptides were normalized by dividing the respective intensity by the median of all peptide intensities of the same condition. According to Silva et al. (27) the normalized intensities of the three most abundant peptides of a proteins were summed to obtain the final quantitative value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna decay, Methionine biosynthesis, Staphylococcus aureus, T-box riboswitch

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald,17489, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald,17489, Germany


