### Accession
PXD004286

### Title
LC-MS/MS Data for Identification of ChREBP O-GlcNAcylation

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis of O-GlcNAcylated ChREBP proteins, which were overexpressed in HEK293T cells and purified via affinity purification using Ni-NTA agarose

### Sample Protocol
ChREBP was expressed and purified as described above. The obtained sample was incubated with freshly made dithiothreitol (DTT, final conc. 100 mM) at 70°C for 1 h to reduce cysteines, followed by alkylation with freshly prepared iodoacetamide (IA, final conc. 200 mM) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The buffer was subsequently exchanged to 25 mM NH4HCO3 using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters (3 kDa molecular weight cutoff, Millipore). Proteolysis was performed at 37°C overnight with a 25:1 (w/w) protein-to-trypsin ratio.

### Data Protocol
The digest was analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides (~1 μg) were desalted on a 100 μm × 3 cm C18 trap column which packed with 5 μm, 120 ? ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) for 4 min and then separated on a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoLC analytical column packed with 3 μm, 120 ? ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in 2% aqueous acetonitrile, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 98% aqueous acetonitrile. A step gradient of 2-7% B, 0-10 min; 7 to 22% B, 10-92 min; 22 to 35% B, 92-105 min; 35 to 90% B, 105-110 min and 90% B, 110-120 min was used. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode with the following parameter settings: spray voltage, 2.4 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; and S-lens level, 60%. The mass acquisition range was set at 350-1550, and the resolution of the orbitrap analyzer for MS analysis was set at 120,000 (m/z = 200) with a 4 × 105 automatic gain control (AGC) target. Top speed mode with a 3 s-cycle was selected for MS2 analysis using orbitrap as the mass analyzer, the resolution was set at 30,000 (m/z = 200) with a 5 × 104 AGC target, and the maximum injection time was set at 150 ms. The parent ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 40%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP) is believed as an important modulator of ChREBP activities, however little direct evidence of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation on ChREBP and no exact <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation sites have been reported so far. Here, we validate <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation on ChREBP in cell-free coupled transcription/translation system and in cells by chemoenzymatic and metabolic labeling, respectively. Moreover, for the first time, we identify <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation on Ser614 in the <i>C</i>-terminus of ChREBP by mass spectrometry and validate two important sites, Thr517 and Ser839 for <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and their function via molecular and chemical biological method. Under high glucose conditions, Ser514 phosphorylation enhances ChREBP <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation, maintaining the transcriptional activity of ChREBP; Ser839 <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is essential for Mlx-heterodimerization and DNA-binding activity enhancement, consequently inducing transcriptional activity. Ser839 <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is also crucial for ChREBP nuclear export partially by strengthening interactions with CRM1 and 14-3-3. This work is a detailed study of ChREBP <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and highlights the biological consequences of the site-specific <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation dynamics of ChREBP.

### Keywords
Mouse, Chrebp, O-glcnac, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University , Xue Yuan Road No. 38, Beijing 100191, China.

### Submitter
An-Qi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Xin-Shan Ye
State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University , Xue Yuan Road No. 38, Beijing 100191, China.


