### Accession
PXD037815

### Title
Proteome of Douglas-fir: a resource for genomic research

### Description
First Douglas fir proteomes by nLC-MS/MS from 12 different organs : root, stem, xylem, needle, bud, female and male flowers, immature and mature seed, immature and mature somatic embryos and callus.

### Sample Protocol
The buds, needles and flowers were collected on the April 13, whereas immature and mature seeds were collected on the July 23 and August 30 respectively. The mature somatic embryos were obtained, by cultivation on maturation medium, of an embryogenic line initiated from immature zygotic embryos, originating from polycross controlled cross. The embryogenic mass with immature somatic embryos and non-embryogenic callus lines were issue of a reiteration of the somatic embryogenesis initiation from a mature somatic embryo.  Total protein extracts were prepared from three biological replicates for each sample (150 mg fresh mass) with TCA-acetone extraction. The proteins were re-suspended in a solubilization medium of 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% chaps (v/v), 10mM dithiothreitol, 0.4% Triton X100 (v/v), 80 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8. Protein samples were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and 10 µg per sample were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel for concentration and cleaning purpose. Separation was stopped once proteins have entered resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% ACN, rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 50-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 48 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120 000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans with a target value of 3 x 103 ions were collected in the ion trap with a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Additionally, only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 30% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 5 x 103. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a pinus douglas database (54795 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (1) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and Area Under the Curve was integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer.  Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total human protein amount. Protein ratio were calculated as the median of all possible pairwise peptide ratios. A t-test was calculated based on background population of peptides or proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The Douglas fir (<i>Pseudotsuga menziesii</i>) is a conifer native to North America that has become increasingly popular in plantations in France due to its many advantages as timber: rapid growth, quality wood, and good adaptation to climate change. Tree genetic improvement programs require knowledge of a species' genetic structure and history and the development of genetic markers. The very slow progress in this field, for Douglas fir as well as the entire genus <i>Pinus</i>, can be explained using the very large size of their genomes, as well as by the presence of numerous highly repeated sequences. Proteomics, therefore, provides a powerful way to access genomic information of otherwise challenging species. Here, we present the first Douglas fir proteomes acquired using nLC-MS/MS from 12 different plant organs or tissues. We identified 3975 different proteins and quantified 3462 of them, then examined the distribution of specific proteins across plant organs/tissues and their implications in various molecular processes. As the first large proteomic study of a resinous tree species with organ-specific profiling, this short note provides an important foundation for future genomic annotations of conifers and other trees.

### Keywords
Pseudotsuga menziesii; proteomics; shotgun; multi-organ

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France.
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Claverol Stephane
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France.


