### Accession
PXD043247

### Title
The Golgi stacking protein GRASP55 is targeted by the natural compound prodigiosin

### Description
The bacterial secondary metabolite prodigiosin has been shown to exert anticancer, antimalarial, antibacterial and immunomodulatory properties. With regard to cancer, it has been reported to affect cancer cells but not non-malignant cells, rendering prodigiosin a promising lead compound for anticancer drug discovery. However, a direct protein target has not yet been experimentally identified. Thus, we used mass spectrometry-based thermal proteome profiling and identified the Golgi stacking protein GRASP55 as target protein of prodigiosin. We show that prodigiosin treatment severely affects Golgi morphology and functionality, and that prodigiosin-dependent cytotoxicity is partially reduced in GRASP55 knockout cells. We also found that prodigiosin treatment results in decreased cathepsin activity and overall blocks autophagic flux, whereas co-localization of the autophagosomal marker LC3 and the lysosomal marker LAMP1 is clearly promoted. Finally, we observed that autophagosomes accumulate at GRASP55-positive structures, pointing towards an involvement of an altered Golgi function in the autophagy-inhibitory effect of this natural compound. Taken together, we propose that prodigiosin affects autophagy and Golgi apparatus integrity in an interlinked mode of action involving the regulation of organelle alkalization and the Golgi stacking protein GRASP55.

### Sample Protocol
Thermal proteome profiling  TPP was performed essentially as described (Lenz and Stühler 2022; Stuhldreier et al. 2022), but with major modifications to the TMT labeling sets and statistical data analysis for TPP-TR. In brief, samples were generated using the following steps: a) HeLa cell compound (prodigiosin) and temperature treatment b) Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) for MS c) TMT labeling and high pH fractionation d) LC-MS/MS analysis (Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography System (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher) and a nano-source ESI interface equipped Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) operated in synchronous precursor selection (SPS) (McAlister et al. 2014) mode)

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis, protein identification, and quantification: MS data was processed as described (Lenz and Stühler 2022) using the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) version 1.6.17.0 for based on 75777 Homo sapiens protein entries, downloaded from the UniProtKB on 27 January 2021, yielding protein quantifications by TMT reporter ions at the MS3 level for a total of 5992 and 4590 identified protein groups for TPP-CCR and TPP-TR, respectively (including potential contaminants, reverse hits and only by site identifications).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prodigiosin; golgi apparatus; natural compound; autophagy; target identification

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Centre, Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
MPL/BMFZ, HHU Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Thomas Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Centre, Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany


