### Accession
PXD002912

### Title
Expressed Proteome of Extraintestinal Escherichia coli Associated with Urinary Tract Infections

### Description
Extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (ExPEC) have a capacity to cause serious infections of blood, the central nervous system and particularly the urinary tract. Relatively little is known about how ExPEC adapt their cell-wide protein expression to environments with different carbon sources and other required nutrients. We used label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis to determine proteomes of five ExPEC strains purified from clinical blood cultures, and compared them with proteomes of reference uropathogenic E. coli strain 536 derived from blood culture and two chemically different solid media. We identified 2,883 proteins in total, and for 90% of the detected proteins described their relative quantitative levels based on LFQ intensity scores. Comparison of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures revealed significant differences in the levels of 32 proteins out of 1854 shared proteins. A majority of these proteins was associated with acquisition and utilization of metal ions, which are critical either for anaerobic (nickel) or aerobic (iron) respiration. ANOVA analysis of the relative quantitative levels of 1758 proteins shared between the strains identified 47 differentially expressed proteins, including proteins involved in vitamin B6 metabolism, cell motility and virulence. Comparison of strain 536 proteomes derived from blood cultures and solid media showed substantial variation in the relative quantitative levels of 200 proteins, which represented 11% of the common proteins between the conditions. Blood culture condition was characteristic by upregulation of anaerobic fermentative metabolism, cell motility and iron utilization. In a response to the growth on solid media increased levels of proteins functional in aerobic respiration, catabolism of various biochemicals obtained from the media and protection against environmental stresses. The study presents the largest coverage of ExPEC/UPEC proteome to date,with a detail account of ExPEC metabolism under three chemically different environments.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were first purified from clinical blood cultures or solid media, and the whole cell lysates were processed according to the Multiple Enzymes for sample Digestion – Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol. The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific. Waltham. MA) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 0.5 – 1 µg protein was loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 2 cm × 75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% FA (formic acid, vol/vol) with 2% ACN (vol/vol). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl /min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN or 90% ACN (vol/vol) respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5%B, 5-5.5 min 8%B, 5.5-140 min 8–35%B, 140-155 min 35–90%B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90 %B (155-170 min) and 5%B (175-195 min) respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240.000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1000 counts for MS/MS. and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed together in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). The Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework performed the MS and MS/MS spectra search against the following databases: reviewed E. coli proteins from the Swiss-Prot section of the UniProtKB database (28,659 entries, downloaded on the 7th October 2015), and predicted proteomes of three genome-sequenced UPEC strains (62-64): CTF073 (NCBI Reference Sequence NC_004431.1; 5,364 entries for chromosome), 536 (NC_008253.1; 4,619 entries for chromosome) and EC958 (NZ_HG941718.1, NZ_HG941719.1 and NZ_HG941720.1; 4,957 and 144 entries for chromosome and plasmids, respectively). Enzyme specificity was defined in group-specific parameters as either to trypsin or LysC, allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. The spectra of the LysC and tryptic fractions originating from the same replica were combined in MaxQuant. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/ glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications in addition to N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. The “match between runs” option was enabled to match spectral identifications across different samples. Normalized spectral proteins intensities (LFQ intensity) were derived by the MaxLFQ algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
One of the trademarks of extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli is adaptation of metabolism and basic physiology to diverse host sites. However, little is known how this common human pathogen adapts to permit survival and growth in blood. We used label-free quantitative proteomics to characterize five E. coli strains purified from clinical blood cultures associated with sepsis and urinary tract infections. Further comparison of proteome profiles of the clinical strains and a reference uropathogenic E. coli strain 536 cultivated in blood culture and on two different solid media distinguished cellular features altered in response to the pathogenically relevant condition. The analysis covered nearly 60% of the strains predicted proteomes, and included quantitative description based on label-free intensity scores for 90% of the detected proteins. Statistical comparison of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures revealed 32 differentially expressed proteins (1.5% of the shared proteins), mostly associated with acquisition and utilization of metal ions critical for anaerobic or aerobic respiration. Analysis of variance identified significantly altered amounts of 47 proteins shared by the strains (2.7%), including proteins involved in vitamin B6 metabolism and virulence. Although the proteomes derived from blood cultures were fairly similar for the investigated strains, quantitative proteomic comparison to the growth on solid media identified 200 proteins with substantially changed levels (11% of the shared proteins). Blood culture was characterized by up-regulation of anaerobic fermentative metabolism and multiple virulence traits, including cell motility and iron acquisition. In a response to the growth on solid media there were increased levels of proteins functional in aerobic respiration, catabolism of medium-specific carbon sources and protection against oxidative and osmotic stresses. These results demonstrate on the expressed proteome level that expression of extraintestinal virulence factors and overall cellular metabolism closely reflects specific growth conditions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002912.

### Keywords
Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Extraintestinal/ uropathogenic escherichia coli

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity Dept. of Clinical Science, University of Bergen The Laboratory Building, 5th floor N-5021 Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Veronika Kucharova

### Lab Head
Dr Harald G. Wiker
Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity Dept. of Clinical Science, University of Bergen The Laboratory Building, 5th floor N-5021 Bergen, Norway


