### Accession
PXD005907

### Title
Mass spectrometry identification of Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream form proteins that interacts with Ins(1,4,5)P3 and Ins(1,3,4,5)P4.

### Description
Mass spectrometry identification of Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream form proteins that interacts with Ins(1,4,5)P3 and Ins(1,3,4,5)P4.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of Trypanosoma brucei bloodform lysate with Ins(1,4,5)P3 or Ins(1,3,4,5)P4 conjugated to Agarose beads.Agarose beads without Ins(1,4,5)P3 and Ins(1,3,4,5)P4 was used as control.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant with default setting and Label free quantification set to true was used for peptide/protein identification

### Publication Abstract
Many cellular processes change during the Trypanosoma brucei life cycle as this parasite alternates between the mammalian host and tsetse fly vector. We show that the inositol phosphate pathway helps regulate these developmental changes. Knockdown of inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK), which phosphorylates Ins(1,4,5)P3 and Ins(1,3,4,5)P4, resulted in changes in bloodstream forms that are characteristic of insect stage procyclic forms. These changes include expression of the procyclic surface coat, up-regulation of RNA-binding proteins that we show to regulate stage-specific transcripts, and activation of oxidative phosphorylation with increased ATP production in bloodstream forms. These changes were accompanied by development of procyclic morphology, which also occurred by the expression of a catalytically inactive IPMK, implying that regulation of these processes entails IPMK activity. Proteins involved in signaling, protein synthesis and turnover, and metabolism were affinity-enriched with the IPMK substrate or product. Developmental changes associated with IPMK knockdown or catalytic inactivation reflected processes that are enriched with inositol phosphates, and chemical and genetic perturbation of these processes affected T. brucei development. Hence, IPMK helps regulate T. brucei development, perhaps by affecting inositol phosphate interactions with proteins of the regulatory network that controls energy metabolism and development.

### Keywords
5)p4, 3, 4, Trypanosoma brucei, Ins(1, 5)p3

### Affiliations
Center for Infectious Disease Research

### Submitter
Atashi Anupama

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kenneth D. Stuart
Center for Infectious Disease Research


