### Accession
PXD017444

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of CEP5 peptide treatment Arabidopsis

### Description
While CEP5 has been shown to play a role in shoot and root growth, possibly through interaction with the CEPR1/XIP1 and/or CEPR2 receptor kinase, very little is known about the downstream molecular effects. To gain insight in the changes downstream of CEP5, we quantified differences in phosphoproteomes of peptide treatment seedlings using label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Sterilized and vernalized Col-0 seeds were sow in liquid 1/2MS medium. 5 µM CEP5hyp and mut-CEP5hyp were added to 7-day-old seedlings. After 1 hour treatment, seedlings were harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen. One gram of fresh weight material was manually ground into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar. Proteins were extracted in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 0.1 M KCl, 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in Milli-Q water, and the appropriate amounts of the complete protease inhibitor mixture and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (both from Roche) were added. The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min at 2500 × g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected, and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1, and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform, and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 × g, and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2500 × g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and resuspended in 8M ureum in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM, respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30 °C in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using Nano drop. One milligram of the proteins was predigested with EndoLysC (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h, followed by a digestion with trypsin overnight (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade) after diluting sample 8 times with 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8). Both digestions occurring at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.  For phosphopeptide enrichment, The dried eluates were resuspended in 100 μL of loading solvent (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA) and incubated with 1 mg of MagReSyn Ti-IMAC microspheres (ReSyn Biosciences) for 20 min at room temperature. The microspheres were next washed once with wash solvent 1 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and two times with wash solvent 2 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes (80 μL) of a 1% NH4OH solution, followed immediately by acidification to pH ≤ 3 with formic acid. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were vacuum-dried and redissolved in 50 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the A. thaliana proteome database (TAIR10, containing 35386 entries; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1).For the quantitative phosphoproteome analyses, the ‘Phospho(STY)sites’ output files generated by the MaxQuant search were loaded into Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0).

### Publication Abstract
Peptides derived from non-functional precursors play important roles in various developmental processes, but also in (a)biotic stress signaling. Our (phospho)proteome-wide analyses of C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE 5 (CEP5)-mediated changes revealed an impact on abiotic stress-related processes. Drought has a dramatic impact on plant growth, development and reproduction, and the plant hormone auxin plays a role in drought responses. Our genetic, physiological, biochemical, and pharmacological results demonstrated that CEP5-mediated signaling is relevant for osmotic and drought stress tolerance in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, and that CEP5 specifically counteracts auxin effects. Specifically, we found that CEP5 signaling stabilizes AUX/IAA transcriptional repressors, suggesting the existence of a novel peptide-dependent control mechanism that tunes auxin signaling. These observations align with the recently described role of AUX/IAAs in stress tolerance and provide a novel role for CEP5 in osmotic and drought stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Whole seedling, Peptide

### Affiliations
VIB-Ugent center for Plant systems biology
lab

### Submitter
Shanshuo Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
lab


