### Accession
PXD027897

### Title
Proteomic characterization of hepatic expression signatures affected in ZHX2 liver conditional knockout mice

### Description
The liver has an exceptional capacity for regeneration which is crucial for maintaining liver function. Since transcriptional regulation of genes controlling metabolism and cell division is a hallmark of liver regeneration (LR), we investigated the role of Zinc-finger and homeboxes 2 (ZHX2), a transcription factor critical for regulating liver postnatal gene expression and hepatic lipid hemostasis, in LR. Our results show that hepatocyte-specific Zhx2 knockout (Zhx2-KOhep) enhances LR after 2/3 partial hepatectomy in mice. Proteomics assays revealed higher mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in Zhx2-KOhep mouse livers. Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and ATP generation assays confirmed the enhanced OXPHOS in Zhx2-KOhep mouse livers and human hepatocytes with ZHX2 knockdown.

### Sample Protocol
Two-thirds Partial Hepatectomy was performed in WT and ZHX2 Knock-out mice and samples were collected at different time points after the surgeries. Liver protein samples were obtained and Proteomic was performed. Weigh the appropriate amount of sample, transfer it into a 2mL centrifuge tube, add two steel beads, add 1XCocktail with appropriate amount of SDS L3 and EDTA, put on ice for 5 minutes, add DTT with the final concentration of 10mM; Use a grinder (frequency is 60HZ, time is 2 (minutes) to crush the tissue, centrifuge at 25,000g*4°C for 15 minutes, and take the supernatant; Add DTT with the final concentration of 10mM, water bath at 56°C for 1 hour. Add IAM at a final concentration of 55mM, and place in a dark room for 45 minutes; Add cold acetone to the protein solution at a ratio of 1:5, place in a refrigerator at -20°C for 30minutes, centrifuge at 25,000g*4°C for 15 minutes, and discard the supernatant; Air-dry precipitation, add lysis buffer without SDS L3, use a grinder (frequency is 60HZ, time is 2 minutes)  to  promote  protein  solubilization; Centrifuge  for  15  minutes  at  25,000g*4°C  to  take  the  supernatant,  and  the  supernatant  is  the protein  solution. Quality Control of Protein Extraction Bradford quantification. Each 10μ g of protein solution was mixed with an appropriate amount of loading buffer, heated at 95°C for 5 minutes, centrifuged at 25,000g for 5 minutes, and the supernatant was loaded into a well of a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel, 80V constant pressure electrophoresis for 30 minutes followd by 120V constant pressure electrophoresis for 120 minutes; After electrophoresis, the gel was stained and de-stained by a protein staining  instrument  for  1 minutes  and  the  images  were  scanned, then Proteolysis.

### Data Protocol
According to the number of samples, took out a certain amount of iTRAQ labeling reagent; After the reagents returned to room temperature, 50μ L of isopropanol was added to each tube of reagent, and vortexed and shaken at low speed; The peptide sample was dissolved in 0.5M TEAB and added to the corresponding iTRAQ labeling reagent. Different sample peptides used different iTRAQ labels; tood at room temperature for 2 hours. The Shimadzu LC-20AB liquid phase system Peptide Fractionation. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A. The peptides separated by liquid phase chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) mode detection.  The main parameters were set:  ion source voltage was set to 1.9kV, MS1 scanning range was 350~1,500m/z; resolution was set to 60,000; MS2 starting m/z was fixed at 100; resolution was 15,000.  The ion screening conditions for MS2 fragmentation: charge 2+ to 6+, and the top 30 parent ions with the peak intensity exceeding 10,000. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap.  The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 seconds.  The AGC was set to:  MS1 3E6, MS2 1E5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zhx2, Mouse, Liver, Proteome sequencing

### Affiliations
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo Medical College, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China
Cheeloo Medical College, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China

### Submitter
yan zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Chunhong Ma
Cheeloo Medical College, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China


