### Accession
PXD042295

### Title
Heart failure-induced cognitive dysfunction is mediated by intracellular Ca2+ leak through ryanodine receptor type 2.

### Description
Cognitive dysfunction (CD) in heart failure (HF) adversely affects treatment compliance and quality of life. Although, ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) has been linked to cardiac muscle dysfunction, its role in CD remains unclear. Here, we show in hippocampal neurons from patients and mice with HF that the ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2)/intracellular Ca 2+ release channels were post-translationally modified (PTM) and leaky. RyR2 PTM was caused by hyper-adrenergic stress and activation of the transforming growth factor (TGF-β) pathway. HF mice treated with either a RyR2 stabilizer drug (S107), beta-blocker (propranolol) or TGF-β inhibitor (SD-208), or mice insensitive RyR2 Ca 2+ leak (RyR2-S2808A), were protected against HF-induced CD. Taken together, we propose that HF is a systemic illness that include cardiogenic dementia, and intracellular Ca 2+ leak is a common effector in multiple components of HF.

### Sample Protocol
For global quantitative proteomics of fresh frozen hippocampal samples from MI and SHAM mice, diaPASEF1 (Data independent acquisition) based proteomics was used. In brief, frozen mouse hippocampal tissues were lysed by bead-beating in lysis buffer2 (2% SDS, 1% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, and protease inhibitors) and boiled for 10 min at 95°C, 1500 rpm. Protein reduction and alkylation of cysteines was performed with 10mM TCEP and 40mM CAA at 45°C for 10 min, followed by sonication in a water bath and then cooled down to room temperature. Cleared lysate was precipitated with the acetone-salt method, as previously described, and precipitated pellets were resuspended in SDC buffer ( 1% SDC, and 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5). Protein digestion was processed overnight by adding LysC and trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of protein) at 37° C and 1400 rpm. Peptides were acidified by adding 1% TFA, vortexed, and subjected to StageTip clean-up via SDB-RPS. Peptides were loaded on one 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Peptides were washed two times with 200 µl 1% TFA 99% ethyl acetate followed 200 µl 0.2% TFA/5%ACN in centrifuge at 3000 rpm, followed by elution with 60 µl of 1% Ammonia, 50% ACN into Eppendorf tubes and dried at 45°C in a SpeedVac centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in 10 μl of LC buffer (3% ACN/0.1% FA). Peptide concentrations were determined using NanoDrop and 200 ng of each sample were used for PASEF and diaPASEF analysis on timsTOFPro. For spectral library generation, 10 μg of each digested tissue sample was pooled and dried in speedVac. Pooled dried peptides were resuspended in 100 μl of 1% TFA, pH 2 and subjected to fractionation with mixed mode SDB-SCX StageTip. Peptides were fractionated into 9 fractions; each fractionated peptide was in dissolved in 10 µl of (3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid) and injected using PASEF method. Peptides were separated within 120 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (25 cm x 75µm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks). Mobile phases A and B were with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2 to 23% within 90 min, followed by an increase to 35% within 10 min, and a further increase to 80% before re-equilibration. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V·s/cm2, End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 200°C, PASEF settings: 10 MSMS Frames (1.16 seconds duty cycle), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 59eV.  A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions. diaPASEF experiment was acquired at defined 32 × 25 Th isolation windows from m/z 400 to 1,200. To adapt the MS1 cycle time in diaPASEF, we set the repetitions to 2 in the 16-scan diaPASEF scheme and to 4 in the 4-scan diaPASEF scheme in these experiments. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0=1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0=0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
To generate the sample specific spectral libraries, the acquired PASEF raw files and diaPASEF raw files were searched with UniProt mouse database in Pulsar search engine using the Hybrid spectral library generation functionality of Spectromine with default settings. The raw intensities for the proteins were calculated by summation of the peptide intensities. diaPASEF data were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X, a mass spectrometer vendor software independent from Biognosys. The default settings were used for targeted analysis of diaPASEF data in Spectronaut, except the decoy generation was set to mutated. The false discovery rate (FDR) will be estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and at 1% at protein level. Results obtained from Spectronaut were further analyzed using the Spectronaut statistical package.  Significantly changed protein abundance was determined by unpaired t-test with a threshold for significance of p <0.05 (permutation-based FDR correction), fold-change ≥1.5, unique peptides ≥2. The significantly changed proteins between MI and SHAM hippocampus were processed for Volcano plot using R ggplot2 package and hierarchical clustering using TBtools software. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for the DEGs were processed by R clusterProfiler package. The potential biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC), molecular functions (MF), and pathways among the DEGs were shown in functional enrichment analysis results. The cut-off value for significant GO and KEGG results was adjusted p value <0.05. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed to identify the statistically significant gene sets in the comparison between MI and SHAM. The gene list was pre-ranked based on fold change before enrichment analysis. GO enrichment analysis was performed through gseGO function in clusterProfiler package. The adjusted p-value<0.05 was set as the cut-off criteria. KEGG enrichment analysis was conducted by the GSEA software obtained from the Broad Institute (http://www.broad.mit.edu/GSEA). The significantly enriched pathways were defined by nominal |NES|>1, NOM p-value <0.05, and FDR q-value <0.25.

### Publication Abstract
Cognitive dysfunction (CD) in heart failure (HF) adversely affects treatment compliance and quality of life. Although ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) has been linked to cardiac muscle dysfunction, its role in CD in HF remains unclear. Here, we show in hippocampal neurons from individuals and mice with HF that the RyR2/intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> release channels were subjected to post-translational modification (PTM) and were leaky. RyR2 PTM included protein kinase A phosphorylation, oxidation, nitrosylation and depletion of the stabilizing subunit calstabin2. RyR2 PTM was caused by hyper-adrenergic signaling and activation of the transforming growth factor-beta pathway. HF mice treated with a RyR2 stabilizer drug (S107), beta blocker (propranolol) or transforming growth factor-beta inhibitor (SD-208), or genetically engineered mice resistant to RyR2 Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak (RyR2-p.Ser2808Ala), were protected against HF-induced CD. Taken together, we propose that HF is a systemic illness driven by intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak that includes cardiogenic dementia.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Calcium, Ryanodine receptor, Cognitive dysfunction

### Affiliations
Columbia University Medical center
Dept Physiology/CellBiophysics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY   10032

### Submitter
Rajesh Soni

### Lab Head
Dr Haikel Dridi
Dept Physiology/CellBiophysics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY   10032


