### Accession
PXD036748

### Title
Towards optimised extracellular vesicle proteomics from cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
The proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can reveal novel biomarkers for diseases of the brain. Here, we validate an ultrafiltration combined with size-exclusion chromatography (UF-SEC) method for isolation of EVs from canine CSF and probed the effect of starting volume for the EV proteomics profile. Using proteomics, SEC fractions 3-5 were compared and enrichment of EV markers in fraction 3 was detected, whereas fractions 4-5 contained more apolipoproteins. Lastly, we compared starting volumes of pooled CSF (6ml, 3ml, 1ml, and 0.5ml) to evaluate the effect on the proteomic profile. A total of 180 proteins was shared regardless of the starting volume. With a 0.5ml starting volume, 743 ± 77 or 345 ± 88 proteins were identified depending on the MaxQuant settings (with and without ‘match between runs’ active). The results confirm that UF-SEC effectively isolates CSF EVs and that EV proteomic analysis can be performed from 0.5ml of canine CSF.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were concentrated by centrifugation in 21°C using Amicon® Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Unit with 100kDa molecular weight cut-off (UFC810024, Merck Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, United States). After concentration, the final volume of each sample was adjusted to 130μl with PBS. qEV single 70nm columns (Izon, Christchurch, New Zealand) were rinsed with a minimum of 10ml of PBS and 130μl of the concentrated sample was loaded into the column. Nine 500μl fractions were collected. EV samples were lysed, proteins precipitated and digested into peptides with trypsin using a previously published protocol for protein aggregation capture (Batth et al. 2019). In addition to EVs (6ml, 3ml, 1ml, 0.5ml starting volumes) and SEC fractions 4-5 (6ml starting volume), also intact and depleted CSF samples were analysed with LC-MS/MS. Intact CSF samples were prepared using the same protocol used with EVs. For depletion of the most abundant proteins from CSF ProteoSpin Abundant Serum Protein depletion kit (Norgen Biotek) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions, and proteins were in-solution digested with trypsin after depletion. The resulting tryptic peptides were purified using home-made C18 Stage tips-columns followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis with 60 min separation gradient using nanoElute coupled to timsTOF fleX (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification the data from LC-MS/MS was analysed by MaxQuant ver 2.0.1.0 against dog (Canis lupus) database downloaded from Uniprot. MaxQuant searches were done with and without “match between runs” active.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can reveal novel biomarkers for diseases of the brain. Here, we validate an ultrafiltration combined with size-exclusion chromatography (UF-SEC) method for isolation of EVs from canine CSF and probe the effect of starting volume on the EV proteomics profile. First, we performed a literature review of CSF EV articles to define the current state of art, discovering a need for basic characterisation of CSF EVs. Secondly, we isolated EVs from CSF by UF-SEC and characterised the SEC fractions by protein amount, particle count, transmission electron microscopy, and immunoblotting. Data are presented as mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;standard deviation. Using proteomics, SEC fractions 3-5 were compared and enrichment of EV markers in fraction 3 was detected, whereas fractions 4-5 contained more apolipoproteins. Lastly, we compared starting volumes of pooled CSF (6&#xa0;ml, 3&#xa0;ml, 1&#xa0;ml, and 0.5&#xa0;ml) to evaluate the effect on the proteomic profile. Even with a 0.5&#xa0;ml starting volume, 743&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;77 or 345&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;88 proteins were identified depending on whether 'matches between runs' was active in MaxQuant. The results confirm that UF-SEC effectively isolates CSF EVs and that EV proteomic analysis can be performed from 0.5&#xa0;ml of canine CSF.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ultrafiltration combined with size-exclusion chromatography, Extracellular vesicles, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


