### Accession
PXD032723

### Title
Chronic inflammatory arthritis drives systemic changes in circadian energy metabolism

### Description
Chronic inflammation underpins many human diseases. The morbidity and mortality of chronic inflammation is often mediated through metabolic dysfunction. Inflammatory and metabolic processes vary through circadian time, suggesting an important temporal crosstalk between these systems. Using an established mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis, here we show thatchronic inflammatory arthritis results in rhythmic joint inflammation and drives major changes in muscle and liver energy metabolism and rhythmic gene expression. Transcriptional and phosphoproteomic analyses reveal alteration in lipid metabolism and mitochondrial function associated with increased EGFR-JAK11 STAT3 signalling. Metabolomic analyses confirmed rhythmic metabolic rewiring with impaired β-oxidation and lipid handling, and revealed a pronounced shunt towards sphingolipid and ceramide accumulation. The arthritis-related production of ceramides was most pronounced during the day, the time of peak inflammation and increased reliance on fatty acid oxidation. Thus, our data demonstrate that localised joint inflammation drives a time-of-day dependent build-up of bioactive lipid species driven by rhythmic inflammation and altered EGFR-STAT signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoenrichment Phosphoenrichment was done on an Agilent Bravo AssayMAP robot using Fe(III)-NTA cartridges with slight adaptations. Cartridges were primed in ACN with 0.1% TFA and equilibrated with 80% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded onto the cartridges followed by a wash with 80% ACN 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% NH3 and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge.  Mass spectrometry Peptides were injected into a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system comprised of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC and a Thermo Fusion Lumos. Peptides were separated on a 50-cm-long EasySpray column (ES803; Thermo Fisher) with a 75-μm inner diameter and a 60 minute gradient of 2 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Data was acquired with the APD peak picking algorithm at a resolution of 120,000 and AGC target of 4e5 ions for a maximum injection time of 50 ms for MS1 spectra. The most abundant peaks were fragmented after isolation with a mass window of 1.6 Th with normalized collision energy 28% (HCD). MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid scan mode for a maximum injection time of 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed in Maxquant. Identified phosphosites (phospho(STY).txt), were initially viewed and filtered in using the Perseus Framework. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were removed. Phosphosites were filtered using a localisation probability of x>0.75, log2 transformed and further filtered to remove missing values, where sites with fewer than 15 valid (not N/A) values in a group (either CIA or naïve) were excluded. Missing values were imputed using random numbers drawn from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Ion intensities of identified phosphopeptides were normalized between each sample using trimmed means of M-values function from the edgeR (v3.30.3) R package. Differential phosphorylation analyses between groups were conducted using edgeR using a 5% FDR. Protein kinases analysis was performed using kinswingR package, using the curated kinase substrate sequences mouse dataset from PhosphoSitePlus. Phosphopeptide differential rhythmicity analysis was performed using compareRhythms (v0.99.0) in the same way as previously described for the RNA-seq data.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic inflammation underpins many human diseases. Morbidity and mortality associated with chronic inflammation are often mediated through metabolic dysfunction. Inflammatory and metabolic processes vary through circadian time, suggesting an important temporal crosstalk between these systems. Using an established mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis, we show that chronic inflammatory arthritis results in rhythmic joint inflammation and drives major changes in muscle and liver energy metabolism and rhythmic gene expression. Transcriptional and phosphoproteomic analyses revealed alterations in lipid metabolism and mitochondrial function associated with increased EGFR-JAK-STAT3 signaling. Metabolomic analyses confirmed rhythmic metabolic rewiring with impaired &#x3b2;-oxidation and lipid handling and revealed a pronounced shunt toward sphingolipid and ceramide accumulation. The arthritis-related production of ceramides was most pronounced during the day, which is the time of peak inflammation and increased reliance on fatty acid oxidation. Thus, our data demonstrate that localized joint inflammation drives a time-of-day&#x2013;dependent build-up of bioactive lipid species driven by rhythmic inflammation and altered EGFR-STAT signaling.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Mitochondria, Rheumatoid arthritis, Ceramide, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford


