### Accession
PXD023660

### Title
The injury environment critically influences the brain-wide input connectome of transplanted neurons

### Description
Cell transplantation is a promising approach for reconstruction of neuronal circuits after brain damage. Transplanted neurons integrate with remarkable specificity into circuitries of the mouse cerebral cortex affected by neuronal ablation. However, it remains unclear how neurons perform in a local environment undergoing reactive gliosis, inflammation, macrophage infiltration and scar formation, as in brain trauma. To elucidate this, we transplanted cells from the embryonic murine cerebral cortex into stab-injured, inflamed-only, or intact cortex of adult mice. Brain-wide quantitative connectomics unraveled graft inputs from correct regions across the brain in all conditions, with pronounced quantitative differences: scarce in intact or inflamed brain, versus exuberant after trauma. In the latter, excessive synapse pruning follows the initial overshoot of connectivity resulting in only a few input connections left. Proteomic profiling identifies candidate molecules involved in the synaptic yield, a pivotal parameter to tailor for functional restoration of neuronal circuits.

### Sample Protocol
3-4 months old male and female C57BL/6J mice (n=10 intact controls, n=10 SW-injured, n=5 LPS injected) were sacrificed through cervical dislocation, brains were removed and placed into cold PBS. Biopsy punches (2.5 mm diameter) of the visual cortex of both hemispheres were dissected whereas meninges and white matter were carefully taken off. The contralateral (uninjured) cortices of the SW-injured brains were not considered for proteome analysis (intact: n=20, SW: n=10, LPS: n=10). Samples were placed into low-protein binding Eppendorf tubes, frozen on dry ice, and stored at - 80 °C until further processing. Tissue samples were lysed in NP40 buffer (1% NP40 in 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) in a Precellys homogenizator (VWR) and 10 ?g total protein per sample were proteolyzed with Lys-C and trypsin using a modified FASP procedure (Grosche et al., 2016).  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). Tryptic peptides were accumulated on a nano trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 ?m, 100 Å, 300 ?m inner diameter (i.d.) × 5 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 ?l/min followed by separation by reversed phase chromatography (?PAC™ column, 200 cm length, with pillar array backbone at interpillar distance of 2.5 ?m, PharmaFluidics) using a non-linear gradient for 240 minutes from 3 to 42% buffer B (acetonitrile [v/v]/0.1% formic acid [v/v] in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile [v/v]/0.1% formic acid [v/v] in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target of 3 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, at a range of 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The individual raw-files were loaded to the Proteome discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo scientific) allowing for peptide identification and label-free quantification using the Minora node. Searches were performed using Sequest HT as search engine in the Swiss Prot database, taxonomy mouse (17038 sequences) with the following search settings: 10 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment tolerance, full tryptic specificity, two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine allowed as variable modifications, as well as oxidation of methionine and Met-loss combined with acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein. The Percolator node was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% (high confidence). Protein groups were additionally filtered for an identification FDR <5% (target/decoy concatenated search validation). Peak intensities (at RT apex) of all allocated unique peptides were used for pairwise ratio calculations. A background-based t-test was employed for calculation of statistical significance of the reported ratios. Data was filtered to ensure direct identifications (not based on match-between run) in at least 30% of samples within at least one experimental group. For data visualization, volcano plots with log2 abundance ratio of sample replicates of SW and LPS condition versus intact control with corresponding log10 p-values were created using Microsoft Excel. Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed by running significantly differentially expressed up- or downregulated proteins against a background list of all detected proteins using the webserver GOrilla (http://cbl-gorilla.cs.technion.ac.il/; Eden et al., 2009). A heatmap of all significantly regulated proteins of the SW condition was created with GraphPad Prism Version 8.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cell transplantation is a promising approach for the reconstruction of neuronal circuits after brain damage. Transplanted neurons integrate with remarkable specificity into circuitries of the mouse cerebral cortex affected by neuronal ablation. However, it remains unclear how neurons perform in a local environment undergoing reactive gliosis, inflammation, macrophage infiltration, and scar formation, as in traumatic brain injury (TBI). To elucidate this, we transplanted cells from the embryonic mouse cerebral cortex into TBI-injured, inflamed-only, or intact cortex of adult mice. Brain-wide quantitative monosynaptic rabies virus (RABV) tracing unraveled graft inputs from correct regions across the brain in all conditions, with pronounced quantitative differences: scarce in intact and inflamed brain versus exuberant after TBI. In the latter, the initial overshoot is followed by pruning, with only a few input neurons persisting at 3 months. Proteomic profiling identifies candidate molecules for regulation of the synaptic yield, a pivotal parameter to tailor for functional restoration of neuronal circuits.

### Keywords
Cell therapy, Injury proteome, Neuronal replacement, Synaptic yield, Inflammation, Transplantation, Circuit mapping

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München


