### Accession
PXD028921

### Title
Tryptophan depletion provokes the production and presentation of in-frame tryptophan to phenylalanine substitutions

### Description
Activated T cells secrete interferon-gamma (IFN) that triggers an intra-cellular tryptophan shortage through the activation of the Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) enzyme.  Surprisingly, we here show that despite tryptophan depletion, in-frame protein synthesis bypassing tryptophan codons continues. Using mass spectrometry, we identified tryptophan to phenylalanine (W>F) substitution as the major event that facilitates in-frame protein synthesis in IFN-treated and tryptophan-depleted cells. We validated their expression using in vitro reporter assays, and pinpoint tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (WARS1) as the candidate gene that accounts for this event. We named these mRNA-translation-driven aberrations ‘substitutants’ to distinguish them from somatic genetic variants. To uncover their biological relevance, we interrogated cancer proteomes and phosphoproteomes of breast, lung and kidney cancers. Interestingly, we specifically identified a high level of tryptic peptides containing W>F substitutants with strong association to IDO1 expression, T cell activity, p53 mutations, and oncogenic MAPK signaling, indicating a role of infiltrating T cells in their production and highlighting cancer relevance. We further show that substitutants can impair protein function and be processed and presented at the cell surface to elicit immune cell recognition. Indeed, immunopeptidomics data from of colorectal-cancer organoids and glioblastoma cell lines revealed a large number of W>F substitutant-peptides being presented on HLA class I molecules following IFN treatment. Thus, W>F substitutants are a novel form of non-genetic mutations induced by tumor-infiltrating T cells with potential impact on gene function and on the repertoire of neopeptides presented by cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of each experiment intended for V5-tag pulldown, cells were treated with 10 µM MG-132 for 4 hours and subsequently collected by trypsinization and centrifugation. Next, cells were lysed in 300 µL ELB lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 125 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) Tween-20 and 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet P40 Substitute. Next, 3 µL mouse anti-V5 antibody solution (1.0 mg/mL, Invitrogen) was added to the lysate and the samples were incubated on a rotating wheel at 4°C overnight. Pulldowns were performed with Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. All pulled down protein was eluted in 30 µL of 1x Laemmli buffer. Next, the eluates were run briefly into a 4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris gel (Bio-Rad) and short, Coomassie-stained gel lanes were excised for each sample. Proteins were reduced with 6.5 mM DTT, alkylated with 54 mM iodoacetamide and digested in-gel with trypsin (Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega, 3 ng/μL) overnight at 37°C. Extracted peptides were vacuum dried, reconstituted in 10% formic acid and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system. Peptides were loaded directly on the analytical column and separated in a 90-minutes gradient containing a non-linear increase from 5% to 26% solvent B.  For 2D-LC-MS/MS proteomics, MD55A3 and MCF10A expressing the V5-ATF4(1-63)-tGFP+1 reporter were used. On the first day, cells were seeded in 15cm dishes at around 60% confluency. The next day, cells were rinsed with PBS and were exposed to the appropriate treatment (IFNy or Tryptophan-free medium). As control, Tryptophan-free medium was supplemented with 5g/mL L-tryptophan (Sigma). After 48h of treatment, 10M MG-132 was added directly in the plates and cells were incubated for 4h at 37°C. Then, cells were washed once with PBS and harvested by trypsinization and centrifugation. Cell pellets were washed once with PBS, after which the cell pellet was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Then, the samples were reduced and alkylated in heated guanidine (GuHCl) lysis buffer as described32. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, proteins were digested twice (4h and overnight) with trypsin (Sigma) at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50. Digestion was quenched by the addition of TFA (final concentration 1%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). Samples were vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until fractionation. Dried digests were subjected to basic reversed-phase (HpH-RP) high-performance liquid chromatography for offline peptide fractionation. 250 μg peptides were reconstituted in 95% 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH, solvent A)/5% (90% acetonitrile (ACN)/10mM NH4OH, solvent B) and loaded onto a Phenomenex Kinetex EVO C18 analytical column (150 mm x 2.1 mm, particle size 5 μm, 100 Å pores) coupled to an Agilent 1260 HPLC system equipped with a fraction collector. Peptides were eluted at a constant flow of 100 μL/min in a 90-minute gradient containing a nonlinear increase from 5-30% solvent B. Fractions were collected and concatenated to 24 fractions per sample replicate. All fractions were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLC1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 2h-gradient containing a linear increase from 8-32% solvent B. MS settings were as follows: full MS scans (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3 × 106 charges and max injection time of 45 ms. Loop count was set to 20 and only precursors with charge state 2-7 were sampled for MS2 using 15,000 resolution, MS2 isolation window of 1.4 m/z, 1 × 105 AGC target, a max injection time of 22 ms and a normalized collision energy of 26. For validation experiments with PRM, peptides were ordered from ThermoFisher Scientific as crude (PePotec grade 3) with amino acid where heavy stable isotope atoms were incorporated for parallel reaction monitoring. Synthetic peptides were spiked into the peptidomic samples at a concentration of 1pmol/ul. The mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF-X) was operated at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z = 200) for the MS1 full scan, with an ion injection time of 80 ms, AGC of 3e6 and scanning a mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z. Each peptide was isolated with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z prior to ion activation by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD, NCE = 27). Targeted MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z = 200) with 80 ms ion injection time and an AGC of 5e5.

### Data Protocol
For the IP proteomics experiments, four search DBs were generated. The first DB consisted of the original ATF4 in-frame protein sequence, the ATF4 sequence until W93 and frame-shifted (+1) at W-codon until the first stop codon, the in-frame ATF4 protein sequence with the tryptophan replaced by every other amino acid, and the ATF4 protein sequences where the tryptophan codon is skipped. The second DB consisted of the tryptic peptide spanning the tryptophan codon in the in-frame ATF4 sequence, and was generated by replacing every amino acid in the sequence to every other possible amino acid.  The third DB was generated by replacing every phenylalanine in the in-frame ATF4 sequence to every other amino acid. Finally, the fourth DB was generated by replacing every tyrosine in the in-frame ATF4 sequence to every other amino acid. Searching of IP-Mass-spec Data against the DBs was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) 30. The parameters of the search were optimized for increasing sensitivity as described previously (Bartok et al., Nature 2021). For 2D-LC-MS/MS proteome data analysis, the human proteome database was downloaded from SWISSPROT. All instances of tryptophan were replaced by other amino acids in a separated DB (FASTA file).Proteome data was searched against the DB in MaxQuant (1.6.0.16), with parameters of the search optimized for increasing sensitivity After the search, only the tryptic peptides spanning the endogenous tryptophan codon were retained and used for further analysis. Further filtering was done to keep only the reproducibly detected peptides.  The PRM data of the validation experiment were processed and analyzed as previously described (REF PMID: 32157095) by Skyline (v4.1.0.18169) (ref PMID: 20147306). Ion mass tolerance of 0.05 m/z was used to extract fragment ion chromatograms and peak lists for the heavy-labelled peptides and endogenous light counterparts were extracted. MS/MS matching assessment was performed by pLabel (v2.4.0.8, pFind studio, Sci. Ac.) and Skyline (MacCoss Lab, V 21.1.0.146).

### Publication Abstract
Activated T cells secrete interferon-&#x3b3;, which triggers intracellular tryptophan shortage by upregulating the indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) enzyme<sup>1-4</sup>. Here we show that despite tryptophan depletion, in-frame protein synthesis continues across tryptophan codons. We identified tryptophan-to-phenylalanine codon reassignment (W&gt;F) as the major event facilitating this process, and pinpointed tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (WARS1) as its source. We call these W&gt;F peptides 'substitutants' to distinguish them from genetically encoded mutants. Using large-scale proteomics analyses, we demonstrate W&gt;F substitutants to be highly abundant in multiple cancer types. W&gt;F substitutants were enriched in tumours relative to matching adjacent normal tissues, and were associated with increased IDO1 expression, oncogenic signalling and the tumour-immune microenvironment. Functionally, W&gt;F substitutants can impair protein activity, but also expand the landscape of antigens presented at the cell surface to activate T cell responses. Thus, substitutants are generated by an alternative decoding mechanism with potential effects on gene function and tumour immunoreactivity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tryptophan depletion, Cancer, Amino acid substitution

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
Division of Oncogenomics, Oncode institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Reuven Agami
Division of Oncogenomics, Oncode institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


