### Accession
PXD019587

### Title
Temporal modulation of the NF-kB network in response to different types of DNA damage ETOPOSIDE C4PR_LIV

### Description
Different types of DNA damage can initiate phosphorylation-mediated signalling cascades that result in stimulus specific pro- or anti-apoptotic cellular responses. Amongst its many roles, the NF-κB transcription factor RelA is central to the DNA damage response pathway. Yet, understanding of the co-ordinated signalling mechanisms that result in these different DNA damaging agents inducing specific cellular outcomes through RelA remains unclear.  Here, we examine the temporal effects of exposure of U2OS cells to either etoposide (ETO) or hydroxyurea (HU) on the phosphorylation status of RelA and its protein binding partners, using label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics. Although there were relatively few stimulus specific differences overall in the phosphorylated RelA interactome in response to either DNA damaging agent, we observed subtle, but significant changes in the phosphorylation states of the RelA bound proteins as a function of both the type of and duration of the DNA damaging agent used. The DNA double strand break (DSB) inducing ETO invoked more rapid, sustained responses than HU, with regulated targets primarily involved in transcription, cell division and (unsurprisingly) DSB repair. Kinase substrate prediction of confident, differentially regulated phosphosites suggests possible roles for CDK1 and MAPK3/ERK1 signaling, in addition to the known roles of ATM/ATR. In contrast, HU-induced replicative stress mediated more temporally dynamic regulation, with phosphoprotein components of the RelA network having known roles in rRNA/mRNA processing and translational initiation, many of which contained a 14-3-3ε binding motif. Our data thus point to differential regulation of key cellular processes and the involvement of unique signalling pathways in modulating DNA damage-specific functions of RelA.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of HA-RelA using Anti-HA magnetic beads Pierce™ Anti-HA Magnetic Beads were washed with 0.05% (v/v) TBST and then with lysis buffer prior to addition of 4 mg cleared cell lysate (at a ratio of beads to protein of 1:2000). Beads and lysate were incubated overnight using an end-over-end rotor at 4°C. Beads were then collected using a magnetic stand and washed three times with 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40, 1 mM EGTA, 6 mM EDTA, 6 mM DTT, 0.5 M NaCl, 1 x PhosSTOP™ phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche), 1 x cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche); one time with HPLC grade water and finally, three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). To recover the immunoprecipitated material, the beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 25 mM AMBIC to which 6 μL of a 1% (w/v) solution of RapiGest (Waters, UK) in 25 mM AMBIC was added. Samples were then heated to 80 °C for 10 min. Supernatants containing the eluted proteins were recovered using a magnetic stand and used for in-solution digestion.  In-solution digestion and TiO2-based enrichment of phosphorylated peptides Samples were digested with trypsin and subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment as previously described. In brief, disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 4 mM (10 min, 60 °C with gentle agitation). Samples were cooled to room temperature and free cysteines alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT), prior to addition of DTT (to 7 mM final) to quench excess iodoacetamide. Samples were digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein ratio) overnight at 37°C with light agitation (450 rpm on a Eppendorf thermomixer). Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubated for 45 min at 37°C. RapiGest insoluble hydrolysis products were removed by centrifugation (13 000 x g, 15 min, 4°C). Digested samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolubilized in TiO2 loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid) to achieve a peptide concentration of 1 μg/μL and sonicated for 10 min. TiO2 beads (50 μg/μL in loading buffer) were mixed at 1400 rpm (with intermittent vortexing to prevent the beads from pelleting) with the resuspended peptides (bead:protein ratio of 5:1) for 20 min at RT. TiO2 beads were recovered by centrifugation (2000 x g, 1 min) and washed successively for 10 min (1400 rpm) with 150 μL of loading buffer, 80% acetonitrile 1% TFA, then 10% acetonitrile, 0.2% TFA. Prior to elution, beads with bound phosphopeptides were dried to completion by vacuum centrifugation. Bound phosphopeptides were then eluted by addition of 100uL of 1% ammonium hydroxide and then with 100uL of 5% ammonium hydroxide. Both elutions were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis Phosphopeptide enriched samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead) coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 4 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) FA, and resolved on an analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% formic acid), 3% B (99.9%  ACN 0.1%  formic acid) to 60% A, 40% B over 80 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition employed a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (MS1) with  AGC set to 3e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. The 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 60,000 resolution scan (AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms) with an ion selection window of 1.2 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 29. A 20 sec dynamic exclusion window was used to minimise repeated selection of peptides for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis The raw LC-MS/MS files were aligned in Progenesis QI for Proteomics label-free analysis software. At this stage in the process no normalisation was performed and an aggregate file containing raw abundances from all the peaks across all runs was exported from Progenesis. Further data processing was then performed in R using a VSN normalisation strategy (…to be continued…) The peptide list was exported into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and searched through MASCOT against the Uniprot Human protein database (with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, serine, threonine, tyrosine and histidine phosphorylation set as a variable mod). ptmRS was used to estimate phosphosite localisation probability. Peptide lists were imported back into Progenesis and assigned to features. Peptide matches in MASCOT were set to a 1% false discovery rate.  Unless otherwise described, all plots were generated in R.  Network analysis All proteins with quantified phosphopeptides in 2 or more repeats of any condition were combined for network analysis of RelA-associated proteins. Common contaminants that bind non-specifically in IP experiments were removed by filtering protein accessions against a CRAPome database (https://www.crapome.org) [28] of contaminants observed with Streptactin-HA IPs from U2OS cells (CC405, CC406 and CC410). All proteins not present in the contaminant database were entered into STRING (https://string-db.org, v11.0) to generate a network of protein associations [29]. The generated network was filtered to contain only high confidence associations (interaction score ≥0.7) with experimental or database evidence only. Proteins with no high confidence interactions were removed from the network and the remaining nodes were clustered using the Kmeans algorithm (K=9). The resulting network was imported into Cytoscape [30] with nodes recoloured, grouped into the top 9 Kmeans clusters and node shapes for proteins unique to HU or ETO changed to squares or diamonds respectively. For the top 9 Kmeans clusters, nodes corresponding to proteins with differentially regulated phosphopeptides in response to either HU, ETO or both treatments, with respect to the untreated control, were outlined in red, blue or black respectively.  Functional enrichment analysis All functional enrichment analysis was performed using the functional annotation tool in DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov, v6.8) against a background of the human proteome [31,32]. For biological process GO term pie charts, all significantly enriched (Benjamini adj.p-value ≤ 0.05) GO biological process terms, with associated Benjamini adj.p-values, were summarised using REVIGO [33] then visualised with the CirGO Python package [34]. Bubble plots including significantly enriched (Benjamini adj.p-value ≤ 0.05) GO biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), cellular component (CC) and overrepresented keywords, filtered to remove duplicate terms, were plotted in R.   Kinase Prediction/Sequence motif analysis Kinase-substrate prediction for all differentially regulated (t-test, p ≤ 0.05) phosphosites was performed using NetPhorest [35,36]. Briefly, for all ‘class I’ phosphorylation sites (ptmRS ≥0.75) protein identifiers together with the position of the phosphorylated residue were submitted to NetPhorest using the high-throughput web interface, with the top scoring prediction for each site reported. Kinase predictions were summarised for all up- or down-regulated phosphosites with the resulting data plotted in R. For sequence motif analysis, sequence windows encompassing 7 amino acids either side of the phosphorylated residue were extracted for all phosphosites significantly up- or down- regulated (t-test, p ≤ 0.05) with respect to the untreated control. Consensus sequence motifs were generated with iceLogo v1.2 [37] against a background of the precompiled human Swiss-Prot composition using percent difference as the scoring system and a p-value cut-off of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Different types of DNA damage can initiate phosphorylation-mediated signalling cascades that result in stimulus specific pro- or anti-apoptotic cellular responses. Amongst its many roles, the NF-&#x3ba;B transcription factor RelA is central to these DNA damage response pathways. However, we still lack understanding of the co-ordinated signalling mechanisms that permit different DNA damaging agents to induce distinct cellular outcomes through RelA. Here, we use label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics to examine the temporal effects of exposure of U2OS cells to either etoposide (ETO) or hydroxyurea (HU) by monitoring the phosphorylation status of RelA and its protein binding partners. Although few stimulus-specific differences were identified in the constituents of phosphorylated RelA interactome after exposure to these DNA damaging agents, we observed subtle, but significant, changes in their phosphorylation states, as a function of both type and duration of treatment. The DNA double strand break (DSB)-inducing ETO invoked more rapid, sustained responses than HU, with regulated targets primarily involved in transcription, cell division and canonical DSB repair. Kinase substrate prediction of ETO-regulated phosphosites suggest abrogation of CDK and ERK1 signalling, in addition to the known induction of ATM/ATR. In contrast, HU-induced replicative stress mediated temporally dynamic regulation, with phosphorylated RelA binding partners having roles in rRNA/mRNA processing and translational initiation, many of which contained a 14-3-3&#x3b5; binding motif, and were putative substrates of the dual specificity kinase CLK1. Our data thus point to differential regulation of key cellular processes and the involvement of distinct signalling pathways in modulating DNA damage-specific functions of RelA.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; etoposide; hydroxyurea, Dna damage; rela; p65; nf-κb; phosphorylation; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
Director, Centre for Proteome Research Department of Biochemistry & Systems Biology Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street, Liverpool  L69 7ZB +44 151 795 4424

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Claire Eyers
Director, Centre for Proteome Research Department of Biochemistry & Systems Biology Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street, Liverpool  L69 7ZB +44 151 795 4424


