### Accession
PXD010846

### Title
A dynamic view of the proteomic landscape during differentiation of ReNcell VM cells, an immortalized human neural progenitor line

### Description
The immortalized human ReNcell VM cell line represents a reproducible and easy-to-propagate cell culture system for studying the differentiation of neural progenitors. To better characterize the starting line and its differentiation, we assessed protein and phospho-protein levels over a two-week period during which ReNcell progenitors differentiated into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. Five of the datasets measured protein levels or states of phosphorylation based on tandem-mass-tag (TMT) mass spectrometry. Proteomic analysis revealed reproducible changes in pathways responsible for cytoskeletal rearrangement, cell phase transitions, neuronal migration, glial differentiation, neurotrophic signalling and extracellular matrix regulation. Proteomic data revealed accelerated differentiation in cells treated with the poly-selective CDK and GSK3 inhibitor kenpaullone or the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor mevastatin, both of which have previously been reported to promote neural differentiation. These data provide in-depth information on the ReNcell progenitor state and on neural differentiation in the presence and absence of drugs, setting the stage for functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
The human ReNcell VM Immortalized cell line was obtained from EMD Millipore grown in ReNcell NSC Maintenance Medium supplemented with basic fibroblast growth factor and epidermal growth factor.  Cells were cultured in Matrigel-coated 15-cm plates. Cells were harvested at ten time points following a switch to growth factor-free medium (t= 0, 6 hr or 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 14 or 15 days).  Chemical perturbation studies were performed using mevastatin at 2 µM final concentration, or kenpaullone at 2 µM or DMSO as a control. Cell pellets were solubilized for 2 minutes by vortexing in lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4). Cell lysates were then transferred to QiaShredder Mini Spin Columns, and processed. Disulfide reduction and alkylation was performed. Detergent was removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as described previously. Precipitates were solubilized in freshly prepared 8M urea in 20 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and used for TMT labelling. Following a 10 min incubation at 37C, the urea concentration was diluted with 20 mM EPPS to 4M final concentration and Lys-C protease digestion was performed. Further digestion was performed by incubation at 37C for 6 hours with trypsin.  Equal amounts of protein were removed from each sample and labelled using a TMT10plex Mass Tag Labelling Kit.  HPLC fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Series instrument.LC-MS: Peptides were injected onto a 30 cm, 100 µm (internal diameter) column and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC.  Samples from the HPLC were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS using a multi-notch MS3 method.  Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Mass Spectrometry: Following protein digestion as described above, approximately 1 mg of protein was removed from samples corresponding to each differentiation time point and then desalted and purified using SepPak tC18 Vac RC Cartridges. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere 5 µm Titanium Dioxide beads. Phosphopeptides were then subjected to TMT labelling. Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were enriched using a p-Tyr- 1000 rabbit antibody.

### Data Protocol
A compilation of commercially available software was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Thermo “.RAW” files) to mzXML format and to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and erroneous peptide charge state assignments. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest (version 28 and the Human UniProt database (downloaded 02/2014). The database search included reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins which were excluded for subsequent analyses. Linear discriminate analysis was used to distinguish forward and reverse hits. Peptides were identified using an MS2 spectrum and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed as described previously. Variable extents of modification including the presence of oxidized methionine and over-labelling of TMT on serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered during peptide assignment for whole-protein experiments. Methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for phosphoproteomics experiments. For protein identification and quantification, shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Peptides with a total TMT value of > 200 and an isolation specificity of > 0.7 were included for quantification. For phosphopeptides, site localization confidence was assessed using the A-score method, and a score above 13 indicated good confidence in phosphosite localization.

### Publication Abstract
The immortalized human ReNcell VM cell line represents a reproducible and easy-to-propagate cell culture system for studying the differentiation of neural progenitors. To better characterize the starting line and its subsequent differentiation, we assessed protein and phospho-protein levels and cell morphology over a 15-day period during which ReNcell progenitors differentiated into neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Five of the resulting datasets measured protein levels or states of phosphorylation based on tandem-mass-tag (TMT) mass spectrometry and four datasets characterized cellular phenotypes using high-content microscopy. Proteomic analysis revealed reproducible changes in pathways responsible for cytoskeletal rearrangement, cell phase transitions, neuronal migration, glial differentiation, neurotrophic signalling and extracellular matrix regulation. Proteomic and imaging data revealed accelerated differentiation in cells treated with the poly-selective CDK and GSK3 inhibitor kenpaullone or the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor mevastatin, both of which have previously been reported to promote neural differentiation. These data provide in-depth information on the ReNcell progenitor state and on neural differentiation in the presence and absence of drugs, setting the stage for functional studies.

### Keywords
Neuron, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Professor of Systems Pharmacology Head of Harvard Program in Therapeutic Science Harvard Medical School
Center for Protein Degradation/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Berberich

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Sorger
Professor of Systems Pharmacology Head of Harvard Program in Therapeutic Science Harvard Medical School


