### Accession
PXD032233

### Title
Profiling Glutathionylome in CD38-mediated  Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
We engineered a cell system in which the glutathione synthetase (GS) mutant was expressed that catalyzed the formation of a glutathione analogy from azido-alanine to profile changes of glutathionylome in CD38-overexpressing cells.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis Cells were harvested and lysed for 30-60 min with RIPA buffer (Bryotime, Shanghai, China) on ice supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo-Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Proteins in the supernatant was precipitated with 4 times volume of precooled acetone for at least 2 hours at -20℃. After centrifugation, 8 M urea/PBS with 1× protease inhibitor was used to redissolve protein pellet. Equal amounts of proteins (110ug) were reduced by 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 10 min and then alkylated by incubating with 20 mM chloroacetamide for 60 min in the dark at room temperature. After diluted with 5 times volume of PBS, proteins were digested by sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, V5280) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w:w) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Latterly, the digested peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak desalting columns (Waters, Milford, MA, United States) and then labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) 6-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) for 1 hour at room temperature. After that, TMT-labeled peptides from different samples were mixed after adding 4 µl 5% hydroxylamine to quench TMT 6-plex reagents. The mixed TMT-labeled peptides were desalted again and separated by an XBridge C18 RP column (Waters, Milford, MA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using UPLC 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After eluted with gradient buffer, the peptides were divided into 48 fractions and recombined into 12 fractions via vacuum drying. Finally, the vacuum dried peptides were dissolved in 20µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Glutathionylation profiling Cells were lysed on ice in RIPA buffer (Bryotime, Shanghai, China) added with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo-Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) after pre-treatment of 1.5 mM azido-alanine for approximately 40 h. Equal amounts of proteins (10mg) were incubated with 5 mM chloroacetamide for 60 min at room temperature in the dark to block free sulfhydryl groups. Then the click reaction was proceeded for 1h at room temperature with 2 mM biotin-alkyne catalyzed by 1 mM CuBr. After that, proteins were precipitated with 4 times volume of precooled acetone for at least 2 hours at -20℃ and 8 M urea/PBS with 1% protease inhibitor was used to redissolve protein pellet after centrifugation. The proteins were digested by sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, V5280) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w:w) at 37 °C for 16 hours after diluting to 1.5 M urea with PBS. Next, the solution was adjusted to PH~2 using trifluoroacetic acid (J&K Scientific, 134753) to inactivate trypsin for 20~30 min and then back to PH~7 using 1 M NaOH.   For the enrichment of glutathionylated peptides, the streptavidin agarose beads were added into the above solution after washing with PBS for three times and incubated on rotator at 4℃ for 6 h or overnight. Next, the beads were washed three times with PBS and then with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for three times. Peptides on beads were released by incubating with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at room temperature to break disulfide bond followed by heating at 95℃ for 10 min. The released peptides in the supernatant were further alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetic acid-13C2 (Sigma, 595489) in the dark for 1 h and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) after vacuum dried for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
TMT:The raw data was searched against the UniProt human database (25 May 2021; 20325 sequences) in Proteome Discoverer 2.3. And the searching parameters were set as follows: two missed cleavage tolerance, full tryptic specificity required, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for tolerances of precursor and fragment mass respectively, TMT 6-plex on lysine or peptide N-terminus and carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modifications, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. And peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and the protein relative quantification was calculated based on the intensities of reporter ions of peptides. Glutathionylation profiling: The raw data was searched against the UniProt human database (25 May 2021; 20325 sequences) in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 with carbamidomethylation and 13C2-carboxyl methylation on cysteine and oxidation on methionine as variable modifications; full tryptic specificity required, two missed cleavages tolerance; 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ion mass and 0.02 Da tolerance for fragment mass. And the protein glutathionylation enrichment experiment was conducted in three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-glutathionylation is an important posttranslational modification that regulates various cellular processes. However, changes in glutathionylome in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial cellular process for embryonic development, wound healing, and carcinoma progression and metastasis, have not been fully characterized. Our previous study revealed that CD38 overexpression decreased cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD<sup>+</sup>) levels and caused cells to undergo EMT. In the present study, we engineered a cell system in which the glutathione synthetase (GS) mutant was expressed that catalyzed the formation of a glutathione analogue from azido-alanine to profile changes of glutathionylome in CD38-overexpressing cells. We identified 1298 glutathionylated proteins and revealed that proteins with changed glutathionylation levels involved in EMT associated pathways including epithelial adherens junction, actin cytoskeleton, and integrin signaling. Moreover, the glutathionylation level of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) was increased in CD38-overexpressing cells. We further demonstrated that glutathionylation of Cys63 residue in 15-PGDH led to decreased enzymatic activity that could promote EMT by increasing prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>). Taken together, these results indicate that the clickable glutathione is an effective probe for glutathionylome profiling, and glutathionylation of 15-PGDH on Cys63 inhibits its enzymatic activity to promote EMT.

### Keywords
Cd38;glutathionylome;epithelial-mesenchymal transition;

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, ChinaMOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

### Submitter
Ma Yingying

### Lab Head
Dr Deng, Haiteng
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, ChinaMOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China


