### Accession
PXD004918

### Title
Monitoring of protein thiol-oxidation in S.aureus USA300 under hypochlorite stress using OxICAT approach.

### Description
During infections, S. aureus has to cope with the oxidative burst of activated macrophages and neutrophils, including reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (RNS, ROS) and the strong oxidant hypochloric acid. We aimed to understand the global thiol-redox state in the major pathogen S. aureus and discover new NaOCl-sensitive proteins driven by thiol-switches. Thus, we performed a quantitative redox proteomics approach based on OxICAT and analyzed the percentages of thiol-oxidation levels in S.aureus before and after sub-lethal doses of 150 µM NaOCl stress. In parallel, we searched for protein S-bacillithiolation.

### Sample Protocol
Staphylococcus aureus USA300 wild type strain were grown in LB medium at 37 °C until they reached an optical density at 540 nm of 2.0, then transferred into Belitsky minimal medium and incubated for 1 hour. 100 g pelleted cells were harvested either before (control) or after treatment with 150 µM NaOCl. After washing the cell pellet with 2X cold PBS buffer, the pellet was dissolved in 400 µl of denaturing alkylation buffer (DAB), consisting of 6 M urea, 0.5% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Cells were then disrupted by Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies). The cell extracts were incubated for 2 h at 30 °C in cleavable light ICAT reagent (Sciex, Foster City, CA), dissolved before in acetonitrile. After removing the unlabeled light ICAT by protein precipitation with aceton overnight at -20°C and 2 washing steps with aceton, the pellet was air-dryed and subsequently dissolved in a mixture of DAB and 50 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) to a final concentration of 1 mM. After 10 min incubation at 30oC, the sample was transferred to cleavable heavy ICAT (Sciex), which was previously dissolved in acetonitrile, and alkylated for 2 h at 30°C in the dark. Unlabeled heavy ICAT was removed by precipitation and washing as described above. The pellet of the ICAT labeled proteins was re-dissolved in denaturing buffer (0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and acetonitril. Then, trypsin, which was dissolved in ddH2O and provided in the ICAT kit, was added to the sample and incubated for 12-16 h at 37oC. All subsequent steps were performed according to the protocol provided by Sciex. After purification of the cysteine-containing peptides, which are linked to biotin, using ICAT cation-exchange cartridge followed by an avidin affinity cartridge (Sciex), the eluate was then dried down using a speed-vac rotator and re-dissolved in a fresh mixture (95:5) of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and cleavage reagent B (Sciex) for 2 h at 37°C to remove the biotin tag. The sample was evaporated to dryness in a speed-vac rotator for LC-MS/MS analysis to quantify the amounts of reduced protein containing the light ICAT and oxidized protein containing the heavy ICAT adduct. In parallel, control and stressed cells were harvested washed and disrupted in presence of an alkylating agent (NEM). The proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE, and then in-gel digested by trypsin. Samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry on a Velos Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for each LC-MS/MS run were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) to determine the ratio of heavy over light OxICAT-labelled peptides in our experiments. As possible modifications, besides the labelling of cysteine residues with light or heavy ICAT label, only methionine oxidation was included and two possible missed cleavages were allowed in the MaxQuant search parameters. A FASTA file containing all protein sequences associated with S.aureus USA300 was set as a reference sequence database. This reference sequence database was used by the search engine Andromeda associated with MaxQuant to identify peptides detected during the LC-MS/MS run. For protein S-bacillithiolation : Tryptic peptides were subjected to a reversed phase column chromatography and MS and MS/MS data were acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source as described in [Chi et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 10: M111 009506, 2011]. Post-translational thiol-modifications of proteins were identified by searching all MS/MS spectra in “dta” format against S.aureus_USA300_TCH1516 target-decoy protein sequence database extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) using Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev. 11, Thermo Electron including Scaffold 4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). The Sequest search was carried out with the following parameter: parent ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1.00 Da. Two tryptic miscleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), cysteine alkylation (+125.04767 Da for NEM), S-cysteinylations (+119.004099 Da for C3H7NO2S), S-bacillithiolations (+396 Da for BSH) and Disulfides (-2.01564 for Cys-2H) were set as variable post-translational modifications in the Sequest search. Sequest identifications required ΔCn scores of > 0.10 and XCorr scores of > 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Neutral loss precursor ions characteristic for the loss of malate (-134  Da) served for verification of the S-bacillithiolated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Gapdh, H2o2, Oxicat, Naocl, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
FU Berlin, EMA Greifswald
FU Berlin Institut für biologie-mikrobiologie Germany

### Submitter
Marcel Imber

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
FU Berlin Institut für biologie-mikrobiologie Germany


