### Accession
PXD000625

### Title
Hepatocyte-specific BIRC5 (Survivin)-knockout-mouse model, Subcellular fractionation

### Description
Experimental design For the label-free proteome analysis 17 mice were used composed of 5 individual wildtype mice for each condition before (WTprePHE) and after hepatectomy (WTpostPHE).  For the pre-hepatectomy condition four BIRC5-knockout mice (KOprePHE) were analyzed and three individuals after partial hepatectomy (KOpostPHE). For the LC-MS/MS analysis the samples were pre-fractionated by subcellular protein fractionatio. All samples corresponding to a subcellular fraction were analyzed in an individual label-free study.    Subcellular protein fractionation The subcellular fractions were generated using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Tissue (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).    Sample preparation and tryptic digestion 5ug of protein were loaded on a 18% Tris-glycine acrylamide gel (Anamed Electrophorese, Grosz-Bieberau, Germany).  The samples were allowed to run slightly into the gel (15 min, 100 V) and form a single band of approximately 3mm height.  The bands were stained with Coomassie, manually cut from the gel and digested with trypsin (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.8) overnight at 37 degrees C.   LC-MS/MS Analysis  The RPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The injection volume was 15 ul of the sample, representing an amount of 250 ng peptides.The MS was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer, while tandem mass spectra of the twenty most abundant peaks were measured in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 5 (BIRC5), also known as inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin, is a member of the chromosomal passenger complex and a key player in mitosis. To investigate the function of BIRC5 in liver regeneration, we analyzed a hepatocyte-specific BIRC5-knockout mouse model using a quantitative label-free proteomics approach. Here, we present the analyses of the proteome changes in hepatocyte-specific BIRC5-knockout mice compared to wildtype mice, as well as proteome changes during liver regeneration induced by partial hepatectomy in wildtype mice and mice lacking hepatic BIRC5, respectively. The BIRC5-knockout mice showed an extensive overexpression of proteins related to cellular maintenance, organization and protein synthesis. Key regulators of cell growth, transcription and translation MTOR and STAT1/STAT2 were found to be overexpressed. During liver regeneration proteome changes representing a response to the mitotic stimulus were detected in wildtype mice. Mainly proteins corresponding to proliferation, cell cycle and cytokinesis were up-regulated. The hepatocyte-specific BIRC5-knockout mice showed impaired liver regeneration, which had severe consequences on the proteome level. However, several proteins with function in mitosis were found to be up-regulated upon the proliferative stimulus. Our results show that the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase UHRF1 is strongly up-regulated during liver regeneration independently of BIRC5.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Survivin, Liver regeneration, Birc5, Knockout

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head


