### Accession
PXD030373

### Title
Capillary Zone Electrophoresis-Electron-Capture Collision-Induced Dissociation on a Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Top-Down Characterization of Intact Proteins

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based denaturing top-down proteomics (dTDP) requires high-capacity separation and extensive gas-phase fragmentation of proteoforms. Herein, we coupled capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) to electron-capture collision-induced dissociation (ECciD) on an Agilent 6545 XT quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer for dTDP for the first time. During ECciD, the protein ions were first fragmented using ECD, followed by further activation and fragmentation by applying a CID potential. In this pilot study, we optimized the CZE-ECciD method for small proteins (lower than 20 kDa) regarding the charge state of protein parent ions for fragmentation and the CID potential applied to maximize the protein backbone cleavage coverage and the number of sequence-informative fragment ions. The CZE-ECciD Q-TOF platform provided extensive backbone cleavage coverage for three standard proteins lower than 20 kDa from only single charge states in a single CZE-MS/MS run in the targeted MS/MS mode, including ubiquitin (97%, +7, 8.6 kDa), superoxide dismutase (SOD, 87%, +17, 16 kDa), and myoglobin (90%, +16, 17 kDa). The CZE-ECciD method produced comparable cleavage coverage of small proteins (i.e., myoglobin) with direct-infusion MS studies using electron transfer dissociation (ETD), activated ion-ETD, and combinations of ETD and collision-based fragmentation on high-end orbitrap mass spectrometers. The results render CZE-ECciD a new tool for dTDP to enhance both separation and gas-phase fragmentation of proteoforms.

### Sample Protocol
For the CID potential study using targeted MS/MS, a standard protein mixture containing ubiquitin (0.05 mg/mL),myoglobin (0.2 mg/mL), and CA (1 mg/mL) was used. Carbonic anhydrase and its impurity superoxide dismutase (SOD, bovine, 16 kDa)21 were denatured with 8 M urea at 37°C, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with IAA, followed by buffer exchange with a Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter unit.

### Data Protocol
The background electrolyte (BGE) for CZE was 5% (v/v) AA (pH ∼ 2.4).For each CZE-MS/MS run, 120 nL of the sample was injected into the capillary by applying 100 mbar air pressure for 56 s based on Poiseuille’s law

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based denaturing top-down proteomics (dTDP) requires high-capacity separation and extensive gas-phase fragmentation of proteoforms. Herein, we coupled capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) to electron-capture collision-induced dissociation (ECciD) on an Agilent 6545 XT quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer for dTDP for the first time. During ECciD, the protein ions were first fragmented using ECD, followed by further activation and fragmentation by applying a CID potential. In this pilot study, we optimized the CZE-ECciD method for small proteins (lower than 20 kDa) regarding the charge state of protein parent ions for fragmentation and the CID potential applied to maximize the protein backbone cleavage coverage and the number of sequence-informative fragment ions. The CZE-ECciD Q-TOF platform provided extensive backbone cleavage coverage for three standard proteins lower than 20 kDa from only single charge states in a single CZE-MS/MS run in the targeted MS/MS mode, including ubiquitin (97%, +7, 8.6 kDa), superoxide dismutase (SOD, 87%, +17, 16 kDa), and myoglobin (90%, +16, 17 kDa). The CZE-ECciD method produced comparable cleavage coverage of small proteins (i.e., myoglobin) with direct-infusion MS studies using electron transfer dissociation (ETD), activated ion-ETD, and combinations of ETD and collision-based fragmentation on high-end orbitrap mass spectrometers. The results render CZE-ECciD a new tool for dTDP to enhance both separation and gas-phase fragmentation of proteoforms.

### Keywords
Top-down, Capillary zone electrophoresis, Electron-capture collision-induced dissociation

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Chemistry of Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Chemistry of Michigan State University


