### Accession
PXD034712

### Title
Compounds activating VCP D1 ATPase enhance both autophagic and proteasomal neurotoxic protein clearance

### Description
Enhancing the removal of aggregate-prone toxic proteins is a rational therapeutic strategy for a number of neurodegenerative diseases, especially Huntington’s disease and various spinocerebellar ataxias. Ideally, such approaches should preferentially clear the mutant/misfolded species, while having minimal impact on the stability of wild-type/normally-folded proteins. Furthermore, activation of both ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome routes may be advantageous, as this would allow effective clearance of both monomeric and oligomeric species, the latter which are inaccessible to the proteasome. Here we find that compounds that activate the D1 ATPase activity of VCP/p97 fulfill these requirements. Such effects are seen with small molecule VCP activators like SMER28, which activate autophagosome biogenesis by enhancing interactions of PI3K complex components to increase PI(3)P production, and also accelerate VCP-dependent proteasomal clearance of such substrates. Thus, this mode of VCP activation may be a very attractive target for many neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Bead preparation. NHS-activated sepharose beads were loaded at 0.2 μmol/mL with primary amine 3 by incubating together overnight on an end-over-end rotator in DMSO with excess of triethylamine. The beads were capped with excess of ethanolamine and washed with DMSO, then EtOH and stored in cold EtOH.  Chemoproteomic affinity enrichment. HeLa cellular lysate was freshly prepared in lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, with 1 Pierce protease inhibitor tablet added per 50 mL) on ice. The soluble fraction was isolated and diluted to 3 mg/mL total protein concentration. SMER28 was incubated with 1 mL of lysate at each concentration (8 µM, 80 µM, 800 µM) for 1 h at 4 ºC on a rotisserie rotator, then the lysate with compound was added to beads derivatized with immobilized compound and incubated for 16 h at 4 ºC on a rotator. Each pulldown experiment was further processed according to the distinct procedure below. Tryptic Digestion and iTRAQ-4 reagent labeling (sample preparation). Approximately 30 µL beads from the pulldown experiment were subjected to on bead tryptic digestion and chemical labeling prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, (50 mM TEAB, 45 L, pH 8) and the reducing agent tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (100 mM, TCEP) were added to the beads to achieve a final concentration of 5 mM. Reduction continued for 20 min at 55 °C, followed by alkylation by S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, 10 mM) for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were treated with ProteaseMAX™ surfactant (4 µg) and (1:25) Trypsin-LysC, Promega) and the digestion proceeded for 16 h at 37 °C. The samples were dried (speed vacuum) and reconstituted with TEAB (30 L of 0.5 M solution). The four iTRAQ labelling reagent tubes (114, 115, 116, 117) were equilibrated to room temperature, spun down, treated with isopropanol (IPA, 50 L) and mixed. Each sample was treated with the corresponding iTRAQ-4-PLEX reagent: 114 (DMSO), 115 (8 M SMER28), 116 (80 M SMER28), 117 (800 M SMER28), respectively. Samples incubated for 2 h at room temperature and quenched with HCOOH. Equal amounts of the four iTRAQ-4 labeled samples from the corresponding replicate were combined into two samples and cleaned with solid phase extraction using C18 solid phase extraction (SepPak tC18 100 g cartridge, product # WAT036820). These labelled peptides were fractionated using a 6 fractions strong cation exchange (SCX and Pierce SCX Mini spin columns). After SCX fractionation, the samples were dried and reconstituted (800 µl of 0.1% HCOOH). Samples were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction, SepPak tC18 100 µg cartridge (Product # WAT036820). Samples were cleaned using the same procedure as previously described (eluted using 4:1 CH3CN/H2O with 0.1% HCOOH), dried (speed vacuum), reconstituted (using 15 µL of 3% CH3CN in H2O with 0.1% HCOOH) and analysed by mass spectrometry. LC-MS analysis. All samples were analysed on a high-resolution mass spectrometer, Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled with either an EASY 1000 nLC system. Nano-electrospray ionization was performed by an EASY-Spray™ source. A 2 column, trap and elute configuration was used for analysis, coupling an Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 m x 2 cm nano viper, C18 3 m 100A trap column to a 50 cm Easy-Spray™ PepMap reverse phase C-18 column (ES803, Thermo Scientific) using mobile phases consisting of 100% LC-MS grade H2O with 0.1% HCOOH for mobile phase A and 100% CH3CN with 0.1% HCOOH for mobile phase B. Peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 2‒20% of B in 80 min, 20‒32% of B in 30 min and 32‒95% of B in 1 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A 4-uL injection was used for the first and second replicates for the lysate pulldown samples.  The Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was operated in data dependent mode using a Full MS/ddMS2 Top12 experiment.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.1.1.21 was used for .RAW file processing, controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, and assembling and quantifying proteins from peptides. The data were searched against a manually reviewed Swiss-Prot human database file, containing 20129 entries (download date 2017-01-05). The Sequest HT algorithm was used for analysis with the following tolerances: full tryptic cleavage with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass accuracy 10 ppm, fragment mass accuracy 20 mDa, static modification of cysteine with Methylthio (45.988 Da) dynamic oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da), static iTRAQ4plex labelling of lysine (144.102 Da) and any N-terminal modification by iTRAQ4plex (144.102 Da). For protein identification, validation was performed at PSM level using 1% FDR determined by percolator algorithm based on q-value and rank 1 peptides. For quantitation, unique and razor peptides were considered with a maximum co-isolation of 100% was allowed. The data was visualized using TIBCO® Spotfire® Analyst 7.9.2 using median normalized log2-fold changes for proteins that were quantitated in all doses for both replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Fucoxanthin chlorophyll (Chl) a/c-binding proteins (FCPs) function as light harvesters in diatoms. The structure of a diatom photosystem II-FCPII (PSII-FCPII) supercomplex have been solved by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) previously; however, the FCPII subunits that constitute the FCPII tetramers and monomers are not identified individually due to their low resolutions. Here, we report a 2.5&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution structure of the PSII-FCPII supercomplex using cryo-EM. Two types of tetrameric FCPs, S-tetramer, and M-tetramer, are identified as different types of hetero-tetrameric complexes. In addition, three FCP monomers, m1, m2, and m3, are assigned to different gene products of FCP. The present structure also identifies the positions of most Chls c and diadinoxanthins, which form a complicated pigment network. Excitation-energy transfer from FCPII to PSII is revealed by time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy. These structural and spectroscopic findings provide insights into an assembly model of FCPII and its excitation-energy transfer and quenching processes.

### Keywords
Vcp, Atpase, Neurodegeneration, Beclin 1, Protein quality control, Smer28, Ubiquitin-proteasome system, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, The Keith Peters Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom
CIMR medicine

### Submitter
Robin Antrobus

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Rubinsztein
Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, The Keith Peters Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom


