### Accession
PXD002442

### Title
Serum glycoprotein biomarker discovery and qualification pipeline reveals novel diagnostic biomarkers for esophageal adenocarcinoma

### Description
The aim of this project is to identify circulatory diagnostic glycoprotein biomarkers for Barrett's esophagus (BE) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Serum samples from healthy, BE and EAC patients were screened using LeMBA-LC-MS/MS-GlycoSelector pipeline as described in the manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were spiked with internal standard chicken ovalbumin and processed using the LeMBA workflow as described in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was extracted and searched using Spectrum Mill. GlycoSelector database incorporating statistical analysis pipeline was utilized for biomarker identification.

### Publication Abstract
We report an integrated pipeline for efficient serum glycoprotein biomarker candidate discovery and qualification that may be used to facilitate cancer diagnosis and management. The discovery phase used semi-automated lectin magnetic bead array (LeMBA)-coupled tandem mass spectrometry with a dedicated data-housing and analysis pipeline; GlycoSelector (http://glycoselector.di.uq.edu.au). The qualification phase used lectin magnetic bead array-multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry incorporating an interactive web-interface, Shiny mixOmics (http://mixomics-projects.di.uq.edu.au/Shiny), for univariate and multivariate statistical analysis. Relative quantitation was performed by referencing to a spiked-in glycoprotein, chicken ovalbumin. We applied this workflow to identify diagnostic biomarkers for esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), a life threatening malignancy with poor prognosis in the advanced setting. EAC develops from metaplastic condition Barrett's esophagus (BE). Currently diagnosis and monitoring of at-risk patients is through endoscopy and biopsy, which is expensive and requires hospital admission. Hence there is a clinical need for a noninvasive diagnostic biomarker of EAC. In total 89 patient samples from healthy controls, and patients with BE or EAC were screened in discovery and qualification stages. Of the 246 glycoforms measured in the qualification stage, 40 glycoforms (as measured by lectin affinity) qualified as candidate serum markers. The top candidate for distinguishing healthy from BE patients' group was Narcissus pseudonarcissus lectin (NPL)-reactive Apolipoprotein B-100 (p value = 0.0231; AUROC = 0.71); BE versus EAC, Aleuria aurantia lectin (AAL)-reactive complement component C9 (p value = 0.0001; AUROC = 0.85); healthy versus EAC, Erythroagglutinin Phaseolus vulgaris (EPHA)-reactive gelsolin (p value = 0.0014; AUROC = 0.80). A panel of 8 glycoforms showed an improved AUROC of 0.94 to discriminate EAC from BE. Two biomarker candidates were independently verified by lectin magnetic bead array-immunoblotting, confirming the validity of the relative quantitation approach. Thus, we have identified candidate biomarkers, which, following large-scale clinical evaluation, can be developed into diagnostic blood tests. A key feature of the pipeline is the potential for rapid translation of the candidate biomarkers to lectin-immunoassays.

### Keywords
Lectin, Biomarker, Glycoprotein, Barrett's esophagus (be), Esophageal adenocarcinoma (eac)

### Affiliations
UQ Diamantina Institute

### Submitter
Alok Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michelle M. Hill
UQ Diamantina Institute


