### Accession
PXD044874

### Title
Integrated widely targeted metabolomics and network pharmacology revealed quality disparities between Guizhou and conventional producing areas of Codonopsis Radix

### Description
With the internationalization of traditional Chinese medicine, the demand for medicinal and edible Codonopsis Radix (CR) is increasing, and its medicinal resources have attracted atten-  tion. CR is a famous traditional Chinese medicine with a long pharmaceutical and edible history.  Guizhou has abundant CR resources, but in the absence of systematic studies on species identifi-  cation and chemical compositions, it has not been fully utilized. The results of plant traits and DNA barcoding molecular identification indicated that Luodang (LD) and Weidang (WD) from Guizhou  were Codonopsis tangshen, C. pilosula., respectively. Widely targeted metabolomics analysis revealed  that a total of 1116 metabolites from 14 categories, including phenolic acids, lipids, flavonoids, etc.,  were found in LD, WD, and the three Chinese Pharmacopoeia CR. CRs shared 1054 (94.4%) me-  tabolites, with extremely similar metabolite profiles. Affected by Guizhou's particular climate, LD  and WD each contained 3 and 10 dominant differential metabolites, respectively, which were pri-  marily flavonoids and amino acids. Amino acids, phenolic acids, and organic acids play important  roles in the excellent food attributes of them. In CR, 8 dominant differential metabolites were dis-  covered for the first time, including isoorientin-7-O-(6′′-feruloyl) glucoside,  N-formyl-L-methionine, and cyclo (Phe-Glu), etc. Network pharmacology analyses showed that  LD dominant differential metabolites were closely related to anti-tumor, cardiovascular disease  improvement, nervous system protection, and metabolic disease treatment, whereas WD was  closely related to nervous system protection and cardiovascular disease improvement. In conclu-  sion, LD and WD can be used and promoted medicinally as CR and have potential value for new  drug development. This work enriched the database of CR compounds and provided a reference  for quality control, resource development, and new drug development of CR

### Sample Protocol
Fresh CR samples were vacuum freeze-dried in a freeze-dryer (Scientz-100F, Scientz,  China) before being crushed to powder in a blender (30 Hz, 1.5min, MM 400, Retsch,  Germany). A 2 mL centrifuge tube (Eppendorf) was first filled with 50 mg of the  ground-up CR sample, and then 1.2 mL of a 70% methanol solution (Merck, Germany)  was added. The tube was vortexed using a vortex mixer (IKA VORTEX GENIUS 3, VG 3  S25) to ensure even mixing. The centrifuge tubes were vortexed (MX-S/MX-F, SCILOGEX,  USA) every 30 minutes for 30 s, 6 times. After centrifugation (Allegra 64R, Beckman, USA)  at 12000 rpm for 3 min, the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 µm microporous  membrane and used as the test sample for UPLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The resultant mass spectra were compared to the MWDB (Metware Biotechnology  Co., Ltd.) database. The technique excludes isotopic signals, repetitive signals comprising  K+, Na+, NH4+, and repeating signals of fragment ions that were themselves other bigger  molecular weight compounds while doing substance characterization based on second-  ary spectrum information. MRM-based quantification of metabolites was conducted us-  ing Multi Quant v3.0.2 (AB Sciex). After obtaining the signal intensities of each metabo-  lite's distinctive ions in several samples, the chromatographic peak regions of those ions  were integrated to indicate the metabolite's relative abundance. The peak areas were  adjusted with retention time and peak type in order to make it easier to compare the  same metabolites quantitatively between samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Codonopsis radix; dna barcoding; widely targeted metabolomics; network pharmacology; quality

### Affiliations
zunyi medical university
Zunyi Medical University

### Submitter
kaixian zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kaixian Zhang
Zunyi Medical University


