### Accession
PXD044216

### Title
Proteome analysis of ROF-FKBP mutants reveals functional relations between heat stress responses, plant development and protein quality control during heat acclimation in A. thaliana

### Description
In the present study, a differential screening following heat stress acclimation was performed in A. thaliana WT and ROF-FKBP mutated plants, using mass spectrometry, and the results were used to understand and analyze the effect of the ROF PPIases during thermotolerance acquisition in plants. Our data highlight the central role of these two PPIases in heat stress and point to their direct or indirect effect on other proteins participating in cellular functions such as protein folding and quality control, cell division, photosynthesis, and other metabolic and signaling processes. 1) Specifically, the heat stress response, protein folding and protein ER processing pathways are enhanced following a 37 oC acclimation period independently to the mutation state. 2) However, at 37 oC and in the double mutated rof1–/2 –plants, a higher accumulation of proteins belonging to the above pathways is observed compared to all other conditions (WT, mutants, control and heat stressed). 3) Furthermore, the proteasomal pathway including the common member of both the protasomal and lysosomal degradation pathway CDC48, is over-represented in the extracts of both untreated and heat stressed rof1–/2 – mutants compared to the other extracts. 4) In contrast, in the single rof1 –   mutation the heat acclimation (including ROF2), protein folding and proteasomal pathways are significantly suppressed compared to the WT, at 37 oC. 5) Protein accumulation related to the heat stress and protein quality control pathways follow the rof1–/2 –  > rof2 – > rof1 – pattern suggesting a differential but also synergistic role of the two proteins. 6) Protein complexes of other biochemical pathways such as the Lhc of the photosynthetic pathway and the phosphoinositide binding proteins involved in membrane-trafficking events during cell plate formation and cytokinesis (Patellin-1, 2 and 3) are negatively regulated by the rof1–/2 – mutants. Our results suggest that ROF1 and ROF2 FKBPs regulate stress response, developmental and metabolic pathways via a complex feedback mechanism that ensures the continuation of protein quality control at their absence.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were processed with the FASP protocol using a 10kDa cutoff filtering system (Sartorius, VN01H02). After sample clean-up the proteins were alkylated with IAA and digested overnight at 37 C on top of the filter with 1μg trypsin/LysC mix (mass spec grade, Promega.  The resulting peptide products were analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS system of  LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled to a nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was analyzed using a 6h long gradient in two technical replicas.   μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μl/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid).  The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 340 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 s. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lock-mass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The rawfiles were analysed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.16) using the Uniprot database of A.thaliana (68011 entries 1/2016) and a common contaminant database using the Andromeda search. The error detection FDR was set at 1% for both proteins and peptides, with a minimum length of seven amino acids, which was determined after reversing the database. LFQ was determined with a minimum measurement fraction of 2.  Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5.000 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin, and methionine oxidation, deamination of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed cysteine modification. The match-between-run function was enabled as well as the second peptide option.

### Publication Abstract
In the present study, a differential screening following heat stress acclimation was performed in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> WT and ROF-FKBP mutated plants using mass spectrometry, and the results were used to understand and analyze the effect of the ROF PPIases during thermotolerance acquisition in plants. Our data highlight the central role of these two PPIases in heat stress and point to their direct or indirect effect on other proteins participating in cellular functions such as protein folding and quality control, cell division, photosynthesis, and other metabolic and signaling processes. Specifically, the heat stress response, protein folding, and protein ER processing pathways are enhanced following a 37 &#xb0;C acclimation period independent of the mutation state. However, at 37 &#xb0;C, and in the double-mutated <i>rof1</i><sup><i>-</i></sup>/<i>2</i><sup><i>-</i></sup> plants, a higher accumulation of proteins belonging to the above pathways is observed compared with all other conditions (WT, single mutants, control, and heat-acclimated plants). Furthermore, the proteasomal pathway, involving the common member of both the protasomal and the lysosomal degradation pathway, CDC48, is over-represented in the extracts of both the untreated and heat-stressed <i>rof1</i><sup><i>-</i></sup>/<i>2</i><sup><i>-</i></sup> mutants compared with the other extracts. In contrast, in the single <i>rof1</i><sup><i>-</i></sup> mutation, the heat acclimation pathway is suppressed at 37 &#xb0;C when compared to the WT. Protein accumulation related to the heat stress and the protein quality control pathways points to a differential but also synergistic role of the two proteins. Protein complexes of other biochemical and developmental mechanisms, such as the light-harvesting complex of the photosynthetic pathway and the phosphoinositide binding proteins involved in membrane-trafficking events during cell plate formation and cytokinesis (patellin 1, 2, and 4), are negatively regulated in the <i>rof1</i><sup><i>-</i></sup>/<i>2</i><sup><i>-</i></sup> mutant. Our results suggest that ROF1 and ROF2 FKBPs regulate stress response, and developmental and metabolic pathways via a complex feedback mechanism involving partners that ensure protein quality control and plant survival during heat stress.

### Keywords
Fkbp, Heat, Plant, Quantitative proteomics, Patellin, Cdc48, Protein quality control, Hsps, Stress, Rof1, Rof2, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Institute of Applied Biosciences, Center for Research and Technology - Hellas, 6th km Charilaou - Thermi rd. 570 01 Thermi Thessaloniki

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Theodora Farmaki
Institute of Applied Biosciences, Center for Research and Technology - Hellas, 6th km Charilaou - Thermi rd. 570 01 Thermi Thessaloniki


