### Accession
PXD025069

### Title
The capacity of isoprene emission largely influences the proteome of Arabidopsis plants both under well-watered and water-stress conditions

### Description
Isoprene is a small lipophilic molecule synthetized at chloroplast level and released into the atmosphere. Isoprene-emitting plants are believed to be better protected against abiotic stresses (i.e. temperature, oxidative stress, drought). The mechanism of action of isoprene is still under debate. In this study we compared the physiological responses and proteomic profile of isoprene-emitting (ISPS) and non-emitting (WT and EV) Arabidopsis thaliana plants subjected to a moderate water stress and in control conditions. Our aim was to investigate if isoprene-emitting plants displayed a different proteomic profile which may help explain how isoprene protects plants from stresses. Only ISPS plants were able to maintain the same photosynthesis and fresh weight in water stress and in control condition. To better understand the molecular mechanism underlying isoprene emission, we performed a LC-MS/MS-based proteomic analysis to explore the changes in protein abundance between WT and EV both under control and moderate water stress conditions. Our data suggest that isoprene exerts its protective mechanism at different levels rather than on a single mode, triggering significant changes in chloroplast protein profiles, but also playing important roles in modulating signaling and hormone pathways and even membrane trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Plant samples (rosettes) were sampled six weeks after sowing and pulverized with liquid nitrogen. The used protocol for total protein extraction was based on SDS and phenol extraction (Wu et al., 2014). Then, samples were digested and analysed by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously (Garcia-Seco et al., 2017).  Garcia-Seco, D., Chiapello, M., Bracale, M., Pesce, C., Bagnaresi, P., Dubois, E., Moulin, L., Vannini, C. and Koebnik, R. (2017) 'Transcriptome and proteome analysis reveal new insight into proximal and distal responses of wheat to foliar infection by Xanthomonas translucens', Sci Rep, 7(1), pp. 10157. Wu, X., Xiong, E., Wang, W., Scali, M. and Cresti, M. (2014) 'Universal sample preparation method integrating trichloroacetic acid/acetone precipitation with phenol extraction for crop proteomic analysis', Nat Protoc, 9(2), pp. 362-74.

### Data Protocol
Ex. Mass spectrometer raw files were analysed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3, default parameters) against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot protein database (version 2019‐01, 76,141 entries). MaxQuant output files were processed with an in-house tool as described earlier (Vannini et al., 2019). Only proteins detected in at least three of the four biological replicates (75%) sharing the same treatment and tissue were considered. To compare the differences among analytical groups we performed both one-way Anova, coupled with Tukey test, and two-way Anova test using Perseus software platform (http:// www.perseus-framework.org).  Vannini, C., Marsoni, M., Scoccianti, V., Ceccarini, C., Domingo, G., Bracale, M. and Crinelli, R. (2019) 'Proteasome-mediated remodeling of the proteome and phosphoproteome during kiwifruit pollen germination', J Proteomics, 192, pp. 334-345.

### Publication Abstract
Isoprene is a small lipophilic molecule synthesized in plastids and abundantly released into the atmosphere. Isoprene-emitting plants are better protected against abiotic stresses, but the mechanism of action of isoprene is still under debate. In this study, we compared the physiological responses and proteomic profiles of Arabidopsis which express the isoprene synthase (ISPS) gene and emit isoprene with those of non-emitting plants under both drought-stress (DS) and well-watered (WW) conditions. We aimed to investigate whether isoprene-emitting plants displayed a different proteomic profile that is consistent with the metabolic changes already reported. Only ISPS DS plants were able to maintain the same photosynthesis and fresh weight of WW plants. LC-MS/MS-based proteomic analysis revealed changes in protein abundance that were dependent on the capacity for emitting isoprene in addition to those caused by the DS. The majority of the proteins changed in response to the interaction between DS and isoprene emission. These include proteins that are associated with the activation of secondary metabolisms leading to ABA, trehalose, and proline accumulations. Overall, our proteomic data suggest that isoprene exerts its protective mechanism at different levels: under drought stress, isoprene affects the abundance of chloroplast proteins, confirming a strong direct or indirect antioxidant action and also modulates signaling and hormone pathways, especially those controlling ABA synthesis. Unexpectedly, isoprene also alters membrane trafficking.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Proteomics, Water stress, Defense, Isoprene

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences University of Insubria via H. Dunant, 3 21100 Varese Italy
University of Insubria

### Submitter
Milena Marsoni

### Lab Head
Dr Milena Marsoni
Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences University of Insubria via H. Dunant, 3 21100 Varese Italy


