### Accession
PXD020483

### Title
Quantitative PTM Maps of Human Pathologic Tau Identify Patient Heterogeneity and Define Critical Steps in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression - high/low molecular weight tau

### Description
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and PTM stoichiometry in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we generated a high resolution quantitative proteomic map of 88 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from the post-mortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. While Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and patient frequency for AD suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by the analysis of size fractionated Tau.  To summarize, critical features within the Tau protein for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C-terminal, an increase in negative charge in the PRR and a decrease in positive charge in the MBD.

### Sample Protocol
High Molecular weight Tau was prepared as described in Takeda et al., 2018.10 Frozen brain tissues from the frontal cortex of four patients with AD and four non-demented control subjects were obtained from the Massachusetts Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Brain Bank. The demographic characteristics of the subjects are shown in table 1. All the study subjects or their next of kin gave informed consent for the brain donation, and the Massachusetts General Hospital Institutional Review Board approved the study protocol. All the AD subjects fulfilled the NIA-Reagan criteria for high likelihood of AD. 300-500 mg of frontal cortex tissue was homogenized in 5x volumes of cold Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS), spun at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was used for size-exclusion chromatography. Human brain PBS-soluble extracts were separated by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) on single Superdex200 10/300GL columns (GE Healthcare) in PBS (Sigma-Aldrich, filtered through a 0.2-μm membrane filter), at a flow rate of 0.5 ml min−1, with an AKTA purifier 10 (GE Healthcare). Each brain extract was diluted with PBS to contain 6,000 ng of human Tau in a final volume of 900 μl, which was filtered through a 0.2-μm membrane filter and then loaded onto an SEC column. Fractions were collected every 1 min (0.5 ml/fraction) from 5.5 mL elution volume (Fraction 2) to 16.5 ml (Fraction 20). Fraction 3 and 4 (containing the high molecular tau) and Fraction 14, 16, 18 (low molecular tau) were collected for mass spectrometry analysis. The individual fractions separated by SEC were analyzed by ELISA (Tau (total) Human ELISA kit, diluted 1:50 in kit buffer). Four volumes (vol/vol) of cold acetone (20°C) were added to each fraction, followed by vigorous vortex and incubation for 90 min at −20°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 13,000g for 10 min at 4°C. After carefully aspirating the supernatant, the pellets were resuspended in 105 μl of PBS. Western Blot analysis using Tau13, Tau46, HT7 and DAKO antibodies confirmed that the fraction 3 and 4 are enriched for Tau (data not shown). The FASP method was carried out as previously described11 with adjustments as described here:100 μg proteins were denatured and reduced by adding 400μl 8 M urea supplemented with 200 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at 60 °C. Samples were then loaded on a 10kDa MWCO spin filter column (Milipore) and spun 14,000×g for 15 min at 23 °C. Two wash steps with 200μl 8 M urea solution were carried out and proteins were alkylated with 100μl 0.05 M iodoacetamide solution in 8 M urea, shaking at 600 rpm for one minute and incubated in the dark at (23 °C) for 20 min before centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min. Two further washes with 8 M urea solution were carried out and subsequently three washes with 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solutions were performed. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a nominal enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50. After incubation for 16 h at 600 rpm, the resulting peptides were eluted in two wash steps with 50μl ABC and a final spin with 50μl 0.5 M sodium chloride (NaCl). Peptide eluates were acidified and desalted using reversed phase C-18 MicroSpin columns (SEMSS18R, Nest Group) and eluted in two fractions (30% Acetonitrile and 50%–70% Acetonitrile fractions). Samples were vacuum dried and frozen at −20 °C prior to LC–MS/MS analysis. Randomized samples (SEC fractions 2,3,4 and 14,16,18 for 4 AD and 4 control human brain samples) were analyzed in duplicates using a Q Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to a micro-autosampler AS2 and a nanoflow HPLC pump (Eksigent). Peptides were separated using an in-house packed C18 analytical column (Magic C18 particles, 75 μm × 15 cm; AQUA C18/3 μm, Michrom Bioresource) by a linear 120 min gradient starting from 95% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in HPLC-H2O) and 5% buffer B (0.2% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) to 35% buffer B. A full mass spectrum with resolution of 70,000 (relative to an m/z of 200) was acquired in a mass range of 300–1500 m/z (AGC target 3 × 106, maximum injection time 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation via higher-energy c-trap dissociation (HCD, resolution 17,500, AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 250 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 27%).

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive raw files were converted into mgf data format using ProteoWizard.5 The spectra were centroided and filtered using ms2preproc to select the 6 most intense peaks in a 30 Th window.6 Collected spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens database (uniprot.org on 04/02/2016) with ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 Beta (Paragon Algorithm 4.5.0.0. 1575, Sciex). The following settings were applied: instrument type ‘Orbi MS (1-3ppm)’; ‘Urea denaturation’; ‘thorough’ search mode; ‘phosphorylation emphasis’, ‘acetylation emphasis’, ‘ID focus on biological modifications’. A cutoff of 99% confidence was employed for all modified peptides. In addition, all MS/MS spectra of identified post-translationally modified peptides were subjected to manual verification. Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.107 and peptide list searched against the Uniprot protein sequence database (February 2016, only reviewed entries appended with common laboratory contaminants [cRAP database, 247 entries]) using the Andromeda search engine.8 The following settings were applied: trypsin (specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search. Oxidation of M, N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation of STY, Ubiquitination (GlyGly) and acetylation of K were chosen as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.  For all other search parameters, the default settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and post-translational modification (PTM) stoichiometry in Alzheimer's disease (AD), we generated a high-resolution quantitative proteomics map of 95 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from postmortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. Although Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and frequency for AD, suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner, leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by analysis of size-fractionated Tau. To summarize, features in the Tau protein critical for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C terminus, an increase in negative charge in the proline-rich region (PRR), and a decrease in positive charge in the microtubule binding domain (MBD).

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease; post-translational modification; clinical progression; srm; lfq; human tau; protein aggregation; proteopathy

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Judith A. Steen
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


