### Accession
PXD020967

### Title
SARS-COV-2 Uses CD4 to infect T Helper Lymphocytes

### Description
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2 or CoV-2) is the agent of a major global outbreak of respiratory tract disease known as COVID-19. CoV-2 infects the lungs and may cause several immune-related complications such as lymphocytopenia and cytokine storm which are associated with the severity of the disease and predict mortality. The mechanism by which CoV-2 infection may result in immune system dysfunction is not fully understood. Here we showed that CoV-2 infects human CD4+ T helper cells, but not CD8+ T cells. CoV-2 is found in the blood and bronchoalveolar lavage T helper cells of severe COVID-19 patients. We demonstrated that CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (S) (sCoV-2) directly binds to the CD4 co-receptor, which in turn mediates the entry of CoV-2 in T helper cells in a mechanism that also requires ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Once inside T helper cells, CoV-2 assembles viral factories, impairs cell function and may cause cell death. CoV-2 infected T helper cells express higher amounts of IL-10, which has been associated with viral persistence and disease severity. Thus, CD4-mediated CoV-2 infection of T helper cells may explain the poor adaptive immune response of many COVID-19 patients.

### Sample Protocol
Both of the T-Cells Covid infected and Mock were resuspended in in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, Tris-HCL 100mM, 1% triton-x final volume) with freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, SIGMA). After 3 cycles of 30 seconds of ultra-sonication for mechanic cell lysis, the protein amount was quantified by the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific).  Aiming to obtain a higher yield we performed the FASP protocol for subsequent analyses (Distler U., and Tenzer S., 2016).  The FASP protocol is a method that allows to concentrate the proteins and clean up the samples through washing steps in a microcolumn tip with a 10kDa MW cut off, and to perform the tryptic digestion in this column. Ten micrograms of protein amount were used to carry out the FASP protocol, where the samples were reduced, alkylated and later digested using trypsin.   An amount of 100 fmol/μl of digestion of Enolase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae was added to each sample as internal standard, then separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corporation). 1 µg of each digested samples has been loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5μm, 180μm × 20mm precolumn (Waters Corp.) and subsequently separated by a 120 min reversed phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 2–85% CH3CN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C.   After peptides separation, the ionized peptides were acquired by a Synapt G2-Si (Waters corp.). Differential protein expression was evaluated with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) of shotgun proteomics analysis by Expression configuration mode using the Ion Mobility cell (HDMSe). All spectra have been acquired in Ion Mobility Mode by applying a wave velocity for the ion separation of 800m/s and a transfer wave velocity of 175m/s.  The mass spectrometer operated in “Expression Mode”, switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies on the gas cell, using a scan time of 0.5 s per function over 50–2000 m/z.  The processing through low and elevated energy, added to the data of the reference lock mass ([Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard, Waters Corp.) provides a time-aligned inventory of accurate mass-retention time components for both low and elevated-energy (EMRT, exact mass retention time).

### Data Protocol
Each sample was run in four technical replicates. Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate experiments for each sample was processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software Progenesis QC for Proteomics (PLGS, Waters Corp.). The qualitative identification of proteins was obtained by searching in Homo sapiens database (UniProt KB/Swiss-Prot Protein reviewed 2020). The expression analysis was performed considering technical replicates available for each experimental condition following the hypothesis that each group is an independent variable. The protein identifications were based on the detection of more than two fragment ions per peptide, and more than two peptides measured per protein. The list of normalized proteins was screened according to the following criteria: protein identified in at least 70% of the runs from the same sample and only modulated proteins with a p< 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the agent of a major global outbreak of respiratory tract disease known as Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). SARS-CoV-2 infects mainly lungs and may cause several immune-related complications, such as lymphocytopenia and cytokine storm, which are associated with the severity of the disease and predict mortality. The mechanism by which SARS-CoV-2 infection may result in immune system dysfunction is still not fully understood. Here, we show that SARS-CoV-2 infects human CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper cells, but not CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, and is present in blood and bronchoalveolar lavage T helper cells of severe COVID-19 patients. We demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein (S) directly binds to the CD4 molecule, which in turn mediates the entry of SARS- CoV-2 in T helper cells. This leads to impaired CD4 T cell function and may cause cell death. SARS-CoV-2-infected T helper cells express higher levels of IL-10, which is associated with viral persistence and disease severity. Thus, CD4-mediated SARS-CoV-2 infection of T helper cells may contribute to a poor immune response in COVID-19 patients.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, T-cell, Proteomics, Sars-cov-2 infection

### Affiliations
Post doctor
Associate Professor at University of Campinas, Sao Paulo-Brazil (UNICAMP-SP.

### Submitter
Victor Corasolla Carregari

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Associate Professor at University of Campinas, Sao Paulo-Brazil (UNICAMP-SP.


