### Accession
PXD025110

### Title
Molecular and epigenetic characterization of the signal transducer CD24 in germ cell tumors

### Description
Type II germ cell tumors (GCTs) are with more than 90% the most common neoplasia in young men of age 14 - 45 years. It is generally accepted that GCTs arise from a common precursor lesion, called germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS), eventually developing into  seminomas or non-seminomas. The non-seminomatous stem-cell like embryonal carcinomas (EC) can further differentiate into teratomas (TE), yolk sac tumors (YST), or choriocarcinomas (CC). Orchiectomy followed by chemo- or radiotherapy is a widely used procedure in the treatment of type II GCTs, leading to high cure rates of up to 90%. Nevertheless, about 10 - 15% of patients with progressive disease relapse as a result of drug resistance and are condemned for a poor prognosis and a short survival of only a few months.   Cluster of differentiation 24 (CD24) is a small, mucin-like glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored membrane molecule that functions both, in signal transduction and as an adhesion molecule. This glycoprotein is mainly expressed on the surface of hematopoietic, neural, muscular, and epithelial cells. Moreover, CD24 has been implicated in tumor metastasis, as fucosylated CD24 interacts with P- and E-selectin, allowing invasion of tumor cells to distal sites. High expression or amplifications of CD24 has been described in a variety of solid malignancies, such as non-small cell lung carcinoma, gliomas, breast cancer, retinoblastoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, cervical carcinoma, prostate cancer, urothelial carcinoma, pineal parenchymal tumors, and ovarian cancer.  In this study, we investigated the putative function of CD24 and its interaction partners in (cisplatin-resistant) GCT cell lines by generating CD24-deficient EC cells by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing. Changes in the proteome between CD24-deficient cells and parental cells were measured by liquid-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LS-MS).

### Sample Protocol
o Proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets. Cells were lysed and homogenized in urea buffer with a TissueLyser (Qiagen) and supernatants were collected after centrifugation for 15 minutes (min) at 14,000 x g and 4°C, supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined by means of Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and 10 µg protein per sample were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for in-gel-digestion. The isolated gel pieces were reduced (50 µl, 10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 µl, 50 mM iodoacetamide) and underwent afterwards tryptic digestion (6 µl, 200 ng trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicaonate). The peptides were resolved in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
o Mass spectrometric data was processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) applying standard parameters for label free protein identification and quantification. Searches were carried out based on 74811 Homo sapiens protein entries downloaded from the UniProtKB on 27th March 2020 using tryptic cleavage specificity (behind K and R) and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. After an initial search using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 parts per million (ppm) and recalibration, a second search was performed with 4.5 ppm precursor mass tolerance. Tolerances for fragment spectra were 20 ppm. A false discovery rates (FDR) of 1% was used for both peptide and protein identification. The intensity and LFQ intensity values received as output of the MaxQuant software were normalized, respectively, towards zero median log2(fold change) in sample-pairwise comparisons of the (LFQ) intensities over all identified proteins. The sample exhibiting the highest (LFQ) intensities, leading to positive log2(fold change) medians in pairwise comparisons to all other samples before normalization, was used as reference sample; the (LFQ) intensities of the other samples were scaled by the respective factors, i. e. 2(median log2(fold change)).The normalized dataset was filtered by importing the protein list into the Perseus software version 1.6.6.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) and removing potential contaminants, decoy hits and proteins which were identified ‘by site’. Additionally, a minimum of three valid values had to be present in at least one group (CD24-deficient cells vs. parental cells). The ‘Significance Analysis of Microarrays’ (SAM) method was applied on intensity and LFQ intensity values, separately. (LFQ) intensities were log2 transformed to reach a normal distribution like data structure and missing values were filled in with random values from downshifted normal distribution (0.3 s.d. width, 1.8 s.d. downshift). Utilizing Student’s T-tests based SAM analysis, with a constant S0 of 0.17 (intensity values) or 0.12 (LFQ intensity values) and a 0.2 FDR based cut-off, protein groups showing a significantly higher (or lower) abundance in the CD24-deficient samples with respect to the parental cells were referred to as up (or down) regulated proteins. As this method considers both the differences between the mean values of log2 (LFQ) intensities as well as the standard deviation of repeated measurements, proteins were considered as up or down regulated proteins on the basis of abundance differences between CD24-deficient and parental cells as well as low p-values. The final list of up or down regulated proteins was obtained by combining the lists of the two separate SAM analyses (based on intensities or LFQ intensities) and filtering for the proteins that had a Student's T-test p-value < 0.05 in both SAM analyses with the same direction of abundance change (up regulated in both analyses or down regulated in both analyses).

### Publication Abstract
Testicular germ cell tumors (GCTs) are stratified into seminomas and nonseminomas. Seminomas share many histological and molecular features&#xa0;with primordial germ cells, whereas the nonseminoma stem cell population-embryonal carcinoma (EC)-is pluripotent and thus able to differentiate into cells of all three germ layers (teratomas). Furthermore, ECs are capable of differentiating into extra-embryonic lineages (yolk sac tumors, choriocarcinomas). In this study, we deciphered the molecular and (epi)genetic mechanisms regulating expression of CD24, a highly glycosylated signaling molecule upregulated in many cancers. CD24 is overexpressed in ECs compared with other GCT entities and can be associated with an undifferentiated pluripotent cell fate. We demonstrate that CD24 can be transactivated by the pluripotency factor SOX2, which binds in proximity to the CD24 promoter. In GCTs, CD24 expression is controlled by epigenetic mechanisms, that is, histone acetylation, since CD24 can be induced by the application histone deacetylase inhibitors. Vice versa, CD24 expression is downregulated upon inhibition of histone methyltransferases, E3 ubiquitin ligases, or bromodomain (BRD) proteins. Additionally, three-dimensional (3D) co-cultivation of EC cells with microenvironmental cells, such as fibroblasts, and endothelial or immune cells, reduced CD24 expression, suggesting that crosstalk with the somatic microenvironment influences CD24 expression. In a CRISPR/Cas9 deficiency model, we demonstrate that CD24 fulfills a bivalent role in differentiation via regulation of homeobox, and phospho- and glycoproteins; that is, it is involved in suppressing the germ cell/spermatogenesis program and mesodermal/endodermal differentiation, while poising the cells for ectodermal differentiation. Finally, blocking CD24 by a monoclonal antibody enhanced sensitivity toward cisplatin in EC cells, including cisplatin-resistant subclones, highlighting CD24 as a putative target in combination with cisplatin.

### Keywords
Germ cell tumors, Epigenetics, Differentiation, Cd24, Pluripotency, Embryonal carcinoma

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Institute for Molecular Medicine, Heinrich-Heine-University, Med. Faculty, Düsseldorf, Germany; Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Centre for Biological and Medical Research (BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

### Submitter
Anja Stefanski

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Institute for Molecular Medicine, Heinrich-Heine-University, Med. Faculty, Düsseldorf, Germany; Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Centre for Biological and Medical Research (BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.


