### Accession
PXD042090

### Title
Cas1-Cas2 and DnaK physically and functionally interact to modulate CRISPR Adaptation

### Description
Prokaryotic Cas1-Cas2 protein complexes generate adaptive immunity to mobile genetic elements (MGEs), by capture and integration of MGE DNA in to CRISPR sites. De novo immunity relies on Cas1-Cas2 targeting MGE DNA, without the aid of pre-existing immunity complexes, through mechanisms of ‘naive adaptation’ that are not clear. Using E. coli we show that the chaperone DnaK inhibits Cas1-Cas2 from DNA binding and integration, and that DnaK expression prevents naïve adaptation from chromosomal self-targeting. We show that that inhibition of naïve adaptation is reversible  by eliminating DnaK from cells, by mutation of the DnaK substrate binding domain, and by expression of an MGE (phage )protein. We show that a fluorescently labelled Cas1 fusion can be visualised in living cells. Formation of foci depends on active DNA replication, and that the number of foci per cell is much increased in cells lacking DnaK. We discuss a model in which DnaK provides a mechanism for restraining naïve adaptation from self-targeting. This restraint is released once MGE DNA is present in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli strain EB377 (Table S7) was transformed with pCas1BioID2-Cas2 or pBioID2 and grown on ampicillin agar. Individual colonies were used to inoculate LB medium supplemented with ampicillin and 0.2 (w/v) % L-arabinose and grown for 18 hours to provide starter cultures. These starter cultures were used to inoculate LB supplemented with 0.2 % (w/v) L-arabinose. Cells were grown for 60 minutes prior to harvesting at 4000 × g for 5 minutes. Biomass was washed three times with 10 ml of 1 × PBS and then resuspended in 1 ml of Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.4 % SDS, 1 % Nonidet P40, 1.5 mM MgCl2) for lysis by sonication and clarification by centrifugation at 16000 × g for 15 minutes. Lysates were incubated with Pierce™ High-Capacity Streptavidin Agarose Beads (Thermo Scientific™) overnight at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Beads were washed three times in 1 × PBS to remove unbound protein.  Beads in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C. Post digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5mm particle size, 100A pore size, 300 mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 auto-sampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 15 mL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Peptides were separated by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a Thermo Scientific nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2mm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 mm i.d. x 50cm length) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min). Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 103 minutes. (Total LC run run time was 120 mins including high organic wash step and column re-equilibration).  The eluted peptides from the C18 column LC eluant were sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 120,000 and were scanned between m/z 380-1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS scans (3 second cycle time) were employed to automatically isolate and fragment precursor ions and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional-induced dissociation (HCD) (Normalised Collision Energy (NCE): 32%) in the ion routing multipole. The resolution of the Orbitrap was set to 15000 for the measurement of fragment ions. Singly charged ions, ions with greater than seven charges and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Post-run, the data was processed using Protein Discoverer (version 2.4., ThermoFisher). Briefly, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against a common contaminants database (125 sequences;); and the UniProt Escheriichia coli database (4449 sequences). Variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and biotin (K) and a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) were applied. The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to  satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Prokaryotic Cas1-Cas2 protein complexes generate adaptive immunity to mobile genetic elements (MGEs), by capture and integration of MGE DNA in to CRISPR sites. De novo immunity relies on naive adaptation-Cas1-Cas2 targeting of MGE DNA without the aid of pre-existing immunity 'interference' complexes-by mechanisms that are not clear. Using E. coli we show that the chaperone DnaK inhibits DNA binding and integration by Cas1-Cas2, and inhibits naive adaptation in cells that results from chromosomal self-targeting. Inhibition of naive adaptation was reversed by deleting DnaK from cells, by mutation of the DnaK substrate binding domain, and by expression of an MGE (phage &#x3bb;)&#xa0;protein. We also imaged fluorescently labelled Cas1 in living cells, observing that Cas1 foci depend on active DNA replication, and are much increased in frequency in cells lacking DnaK. We discuss a model in which DnaK provides a mechanism for restraining naive adaptation from DNA self-targeting, until DnaK is triggered to release Cas1-Cas2 to target MGE DNA.

### Keywords
Cas1-cas2, Dnak, Crispr, Adaptaion

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Tom Killelea

### Lab Head
Dr Edward L. Bolt
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham


