### Accession
PXD007888

### Title
HAX1-interactome in breast cancer cell line (MCF7)

### Description
The MCF7 cell line represents a typical epithelial cell line and corresponds to luminal A breast cancer (estrogen-responsive). Overexpression of HAX1 was demonstrated in MCF7 cell line as well as in breast cancer samples, suggesting a role of HAX1 in breast cancer progression. HAX1 is a 32-kDa protein of unknown structure, involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell migration and calcium homeostasis. It was also shown to bind mRNA. Scarcity of structural elements and the presence of a disordered region, inferred from HAX1 sequence, suggests that HAX1 is intrinsically disordered, and may have many protein-protein interactions. So far about 40 different proteins were characterized as HAX1 protein partners. In the present work, applying immunoaffinity chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry, we identified new candidates for HAX1 binding partners in breast cancer cells. Newly identified proteins may be divided into three, partially overlapping groups: cytoskeleton-associated proteins, GTP-ase associated proteins and RNA-binding proteins. These results imply that HAX1 has more protein partners than hitherto described. Subsequent analysis of these interactions may shed some light into molecular mechanisms of HAX1 functions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis. Approximately 7.5 x 10^6 cells were used per one IP experiment. The experiment was performed in triplicate. Cells were washed twice with 10ml of ice cold phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), detergent permeabilized with lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 5mM EDTA pH 8.0, Nonidet P-40 0.5%, Triton X-100; 1%, protease and phosphatase inhibitors: Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and harvested using cell scraper. Cell lysate was pulled 10 times through a 29G needle attached to a 3/10cc syringe. Cell lysate was centrifuged for 12000g, 15min, 4ºC. Supernatant was collected and subjected to immunoaffinity chromatography via magnetic bead extraction. 10µg of anti-HAX1 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or, for negative control, anti-IgG rabbit polyclonal antibody (Sigma) were coupled to dynabeads protein A (1.5mg, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30', RT. Antibody was crosslinked on dynabeads in conjugation buffer  (20mM Sodium phosphate Na2HPO4, 150mM NaCl, pH 8.0) with 2mM BS3 (ThermoFischer Scientific) for 30', RT. The reaction was quenched by adding 1M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, added to final concentration 50mM, 15', RT. Immunoprecipitation was carried out overnight, at 4ºC,with constant agitation. Beads with antigen-antibody complexes were collected using magnetic separation method and washed 4 times in wash buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, NaCl 150mM, 0.5% Nonidet P-40), last wash without detergent. Proteins bound to beads were suspended in 50µl 100mM NH4HCO3. 0.5M TCEP (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added to the sample for a final concentration of 5mM and incubated at 60ºC for 1h. To block reduced cysteine residues, 200mM MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added at a final concentration of 10mM, and the sample was subjected to incubation at room temperature for 10 minutes. For digestion, trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 vol./vol. ratio and the sample was incubated at 37ºC overnight. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was used to inactivate trypsin. Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS for peptide identification.   MS settings. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a QExactive hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a nanoAcquity LC system (Waters). Data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch mode was used for acquisition, and peptide fragmentation was achieved by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD). Spectrometer parameters were as follows: polarity mode, positive; capillary voltage, 2kV. A sample was first applied to the nanoACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column (Waters) using water containing 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase. Next, the peptide mixture was transferred to the nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (Waters, 75μm inner diameter; 250mm long) and an ACN gradient (5–30% over 120min) was applied in the presence of 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250nL/min and eluted directly to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. Each LC run was preceded by a blank run in order to avoid sample carry-over between the analyses.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS raw data files were processed to peak lists with Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and submitted to the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). The databasewas composed of SwissProt (release 2017.04) Homo sapiensprotein records, SwissProt Oryctolagus cuniculus IgG entries, and contaminant proteins retrieved from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html). In total, the database included 20278 target sequences, and the same number of reversed decoy records. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme specificity: semitrypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages: 1; protein mass: unrestricted; parent ions mass error tolerance: ± 5 ppm after recalibration; fragment ions mass error tolerance: ± 0.01 Da after recalibration; fixed modifications: Methylthio C (45.98772 Da); variable modifications: Oxidation M (15.99492 Da). The statistical significance of identified peptides was determined using a target/decoy database search approach and a previously described procedure that provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (PSM) in the data set. Only PSMs with q-values ≤ 0.01 were regarded as confidently identified. Furthermore, all the peptide sequences matched to database entries representing contaminant proteins were rejected. Proteins represented by less than two peptides were excluded from further analysis. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from other proteins were filtered out from the results, and those matching the same set of peptides were grouped together into clusters (metaproteins). Mascot results processing was performed using MScan, a software tool available at http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan.

### Publication Abstract
HAX1 protein is involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell motility and calcium homeostasis. Its overexpression was reported in several tumors, including breast cancer. This study demonstrates that HAX1 has an impact on collective, but not single-cell migration, thus indicating the importance of cell-cell contacts for the HAX1-mediated effect. Accordingly, it was shown that <i>HAX1</i> knockdown affects cell-cell junctions, substrate adhesion, and epithelial cell layer integrity. As demonstrated here, these effects can be attributed to the modulation of actomyosin contractility through changes in RhoA and septin signaling. Additionally, it was shown that HAX1 does not influence invasive potential in the breast cancer cell line, suggesting that its role in breast cancer progression may be linked instead to collective invasion of the epithelial cells but not single-cell dissemination.

### Keywords
Hax1, Mcf7, Interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Radioelectronics and Multimedia Technology
Warsaw University of Technology
Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology; Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Tymon Rubel

### Lab Head
Dr Ewa Grzybowska
Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology; Warsaw, Poland


