### Accession
PXD021137

### Title
PROTEOMIC IDENTIFICATION OF SYSTEMIC BIOMARKERS IN RAT MODELS OF SPINAL CORD INJURY

### Description
Biomarkers to more accurately determine severity and prognosis following spinal cord injury (SCI) are needed to ensure that patients are assigned to the most suitable treatment and rehabilitation regimes. This study aimed to characterise the blood proteome following SCI in clinical rat injury models to identify novel candidate biomarkers and altered biological pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled blood samples from one and seven days after a contusion (serum; n=5) or from 14 days and 112 days post-complete transection SCI (plasma; n=8) and their sham-injured counterparts were subjected to independent (contusion or complete injury) iTRAQ nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry proteomic analyses. Network analyses of the differentially abundant proteins were completed to assess biological pathways that are altered in response to SCI. Data was compared to published proteomic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or blood datasets to identify candidate biomarkers.

### Data Protocol
USing Protein Pilot against NCBI and SwissProt the iTRAQ reporter ions indicated that Eleven and 42 proteins were differentially abundant (≥±2.0FC) between the contusion SCI and sham injured animals at 24h and seven days post-injury, respectively. Seven and 12 proteins were differentially abundant between complete and sham injured rats at 14 and 112 days post-injury, respectively. Acute phase response signalling and LXR/RXR activation were identified as key pathways that are differentially regulated in both models of SCI. Afamin, alpha-1-inhibitor 3, apolipoprotein B-100, fibronectin, gelsolin and vitamin D binding protein consistently changed in different SCI models.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spinal cord injury; sci; itraq proteomics; complete transection sci; contusion sci

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
1. School of Pharmacy and Bioengineering, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire, UK 2. Midlands Centre for Spinal Injuries, RJAH Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, Shropshire, UK.

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Karina T. Wright
1. School of Pharmacy and Bioengineering, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire, UK 2. Midlands Centre for Spinal Injuries, RJAH Orthopaedic Hospital, Oswestry, Shropshire, UK.


