### Accession
PXD017765

### Title
Rats, heart tissue, iTRAQ proteomics

### Description
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into (1) mock surgery (MS) group, mock surgery after EP (EPMS) group, myocardial ischemia (MI) group and MI after EP (EPMI) group. Twenty-four hours after MI or mock surgery , left ventricular tissues below the ligation were collected for the iTRAQ proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were prepared of each group for iTRAQ proteomics. The details of this process are described as follows: Protein digestion was performed according to the Filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) procedure described by the reference (15) and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffers (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 30 kD). Then 100 μl 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 20 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl DS buffer (50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate at pH 8.5) twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl DS buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μl of ethanol and added to the respective peptide mixture (100ug peptide of each sample). The samples were labeled as (Sample1)-1, (Sample2)-2, (Sample3)-3.   iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier 100 (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with 2 ml buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%-10% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%-10% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 25 min, 10-20% buffer B for 7 min, 20%-45% buffer B for 10 min, 45%–100% buffer B for 5 min, and 100% buffer B for 13 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions (about 30 fractions) were finally desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma).   Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 μl of each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (5 μg) was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.)  against Uniprot Rat database (36094 sequences, download at June 6th, 2018) and the decoy database. For protein identification, the following options were used: Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4/8plex(K), iTRAQ4/8plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M), FDR≤0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq proteomics, Heart tissue, Rats

### Affiliations
Acupuncture and Tuina college, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine
Key Laboratory of Acupuncture and Medicine Research of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Hua Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Feng Lu
Key Laboratory of Acupuncture and Medicine Research of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine


