### Accession
PXD027971

### Title
Simple, single-shot phosphoproteomic analysis of heat-stable tau

### Description
We developed a simple, antibody-free approach for single shot analysis of tau phosphorylation across the entire protein by liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to study age-related changes in tau phosphorylation. This methodology is species independent; thus, while initially developed in a rodent model, we utilized this technique to analyze 36 phosphorylation sites on rhesus monkey tau from the prefrontal cortex (PFC), a region vulnerable to AD degeneration. We identified novel, age-related changes in tau phosphorylation in the rhesus monkey PFC and analyzed patterns of phosphorylation change across domains of the protein. We confirmed a significant increase and positive correlation with age of phosphorylated serine235 tau and phosphorylated serine396 tau levels in an expanded cohort of 14 monkeys.

### Sample Protocol
Small sections of tissue were kept on dry ice while they were carefully cut with a razor blade and weighed for lysis preparation. Lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 140 mM NaCl, 2 mM EGTA, PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to each sample at a concentration of 4 μl lysis buffer for every 1 mg of tissue. Samples were sonicated following the addition of lysis buffer. NaCl (22 μl/mL 5 M) and beta-mercaptoethanol (BME; 55 μl/mL) were added and samples were vortexed. Samples were boiled for 15 min at 100°C and vortexed again. Then samples were cooled on ice for 30 min. Afterwards samples were centrifuged at 4°C, 16,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatant was collected for subsequent assays. Samples were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) equivalent to half final volume minus the reduction and alkylation volumes to ensure the BME was diluted. Either 45 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) or 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added as the reducing agent at a 1:10 ratio and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Then samples were alkylated with a 1:10 dilution of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for DTT reduced samples, or 150 mM IAA for TCEP reduced samples, at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Following reduction and alkylation all samples were digested with 1 μg trypsin per 20 μL lysate overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, samples were acidified with 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and de-salted using Nest Group C18 macrospin columns (HMMS18V) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluent from the C18 columns was dried in a speedvac and analyzed as the total lysate. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TopTip TiO2 columns (Part No. TT1TIO). For TiO2 enrichment dried peptides from the de-salt were brought up in 50 μL of 70 mM L-glutamic acid, 65% acetonitrile, 2% TFA in water. Samples were then enriched on the TiO2 columns following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluent was dried in a speedvac. Peptides were dissolved in 25 µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.2% TFA), with 5 µl injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Trapping was performed at 5µl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, 2G, V/M).  Peptides were separated at 37°C using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm) and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 2 minutes; 25% B at 140 minutes; 40% B at 165 minutes; 90% B at 170 minutes; 90% B at 180 min; return to initial conditions at 182 minutes.  MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300-1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3E6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms.  Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in centroid mode on the top 20 precursors per MS scan using 1 microscan, 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z.  Precursors were fragmented by HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%.  MS/MS were collected on species with an intensity threshold of 1E4, charge states 2-6, and peptide match preferred.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched on Mascot version 2.7.0 in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 with a parent tolerance of 10 ppm (monoisotopic), fragment tolerance of 0.020 Da (monoisotopic), and strict trypsin digestion with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages.  Variable modifications included oxidation (M), carbamidomethylation (C), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), acetylation (K, protein N-terminus), GG (K)(ubiquitin remnant), deamidation (N, Q), and DeStreak (C)(beta-mercaptoethanol adduct). Samples were analyzed using Scaffold and Scaffold PTM (Proteome Software, Portland, Oregon, USA). Scaffold PTM was used to annotate PTM sites derived from MS/MS sequencing results obtained using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.1), using the site localization algorithm developed by Sean A Beausoleil, Judit Villén, Scott A Gerber, John Rush & Steven P Gygi (Beausoleil et al., 2006). Samples were searched with a species-specific general protein library as well as a 2N4R tau-specific library. A 0.3% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 7.0% protein FDR were used for macaque results and a 0.4% protein FDR was the only threshold for rodent results as listed in the supplementary tables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heat-stable, Brain, Phosphoproteomics, Tau

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT

### Submitter
Shannon Leslie

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Nairn
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT


