### Accession
PXD028791

### Title
Identification of β-lactamases produced by Enterobacteriaceae

### Description
The increasing spread of drug-resistant bacterial strains presents great challenges to clinical antibacterial treatment and public health, particularly with regard to β-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. A rapid and accurate detection method that can expedite precise clinical diagnosis and rational administration of antibiotics is urgently needed.

### Sample Protocol
Single colonies  were picked using a micropipette tip or a 10 μL loop, and resuspended in 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, sonicated for 1 min (3 s of sonication, 6 s of rest), centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 2 min and heated at 95 °C for 5 min, after which the buffer was removed using 10K Nanosep centrifugal device with Omega membrane (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA). Ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM) was added along with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA), and the solution was microwaved in a water bath followed by heat treatment at 55 °C. Data-dependent analysis was performed on the Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to build a spectral library. The digests were separated by the trap column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany); 20 × 0.05 mm) followed by a C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18 (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH); 120 × 0.15 mm) at a flow rate of 600 μL/min. The solvent buffer A comprised water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B comprised 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. After sample loading, the gradient was initiated with 11% of buffer B, and then increased from 11 to 13% of buffer B for 2 min. The gradient increased up to 32% of buffer B in 16 min, and then to 42% in 7 min. Finally, the gradient was increased to 95% of buffer B in 1 min and was maintained for 4 min. The MS parameters were as follows: MS1 (Orbitrap analysis; mass range, approximately 350–1550 m/z; resolution, 120,000; AGC target, 5× 105; RF lens, 50%; maximum injection time, 50 ms), MS2 (high-energy collisional dissociation [HCD] collision energy, 32%; maximum injection time, 22 ms; AGC, 5 × 104; isolation window, 1.6 Da; Orbitrap solution, 15,000).

### Data Protocol
For database analyses, these raw data were searched against a combined bacterial antimicrobial resistance database downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) using the Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ version 2.2 (PD2.2) software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was specified for protein digestion with two missed cleavages allowed for each peptide. The search parameters were set as previously described (Espadas et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Β-lactamases, Detection, Enterobacteriaceae

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
Beijing Key Laboratory of Antimicrobial Agents, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Yun Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuefu You
Beijing Key Laboratory of Antimicrobial Agents, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


