### Accession
PXD003487

### Title
proteomic analysis of the gametocyte secretome

### Description
in this study we analysed the gametocyte secretome and osmiophilic body proteins by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Samples were, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific) using a Digest pro MS liquid handling system (Intavis AG) following a protocole as described by Catreinet et al. the FEBS journal 272, 2892–900 (2005). Digested peptides were then extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, concentrated nearly to dryness in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30 µl with 0.1% TFA. 10 µl of the sample was analyzed by a nanoHPLC system (Ultimate 300, Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite or LTQ_Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Sample was loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 30ul/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75um x 250mm) with a flow rate of 300nl/min in a 90 min gradient of 3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to twenty data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Mascot Daemon without grouping or smoothing and analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search against a manually compiled database containing the protein of interest and a second entry of two concatenated sequences of the same protein. Trypsin was used as protease, fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.0.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58).

### Publication Abstract
Malaria transmission from an infected host to the mosquito vector requires the uptake of intraerythrocytic sexual precursor cells into the mosquito midgut. For the release of mature extracellular gametes two membrane barriers-the parasite parasitophorous vacuole membrane and the host red blood cell membrane-need to be dissolved. Membrane lysis occurs after the release of proteins from specialized secretory vesicles including osmiophilic bodies. In this study we conducted proteomic analyses of the P. berghei gametocyte egressome and developed a vesicular bioID approach to identify hitherto unknown proteins with a potential function in gametocyte egress. This first Plasmodium gametocyte egressome includes the proteins released by the parasite during the lysis of the parasitophorous vacuole membrane and red blood cell membrane. BioID of the osmiophilic body protein MDV1/PEG3 revealed a vesicular proteome of these gametocyte-specific secretory vesicles. Fluorescent protein tagging and gene deletion approaches were employed to validate and identify a set of novel factors essential for this lysis and egress process. Our study provides the first in vivo bioID for a rodent malaria parasite and together with the first Plasmodium gametocyte egressome identifies MTRAP as a novel factor essential for mosquito transmission. Our data provide an important resource for proteins potentially involved in a key step of gametogenesis.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Gamete egress

### Affiliations
University of  Heidelberg, Center for Infectious diseases
University of Heidelberg
ZMBH

### Submitter
Bernd Hessling

### Lab Head
Dr Friedrich Frischknecht
University of  Heidelberg, Center for Infectious diseases


