### Accession
PXD027593

### Title
Amorphous silica nanoparticle exposures can lead to mitochondrial protein changes

### Description
Mitochondrial fractions from J774 mouse macrophage/monocyte cells were exposed to amorphous silica nanoforms and mitochondrial protein profiles were examined to gain information on relative toxicities of these nanomaterials on mitochondrial pathways and identify potency determinants, for risk characterization. The applicability of this approach for screening mitochondrial toxicity of nanomaterials was also verified.

### Sample Protocol
Nanoparticles-exposed (2h exposure) mitochondrial fractions from J774 cells were clarified to remove nanoparticles, were then lysed and subsequently mitochondrial proteins were further fractionated  by sequential molecular weight cut off filtration, tryptic digested and cleaned up using C18 ziptip and were analysed by LC-Orbi

### Data Protocol
The mzXML files were analyzed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2. Database searches were performed with SEQUEST HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search algorithms with a few modifications: trypsin digestion, 2 maximum missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da in case of Sequest HT and 5ppm MS1 tolerance and 0.02Da MS2 tolerance in case of MS Amanda 2.0, a fixed modification of +57.021 Da (carbamidomethylation) on cysteine, and variable modifications of +15.995 Da (oxidation) on methionine, and +79.966 Da (phosphorylation) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, +33.061 Da (chlorination) on tryptophan and tyrosine and +44.985 Da (Nitrosylation) on tryptophan and tyrosine.  A reverse database search was performed for both search engines to determine the spectral false discovery rate (FDR), and subsequent results were filtered by an FDR of ≤ 1%. The FASTA database used was a mouse proteome downloaded from Uniprot with addition of 635 common contaminants such as proteases, keratins and ubiquitins , yielding a total of 17,239 non-redundant protein sequences. Prior to quantitation, the Spectrum Files RC node in PD 2.2 was utilized to perform spectrum recalibration. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by using a target–decoy search strategy. Only high confidence peptides defined by Sequest HT or MS Amanda 2.0 with a 1% false discovery rate by Percolator were considered for the peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) are used in consumer products, engineering and medical technologies. Attractive properties of SiNPs (<i>e.g.</i> size/surface-modification) enhance usage and thus the likelihood of environmental/human exposures. The assessment of health risks associated with exposures to SiNPs requires information on their relative potencies and toxicity mechanisms. In this work, phagocytic J774 cells were exposed to amorphous pristine (15, 30, 75 nm) and surface-modified (-NH<sub>2</sub>, -C3COOH, -C11COOH, -PEG) SiNP variants, and internalization was assessed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), while cellular ATP was measured as a cytotoxicity endpoint. Furthermore, mitochondrial fractions from J774 cells were exposed to these SiNP variants (5, 15 &#x3bc;g mL<sup>-1</sup>), as well as two reference particles (SiNP 12 nm and TiO<sub>2</sub>), and proteomic changes were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to identify toxicity pathways. TEM analyses showed SiNP internalization and distribution along with some changes in mitochondrial structure. SiNP size- and surface-modification and chemical composition-related changes in mitochondrial proteins, including key proteins of the respiratory complex and oxidative stress, were evident based on high content mass spectrometry data. In addition, the dose-related decrease in cellular ATP levels in SiNP-exposed cells was consistent with related mitochondrial protein profiles. These findings suggest that physicochemical properties can be determinants of SiNP exposure-related mitochondrial effects, and mitochondrial exposures combined with proteomic analysis can be valuable as a new approach methodology in the toxicity screening of SiNPs for risk assessment, with added insight into related toxicity mechanisms.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Physicochemical characteristics, Proteomics, Exposure, Amorphous silica nanomaterials, Mass spectrometry, Nanoforms

### Affiliations
1. Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, HECSB, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON 2. Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Prem Kumarathasan
1. Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, HECSB, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON 2. Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON


