### Accession
PXD012692

### Title
Discovery of covalent CDK14 inhibitors with pan-TAIRE family specificity

### Description
Cyclin dependent kinase 14 (CDK14) and other TAIRE family kinases (CDKs 15-18) are proteins that lack functional annotation but are frequent off-targets of clinical kinase inhibitors. In this study we develop and characterize FMF-04-159-2, the first tool compound that specifically targets CDK14 covalently and possesses a TAIRE kinase-biased selectivity profile. This tool compound and its reversible analog were used to characterize the cellular consequences of covalent CDK14 inhibition, including an unbiased investigation using phospho-proteomics. To reduce confounding off-target activity, washout conditions were used to deconvolute CDK14-specific effects. This investigation suggested that CDK14 plays a supporting role in cell cycle regulation, particularly mitotic progression, and identified putative CDK14 substrates using proteomics and phospho-proteomics experiments to characterize compound effects. Together these results represent an important step forward in understanding the cellular consequences of inhibiting CDK14 kinase activity.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were treated with either DMSO, 1μM FMF-04-159-2, or 1μM AT7519 for 4 h. Washout samples were treated with 1μM FMF-04-159-2 for 4 h, followed by compound washout by removing medium containing inhibitor and washing 2x with media to effectively 'wash out' the compound. Fresh media was replaced, and cells were harvested 2 h later. Cells were harvested by removing media, washing 1x PBS, and scraping into PBS. Cells were collected by centrifugation and pellets were snap-frozen and stored at -80C.  Cells were lysed by homogenization (QIAshredder) in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4).  Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark, alkylation reactions quenched with 50 mM freshly prepared DTT and proteins precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Digests were carried out in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 in presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) with LysC (Wako, 2mg/ml, used 1:75) for 3 hours at room temperature and after subsequent addition of trypsin (Promega #V5111, stock 1:75) over night at 37C.  Missed cleavage rate was assayed from a small aliquot by mass spectrometry. For whole proteome analysis, digests containing approximately 60 μg of peptide material were directly labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeling efficiency and TMT ratios were assayed by mass spectrometry, while labeling reactions were stored at -80C. After quenching of TMT labeling reactions with hydroxylamine, TMT labeling reactions were mixed, solvent evaporated to near completion and TMT labeled peptides purified and desalted by acidic reversed phase C18 chromatography. Peptides were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography into 96 fractions and combined into 12 samples. Before mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were desalted over Stage Tips.  Phosphopeptides were enriched from digested material containing approximately 4 mg of peptide material per sample by Fe-NTA chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific #A32992). After TMT labeling, phosphopeptides were subjected to alkaline reverse fractionation by a linear acetonitrile gradient into 96 fractions and combined into 24 samples. TMT labeled, fractionated phosphopeptides were desalted over StageTips prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected by a MultiNotch MS3 TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014) using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 100 m inner diameter capillary column used was packed with C18 resin (SepPax Technologies Inc. 1.8 μm). Peptides of each fraction were separated over 3 h acidic acetonitrile gradients by LC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) injection. The first scan of the sequence was an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 Th). MS2 analysis followed collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE=35) with a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms (350 ms for phosphopeptides) and an isolation window of 0.7 Da. In order to obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th. For phosphopeptides, MS2 spectra were recorded with an isolation window of 0.5 Da and multistage activation (MSA) with a neutral loss of 97.9763 Da. In the MS3 for charge states of 2 and 3, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and for charge states 4-6 an isolation window of 0.8 m/z was chosen. MS3 injection time for phosphopeptides was 350 ms at a resolution of 50,000. Further details on LC and MS parameters and settings used were described recently. Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST-based in-house software against a human database with a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and a final collapsed protein-level FDR of 2%. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans. Quant tables were generated requiring an MS2 isolation specificity of >65% for each peptide and a sum of TMT s/n of >150 over all channels for any given peptide and exported to Excel and further processed therein. To quantify the confidence assignment of phosphorylation sites, a modified version of the Ascore algorithm was used. For confident site localization, Ascore values of >13 (p <= 0.05) were required. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described recently.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 14 (CDK14) and other TAIRE family kinases (CDKs 15-18) are proteins that lack functional annotation but are frequent off-targets of clinical kinase inhibitors. In this study we develop and characterize FMF-04-159-2, a tool compound that specifically targets CDK14 covalently and possesses a TAIRE kinase-biased selectivity profile. This tool compound and its reversible analog were used to characterize the cellular consequences of covalent CDK14 inhibition, including an unbiased investigation using phospho-proteomics. To reduce confounding off-target activity, washout conditions were used to deconvolute CDK14-specific effects. This investigation suggested that CDK14 plays a supporting role in cell-cycle regulation, particularly mitotic progression, and identified putative CDK14 substrates. Together, these results represent an important step forward in understanding the cellular consequences of inhibiting CDK14 kinase activity.

### Keywords
Cdk14, Mitosis, Cell-cycle, Covalent inhibitor, Druggable genome, Taire kinase

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Cancer Biology / Harvard Medical School, Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology
Center for Protein Degradation/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Berberich

### Lab Head
Dr Nathanael S. Gray
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Cancer Biology / Harvard Medical School, Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology


