### Accession
PXD023571

### Title
Protein Phosphatase 1 regulates atypical chromosome segregation and cell polarity during mitotic and meiotic division in Plasmodium sexual stages

### Description
PP1 is a conserved eukaryotic serine/threonine phosphatase that regulates many aspects of mitosis and meiosis, often working in concert with other phosphatases, such as CDC14 and CDC25. The proliferative stages of the parasite life cycle include sexual development within the mosquito vector, with male gamete formation characterized by an atypical rapid mitosis, consisting of three rounds of DNA synthesis, successive spindle formation with clustered kinetochores, and a meiotic stage during zygote to ookinete development following fertilization. It is unclear how PP1 is involved in these unusual processes. Using real-time live-cell imaging, conditional gene knockdown, RNA-seq and proteomic approaches, we show that Plasmodium PP1 is involved in both chromosome segregation during mitotic exit, and potentially establishment of cell polarity during zygote development in the mosquito midgut, suggesting that chemical inhibitors of PP1 may be explored for blocking parasite transmission

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin was used for in-gel digestion of the samples. Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 50 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 . Peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 300 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4% B to 35% over 73 min and then to 80% B over 2 min, followed by a 15 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1x104 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43, http://www.maxquant.org) and X!Tandem (version ALANINE 2017.02.01, https://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/) were used to search the mass spectrometry data against the PlasmoDB Berhei ANKA database (version 39, https://plasmodb.org/). Results were imported into Scaffold (version 4.10.0, Proteome Software) for further analysis where peptides and protein were filtered to 95% probability.

### Publication Abstract
PP1 is a conserved eukaryotic serine/threonine phosphatase that regulates many aspects of mitosis and meiosis, often working in concert with other phosphatases, such as CDC14 and CDC25. The proliferative stages of the malaria parasite life cycle include sexual development within the mosquito vector, with male gamete formation characterized by an atypical rapid mitosis, consisting of three rounds of DNA synthesis, successive spindle formation with clustered kinetochores, and a meiotic stage during zygote to ookinete development following fertilization. It is unclear how PP1 is involved in these unusual processes. Using real-time live-cell and ultrastructural imaging, conditional gene knockdown, RNA-seq and proteomic approaches, we show that Plasmodium PP1 is implicated in both mitotic exit and, potentially, establishing cell polarity during zygote development in the mosquito midgut, suggesting that small molecule inhibitors of PP1 should be explored for blocking parasite transmission.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Kinetochore, Sexual stage, Cell division, Polarity, Warwick-rtp, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rita Tewari
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH


