### Accession
PXD034423

### Title
Exploring Effectiveness of KEAP1-based PROTAC Strategy

### Description
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) uses small molecules to recruit E3 ubiquitin ligases into proximity of proteins of interest, inducing ubiquitination-dependent degradation. A major bottleneck in the TPD field is the lack of accessible E3 ligase ligands for developing degraders. To expand the E3 ligase toolbox, we sought to convert the KEAP1 inhibitor KI696 into a recruitment handle for several targets. While we were able to generate KEAP1-recruiting degraders of BET family and murine FAK we discovered that the target scope of KEAP1 was narrow, as targets easily degraded by a cereblon (CRBN)-recruiting degrader were refractory to KEAP1-mediated degradation. Linking the KEAP1-binding ligand to a CRBN-binding ligand resulted in a molecule that induced degradation of KEAP1 but not CRBN. In sum, we characterize tool compounds to explore KEAP1-mediated ubiquitination and delineate the challenges of exploiting new E3 ligases for generating bivalent degraders.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-based quantitative LCMS proteomics HEK239T, MM.1S or KPC cells were treated with DMSO (biological triplicate) or indicated compounds at different concentrations for certain time points and cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4 ºC. Cell lysis was performed by the addition of Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) followed by manual homogenization by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle. Lysate was clarified by centrifugation and protein quantified using bradford (Bio-Rad) assay. 200 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described[1]. The resulting precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, buffer for solubilization, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were digested for 12 hours at room temperature with LysC (1:50 ratio), followed by dilution to 0.5 M urea and a second digestion step was performed by addition of trypsin (1:50 ratio) for 6 hours at 37 ºC. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30%, followed by addition of Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents at a labelling ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. TMT labelling occurred over a 1.5 hour incubation at room temperature followed by quenching with the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. Each of the samples were combined using adjusted volumes and dried down in a speed vacuum followed by desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). The sample was offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 5 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The resulting 96 fractions were recombined in a non-contiguous manner into 24 fractions and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.  Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with an Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC lump (Thermo FIsher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 μm inner diameter EasySpray ES803/903 microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.   Quantification was performed using a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.1, 2.2 or 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (September 2016 or December 2019) containing both the forward and reverse sequences. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, tryptic peptides containing a maximum of two missed cleavages, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.1629 Da for 10/11-plex or 304.2071 For 16-plex), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (R Development Core Team, 2014). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) uses small molecules to recruit E3 ubiquitin ligases into the proximity of proteins of interest, inducing ubiquitination-dependent degradation. A major bottleneck in the TPD field is the lack of accessible E3 ligase ligands for developing degraders. To expand the E3 ligase toolbox, we sought to convert the Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1) inhibitor KI696 into a recruitment handle for several targets. While we were able to generate KEAP1-recruiting degraders of BET family and murine focal adhesion kinase (FAK), we discovered that the target scope of KEAP1 was narrow, as targets easily degraded using a cereblon (CRBN)-recruiting degrader were refractory to KEAP1-mediated degradation. Linking the KEAP1-binding ligand to a CRBN-binding ligand resulted in a molecule that induced degradation of KEAP1 but not CRBN. In sum, we characterize tool compounds to explore KEAP1-mediated ubiquitination and delineate the challenges of exploiting new E3 ligases for generating bivalent degraders.

### Keywords
Degrader, Fak, Targeted protein degradation, Keap1, Brd4

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA


