### Accession
PXD002139

### Title
AP-MS of tissue-specific protein complexes in C. elegans

### Description
We present a method for the tissue-specific purification of protein complexes from the nematode C. elegans, based on cell-type specific biotinylation. To purify proteins from specific C. elegans tissues, we adapted a system based on in vivo biotinylation of a protein of interest. In this approach, a protein of interest is tagged with the 15 amino acid Avi-tag, which can be biotinylated in vivo by the BirA biotin ligase from Escherichia coli. The biotinylated bait protein and any associated proteins are then purified with streptavidin-coated beads, and their identities are determined by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans pellets were lysed by sonication using a Diagenode Bioruptor and the concentration of protein in the lysates was determined by Bradford assay. Affinity purifications were performed with streptavidin-coated beads. After two washes, followed incubation in lysis buffer, beads were pelleted, resuspended in TEV buffer in an Eppendorf tube. Finally, we resuspended the beads in 15 μl TEV buffer and added 2 μl of TEV protease (Promega, V6101) to the samples and incubated overnight at 4°C. Eluted samples were reduced and alkylated before tryptic digestion over night at 37C before LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). For each AP, one peak list was generated per entire gel lane. Peak lists were searched against database elegans-prot-cont. with all entries and Mascot software version 2.4.01 (Matrix Science, UK). Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity with two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M)) was set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 50 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da (HCD), followed by data filtering using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted to ensure that only high quality data is allowed for this study. The spectral counts for each triplicate of controls and the four tissues were uploaded in the online CRAPome pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Bira biotin ligase, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Utrecht Univeristy
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Teck Yew Low

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.


