### Accession
PXD022905

### Title
oyster mushroom against hepatic steatosis in obese Zucker rats

### Description
Hepatic steatosis is a very common response to liver injury and often attributed to metabolic disorders. Prior studies have demonstrated the efficacy of a biotechnologically produced oyster mushroom (Pleurotus sajor-caju, PSC) in alleviating hepatic steatosis in obese Zucker rats. This study aims to elucidate molecular events underlying the anti-steatotic effects of PSC.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were extracted with TFA, proteins were digested with trypsin, peptides were labeled with TMT-10plex and analyzed with LC-ESI-MS after high-pH fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 and DAVID 6.8

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic steatosis is a very common response to liver injury and often attributed to metabolic disorders. Prior studies have demonstrated the efficacy of a biotechnologically produced oyster mushroom (Pleurotus sajor-caju, PSC) in alleviating hepatic steatosis in obese Zucker rats. This study aims to elucidate molecular events underlying the anti-steatotic effects of PSC. Tandem mass tag (TMT) peptide labeling coupled with LC-MS/MS/MS was used to quantify and compare proteins in the livers of lean Zucker rats fed a control diet (LC), obese Zucker rats fed the same control diet (OC) and obese Zucker rats fed the control diet supplemented with 5% PSC (OPSC) for 4&#xa0;weeks. Using this technique 3128 proteins could be quantified, out of which 108 were differentially abundant between the OPSC and OC group. Functional enrichment analysis of the up-regulated proteins showed that these proteins were mainly involved in metabolic processes, while the down-regulated proteins were involved in inflammatory processes. Results from proteomic analysis were successfully validated for two up-regulated (carbonic anhydrase 3, regucalcin) and two down-regulated (cadherin-17, ceruloplasmin) proteins by means of immunoblotting. SIGNIFICANCE: Valorization of low-grade agricultural waste by edible fungi, such as the mushroom Pleurotus sajor-caju (PSC), represents a promising strategy for the production of protein rich biomass since they boast of a unique enzyme system that has the ability to recover nutrients and energy from biodegradable waste. Herein, we describe the metabolic effects of PSC feeding using a combined quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics approach. In total, 108 proteins were identified to be regulated by PSC feeding in the liver of the obese rats. Complementary usage of a bioinformatics approach allowed us to decipher the mechanisms underlying the recently observed lipid-lowering and anti-inflammatory activity of PSC feeding in obese Zucker rats, namely a reduction of fatty acid synthesis, an improvement of hepatoprotective mechanisms and an enhancement of anti-inflammatory effects.

### Keywords
Hepatoprotective, Isobaric tandem mass tags, Proteomics, Oyster mushroom, Hepatic steatosis

### Affiliations
Protein Analytics,  Institute of Biiochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen

### Submitter
Günter Lochnit

### Lab Head
Dr Günter Lochnit
Protein Analytics,  Institute of Biiochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen


