### Accession
PXD001665

### Title
Mytilus galloprovincialis, sperm, LC-MSMS

### Description
Sperm contains essential proteins for interaction with eggs, however, there are only several sperm proteins reported with important role in fertilization, and gamete proteomics are limited in marine invertebrate species. We present here a sperm proteomic profile of marine mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis. There are 816 proteins were successfully identified by LC-MS/MS based on 1-DE SDS-PAGE. Many of the identifications are relevant to sperm cell physiology and mtDNA functioning. The results will contribute to better understand the proteins involved in fertilization in M. galloprovincialis, as well as the other marine invertebrate species.

### Sample Protocol
Specimens of M. galloprovincialis were collected from Qingdao, China. The male M. galloprovincialis individuals were induced to spawn and the sperm were collected by centrifugtion for 2 min at 8,000g. Then, 8M urea solution with 50mM Tris (pH =7.5) was used to resuspend the sperm palet, vortex and stored them into -80 oC for further use. SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS were proceed according the method described previously (Sun et al., 2012). Sperm from three individuals were used. First, protein quality was measured by RC DC Protein Assay kit (BIO-RAD) after centrifuge to move insoluble pellet. 100 μg total protein extraction was used to SDS-PAGE for each biological replicate. After destaining with 1 % acetic acid, each replicate was cut into 8 slices with proteins of different mass (Figure 1). Following in-gel trypsin digestion and desalting by Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, the fractions were dried using SpeedVac, and then each fraction was reconstituted in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). A 90 min gradient was used in LC process.

### Data Protocol
Database search was proceed based on the method reported previously (Sun et al., 2012). The database for Mascot search was generated from all transcriptome of M. galloprovincialis available in NCBI SRA database. All raw data were put together and assembled by CLC Genomics Workbench version 7.0.3, and they were translated to protein sequences by GETORF online server (http://leto.bioc.uvic.ca/cgi-bin/emboss.pl?_action=input&_app=getorf ) with 200 for minimum nucleotide size of ORF to report. The LC-MS/MS raw data were searched against a ‘target-decoy’ protein database. LC-MS data generated for each fraction of the 1-DE protein gel were submitted to Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Sciences Ltd., London, UK) with the following criteria: 0.8 Da for peptide tolerant and MS/MS tolerant; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (cysteine); variable modification: oxidation (M) and deamdated (NQ). Up to one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. Protein identification was considered significant only when the ions score for peptide assignments was above the 95% confidence level. All the identified proteins from three replicates were put together for annotation and classification by BLST2GO combined with BIG WEGO.

### Publication Abstract
Cataloging the sperm proteome of an animal can improve our understanding of its sperm-egg interaction and speciation, but such data are available for only a few free-spawning invertebrates. This study aimed to identify the sperm proteome of Mytilus galloprovincialis, a free-spawning marine mussel. We integrated public transcriptome datasets by de novo assembly, and applied SDS-PAGE coupled LC-MS/MS analysis to profile the sperm proteome, resulting in the identification of 550 proteins. Comparing the homologous sperm protein coding genes between M. galloprovincialis and its closely related species M. edulis revealed that fertilization proteins have the highest mean nonsynonymous substitution rate (Ka/Ks = 0.62) among 11 functional groups, consistent with previous reports of positive selection of several fertilization proteins in Mytilus. Moreover, 78 sperm proteins in different functional groups have Ka/Ks values &gt; 0.5, indicating the presence of many candidate sperm proteins for further analysis of rapid interspecific divergence. The MS data are available in ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD001665.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sperm, Mytilus galloprovincialis

### Affiliations
Hong Kong Baptist University
LAB SCT1006-2, Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

### Submitter
Yanjie Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr QIU Jian-Wen
LAB SCT1006-2, Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong


