### Accession
PXD006437

### Title
Rats, Brain, LC-MSMS -  iTRAQ-Based Proteomics Analysis Reveals the Effect of Rhubarb in Rats with Ischemic Stroke

### Description
In our study, we apply isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) followed by multidimensional liquid chromatography and tandem MS analysis(LC-MS-MS). The iTRAQ labeling were performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Applied Biosystems).8 groups of samples were labeled and repeatedly identified in one technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
The whole right or hemorrhagic hemisphere excluding the cerebellum and olfactory lobe was selected in our proteomics experiment and comparison was made in all animals. To extract proteins, the ipsilateral hemispheres were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, and then extracted with ice-cold Lysis buffer (7 M urea, 4% chaps, 30 mM HEPES) containing 1mM PMSF and 2mM EDTA (final concentration).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from Thermo Q Exactive™ LC-MS/MS System were converted into peak lists (.mgf) by Thermo Fisher Scientific Proteome Discoverer™ Software 1.4. MGF peaks files as input file, ProteinPilot (AB Sciex, Foster, CA, USA; version 5.0.1) was used to conduct deep protein quantitation and identification with rat proteome database (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002494). ProteinPilot search parameters were as follows: Sample Type (iTRAQ 8plex), Cys Alkylation (MMTS), Digestion (Trypsin), Database (RAT.fasta), Search Effort (thorough ID), FDR Analysis (Yes) and User Modified Parameter Files (No).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background</b>: Stroke is a leading health issue, with high morbidity and mortality rates worldwide. Of all strokes, approximately 80% of cases are ischemic stroke (IS). However, the underlying mechanisms of the occurrence of acute IS remain poorly understood because of heterogeneous and multiple factors. More potential biomarkers are urgently needed to reveal the deeper pathogenesis of IS. <b>Methods</b>: We identified potential biomarkers in rat brain tissues of IS using an iTRAQ labeling approach coupled with LC-MS/MS. Furthermore, bioinformatrics analyses including GO, KEGG, DAVID, and Cytoscape were used to present proteomic profiles and to explore the disease mechanisms. Additionally, Western blotting for target proteins was conducted for further verification. <b>Results</b>: We identified 4,578 proteins using the iTRAQ-based proteomics method. Of these proteins, 282 differentiated proteins, comprising 73 upregulated and 209 downregulated proteins, were observed. Further bioinformatics analysis suggested that the candidate proteins were mainly involved in energy liberation, intracellular protein transport, and synaptic plasticity regulation during the acute period. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis indicated a series of representative pathological pathways, including energy metabolite, long-term potentiation (LTP), and neurodegenerative disease-related pathways. Moreover, Western blotting confirmed the associated candidate proteins, which refer to oxidative responses and synaptic plasticity. <b>Conclusions</b>: Our findings highlight the identification of candidate protein biomarkers and provide insight into the biological processes involved in acute IS.

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Rats

### Affiliations
Yang Wang, Tao Liu, Hanjin Cui, Jing Zhou, Lin Zhu
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University

### Submitter
Yang  Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Tang
Yang Wang, Tao Liu, Hanjin Cui, Jing Zhou, Lin Zhu


