### Accession
PXD012221

### Title
Alterations of human plasma proteome profile on adaptation to high-altitude hypobaric hypoxia

### Description
For individuals migrating to or residing permanently at high-altitude regions, environmental hypobaric hypoxia is a primary challenge which induces several physiological or pathological responses. It is well documented that human beings adapt to hypobaric hypoxia via some protective mechanisms, such as erythropoiesis and overproduction of hemoglobin, however little is known on the changes of plasma proteome profiles in accommodation to high-altitude hypobaric hypoxia. In the present study, we investigated differential plasma proteomes of high altitude natives and lowland normal controls by a TMT-based proteomic approach. A total of 818 proteins were identified, of which 137 were differentially altered. Bioinformatics (including GO, KEGG, protein-protein interactions, etc.) analysis revealed the dysregulated proteins were primarily involved in complement and coagulation cascades, anti-oxidative stress and glycolysis. Validations via magnetic Luminex® Assays and ELISA demonstrated that CCL18, C9, PF4, MPO and S100A9 notably up-regulated, and HRG and F11 down-regulated in high altitude natives compared with lowland controls, which were consistent with the proteomic results. Our findings highlight the roles of complement and coagulation cascades, anti-oxidative stress and glycolysis in acclimatization to hypobaric hypoxia and provide a foundation for developing potential diagnostic or/and therapeutic biomarkers for high altitude hypobaric hypoxia-induced diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, TMT-labelling and LC-MSMS The basic coagulation tests of the plasma specimens, including activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), thrombin time (TT) and fibrinogen (Fbg) were measured by clotting assay on a CA-1500 automated coagulation analyzer (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan) as we previously studied(6, 12, 13). For TMT-based proteomic analysis, we randomly selected 6 high altitude male subjects of the 43 recruited individuals (Group A) and 6 ABO type-, gender- and age-matched low altitude controls (Group B). Pooled plasma samples were generated by combining equal volumes of the 2 individual plasma samples from each group (three biological repetitions). To facilitate the identification of lower-abundance proteins, the highly abundant proteins were reduced using a ProteoMiner™ Protein Enrichment Introductory Large-Capacity Kit (Bio-Rad, Richmond, USA) after pooling the samples. The total protein concentrations of immune-reduced protein samples were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), and were verified the consistency of each group by SDS-PAGE. Protein digestion and TMT-labelling were performed according to the Thermo Fisher protocol for TMT. Briefly, samples were reduced with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM), and digested with trypsin. Subsequently, each group of digested peptides was labeled with the TMT reagents according to the protocol of the 6-plex TMT labeling kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Torrance, CA, USA). Sample labelling was as follows: group A1: 126, group A2: 127, group A3: 128, group B1: 129, group B2: 130, and group B3: 131). Then, the labeled peptides were fractionated into 60 fractions by high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using Agilent 300Extend C-18 column. According to the strategy of Udeshi et al. (14), the 60 fractions were combined into 18 fractions, and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Thereafter, the dried samples were reconstituted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system connected to Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific, USA). Briefly, the electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 with an m/z scan range of 350–1800 for full scan. And ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. In the MS survey scan, a data-dependent mode with an automatic alteration (1 MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans) was used for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5 × 104 with 30s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and bioinformatics The raw MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against human UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org). The precursor mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and that for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. For positive protein identification, FDR was adjusted to < 1% at protein, peptide and PSM levels, and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. All identified proteins were required to have at least two peptides with at least one unique peptide. And for protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot.  GO functional annotation and enrichment analysis were derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). InterProScan soft (a sequence analysis application, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was applied to predict the domain functional descriptions of the DEPs. The PPI networks and pathway analysis were assessed by STRING database (http://string-db.org) and KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/orhttp://www.kegg.jp/), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
For individuals migrating to or residing permanently in high-altitude regions, environmental hypobaric hypoxia is a primary challenge that induces several physiological or pathological responses. It is well documented that human beings adapt to hypobaric hypoxia via some protective mechanisms, such as erythropoiesis and overproduction of hemoglobin; however, little is known on the alterations of plasma proteome profiles in accommodation to high-altitude hypobaric hypoxia. In the present study, we investigated differential plasma proteomes of high altitude natives and lowland normal controls by a TMT-based proteomic approach. A total of 818 proteins were identified, of which 137 were differentially altered. Bioinformatics (including GO, KEGG, protein-protein interactions, etc.) analysis showed that the differentially altered proteins were basically involved in complement and coagulation cascades, antioxidative stress, and glycolysis. Validation results demonstrated that CCL18, C9, PF4, MPO, and S100A9 were notably up-regulated, and HRG and F11 were down-regulated in high altitude natives, which were consistent with TMT-based proteomic results. Our findings highlight the contributions of complement and coagulation cascades, antioxidative stress, and glycolysis in acclimatization to hypobaric hypoxia and provide a foundation for developing potential diagnostic or/and therapeutic biomarkers for high altitude hypobaric hypoxia-induced diseases.

### Keywords
Proteomics; high altitude; hypobaric hypoxia; complement and coagulation cascades; antioxidant; glycolysis.

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Institute of Blood Transfusion, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Chengdu, China, 610052

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Zongkui Wang
Institute of Blood Transfusion, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Chengdu, China, 610052


