### Accession
PXD007850

### Title
Proteomic studies on the swimbladder of the European eel (Anguilla anguilla)

### Description
The swimbladder of fish is a vital organ that along with gas glands in the swimbladder wall enables key physiological functions including buoyance, diving and coping with different hydrostatic pressures. Specific intramural glands provide gas for regulating gas pressure in the swimming bladder. Transcriptomic analysis have revealed evidence at the RNA level but no specific studies at the protein level have been carried out so far. Herein, it was the aim of the study to show swimbladder proteins of the European eel by label-free LC/MS (Q-Exactive Plus) that resulted in the identification of 6,223 protein groups. Neurotransmitter receptors and -transporters were enriched in the membrane fraction and enzymes for gas production were observed. The list of identified proteins may represent a useful tool for further proteomics experiments on this organ.

### Sample Protocol
European eels (Anguilla anguilla) were caught by local fishermen in Lake Constance, Bregenz, Austria (N 47° 30’ 54”, E 9° 44’ 35”), and kept in an outdoor freshwater basin at the Institute of Zoology at the University of Innsbruck, until sampling.  Yellow eels were either killed with an overdose of neutralized tricaine methanosulfonate (MS-222; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Luis, MO, USA), or anesthetized with MS-222 and subsequently decerebrated and spinally pithed. The swimbladder was dissected, freed from connective tissue to reveal the actual gas gland tissue, immediately shock frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further use. Only swim bladders showing no sign of infection were selected for the analysis. Tissue sampling was performed in compliance with the Austrian law, the guidelines of the Austrian Federal Minister for Education, Arts, and Culture, and also the Dutch and German law. The tissue sampling procedure was approved by the Tierversuchskommission of the University of Innsbruck. Three biological replicates were used for the experiment. Frozen tissues were ground and homogenized in a solution containing 0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.1mM CaCl2 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Germany) on ice using a Dounce homogenizer.  Homogenates were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min at 4oC to obtain the pellet (debris and nuclear components). The supernatant was further centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 30 minutes at 4oC to obtain membrane (pellet) and cytosolic (supernatant) components. The sample preparation for LCMS analyses were implemented as previously described with minor modifications (Sialana et al. 2016).  Nuclear/debris and membrane pellets were reconstituted in a strong-chaotropic extraction buffer (SCEB) that contains 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100 mM DTT and 50 mM TEAB supplemented with protease inhibitors (see above).  Cytosolic fractions were concentrated using 3K centrifugal filters (Amicon) and exchanged with SCEB.  Protein amounts were estimated using the Pierce 660 protein assay (Pierce, USA).  Protein samples (100µg) were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:100 w/w, Promega, V5073) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al. 2009). All digests were desalted and concentrated by solid phase extraction using C18 material (Nest Group, USA).  Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA and the peptide concentrations were determined using the Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Pierce, USA).  Peptide aliquots (3 µg) of the biochemical fractions were obtained for label free quantification.  The remaining peptides from cytosolic and membrane fractions were separated by offline high pH reverse column (ThermoFisher Scientific, #84868) into eight fractions.  Peptides from each fractions were measured and 1µg of the peptides was analysed by LCMS.  Peptide analyses were performed using a single-shot LCMS approach with a 4-hr gradient using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) with LCMS parameters as described previously (Stojanovic et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
A protein database was generated from the predicted cDNA scaffold sequences of a draft genome sequence of the European eel (Henkel et al. 2012) using RevTrans 2.0 (Wernersson and Pedersen 2003) and the transcriptomics data (Schneebauer, Dirks, and Pelster 2017).  All MS-MS2 spectra were matched against the generated European eel protein database (34,018 sequences, http://www.zfgenomics.com/sub/eel) appended with common contaminants using the Mascot 1.5.3.30 via the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 platform (Thermo Scientific, USA). The search parameters were as follows: two tryptic missed cleavage sites, mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the precursor and fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. The data was also matched against a decoy reverse database.  Peptides and protein identifications with 1% FDR are reported implementing the Percolator algorithm.  Protein identifications requiring a minimum of two peptides sequences were reported.   Label-free quantitation was implemented using the Minora feature of Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The following parameters were used:  maximum 10 min retention time alignment; minimum of S/N of 5 for feature linking mapping.  Abundances were based upon precursor/peptide area intensities. Normalization was performed such that the total sum of the abundance is the same for all sample channels.  Imputation was performed by replacing the missing values with random values from the lower 5% of the detected values.

### Publication Abstract
The swim bladder of a fish is a vital organ that with gas gland cells in the swim bladder wall enables key physiological functions including buoyancy regulation in the face of different hydrostatic pressures. Specific gas gland cells produce and secrete acidic metabolites into the blood in order to reduce the physical solubility of gases and blood gas transport capacity for regulating the volume of the swim bladder. Transcriptomic analyses have provided evidence at the RNA level but no specific studies at the protein level have been carried out so far. Herein, it was the aim of the study to show swim bladder proteins of the yellow stage European eel by label-free LCMS (Q-Exactive Plus) that resulted in the identification of 6223 protein groups. Neurotransmitter receptors and transporters were enriched in the membrane fraction and enzymes for acid production were observed. The list of identified proteins may represent a useful tool for further proteomics experiments on this organ. All MS proteomics data are available at the PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD007850.

### Keywords
Swimbladder, Anguilla anguilla, Receptor, Neurotransmitter, Transporter, European eel

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
University of Vienna


