### Accession
PXD039498

### Title
Proteome draft of Tremella fuciformis

### Description
Identified the intracellular proteins proteins of Tremella fuciformis at three differential life stages  by the shot-gun proteomics. A total of 6823 canonical proteins (68% of predicted proteome) have been identified with protein FDR cut-off 0.01, establishing the first proteome draft of predicted coding genes of T. fuciformis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were crushed into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the total protein were was extracted isolated by extraction buffer (85% phenol, 2% β- mercaptoethanol in ddH2O), precipitated in methanol at −20 °C and re-dissolved in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail). Protein was digested into peptides by trypsin as the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)41. Peptides mixture were isolated by the EASY-nLC1000 chromatographic system equipped a omics high-resolution series monolithic capillary HPLC columns (100 μM × 50 cm, KYOTO MONOTCHE), and then were analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with DDA (data dependent acquisition) method for protein identification and DIA (data independent acquisition) for quantification as the previously description6 . The main parameters were: column temperature 50 °C, gradient time 120 min, electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV, scan range (m/z) was 350–1500, a resolution was 60,000, AGC target = 4 × 105.

### Data Protocol
Raw data Were respectively researched by Protein Discoverer 2.2.against the protein database from genome sequencing with the following parameters:  fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C),   modification of oxidation (M) and protein N-ter, MS/MS tolerance was 10 ppm, and precursor and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was 1% FDR cut-off was 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we first reported a high-quality chromosome-scale genome of Tremella fuciformis using Pacbio HiFi sequencing combining Hi-C technology. According to 21.6 Gb PacBio HiFi reads and 18.1 Gb Hi-C valid reads, we drafted a T. fuciformis genome of 27.38&#xa0;Mb assigned to 10 chromosomes, with the contig N50 of 2.28&#xa0;Mb, GC content of 56.51&#xa0;%, BUSCOs completeness of 93.1&#xa0;% and consensus quality value of 33.7. The following annotation of genomic components predicted 5,171 repeat sequences, 283 RNAs, and 10,150 protein-coding genes. Next, the intracellular proteins at three differential life stages of T. fuciformis (conidium, hyphal and fruiting body) were identified by the shot-gun proteomics. 6,823 canonical proteins (68.1&#xa0;% of predicted proteome) have been identified with protein FDR cut-off of 0.01, establishing the first proteome draft of predicted protein-coding genes of T. fuciformis. Finally, 24&#xa0;T. fuciformis polysaccharides (TPS) biosynthesis-related genes in mycelia were identified by comparative transcriptomics and proteomics, which may be more active than in conidium and revealed the TPS biosynthesis process in mycelia. This present study elucidated T. fuciformis genome composition and organization, drafted its associated proteome, and provided a genome-view of TPS biosynthesis, which will be a powerful platform for biological and genetic studies in T. fuciformis.

### Keywords
Tremella fuciformis, Proteome

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University
College of life science,Fujian agriculture and  forestry university

### Submitter
LI Yaxing

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Shujing
College of life science,Fujian agriculture and  forestry university


