### Accession
PXD007716

### Title
Dystrophin -  Human Dystrophin Structural Changes upon Binding to Anionic Membrane Lipids

### Description
Mapping of dystrophin-lipid interactions by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
HZB and HAB were labeled with 5% (mol/mol) of 16:0 pacFA PC (Avanti Polar lipids) bearing a photoactivable diazirine and a clickable alkyne group on the tail of the phospholipids. The modified bicelles were mixed with the R1-3 protein fragment to reach a final concentration of 50 mM of lipids and 15 µM of protein. Then, the protein-lipid complexes were exposed to UVA radiation (Stratalinker, GE Healthcare) for 5 min. The solutions were mixed with Laemmli buffer (2x final), heated for 5 min at 95°C and load into a homemade 10% polyacrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE. The staining was done with Coomassie blue (InstantBlue, Expedeon). The smeared parts of the gel, just above the band corresponding to the R1-3 protein fragment, were cut in small pieces . Proteins contained in the gel pieces were reduced, alkylated then digested with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptides were extracted as previously described (réf PMID: 21997732). The peptide extract was loaded (10 µL) on a nano-HPLC system (LC Packings Ultimate 3000, Dionex) equipped with a trapping precolumn (5 mm × 300 µm id, 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 µm, ThermoScientific) and an analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm id, 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 µm, ThermoScientific). Reversed-phase separation was performed with the same gradient as described previously. Peptides were directly eluted from the nanoHPLC column to the nanoelectrospray ion source of a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full MS scan and MS/MS acquisitions on the 15 most intense precursor ions as described previously. HZB and HAB were labeled with 5% (mol/mol) of 16:0 pacFA PC (Avanti Polar lipids) bearing a photoactivable diazirine and a clickable alkyne group on the tail of the phospholipids64. The modified bicelles were mixed with the R1-3 protein fragment to reach a final concentration of 50 mM of lipids and 15 µM of protein. Then, the protein-lipid complexes were exposed to UVA radiation (Stratalinker, GE Healthcare) for 5 min. The solutions were mixed with Laemmli buffer (2x final), heated for 5 min at 95°C and load into a homemade 10% polyacrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE. The staining was done with Coomassie blue (InstantBlue, Expedeon). The smeared parts of the gel, just above the band corresponding to the R1-3 protein fragment, were cut in small pieces . Proteins contained in the gel pieces were reduced, alkylated then digested with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptides were extracted as previously described. The peptide extract was loaded (10 µL) on a nano-HPLC system (LC Packings Ultimate 3000, Dionex) equipped with a trapping precolumn (5 mm × 300 µm id, 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 µm, ThermoScientific) and an analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm id, 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 µm, ThermoScientific). Reversed-phase separation was performed with the same gradient as described previously. Peptides were directly eluted from the nanoHPLC column to the nanoelectrospray ion source of a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full MS scan and MS/MS acquisitions on the 15 most intense precursor ions as described previously.

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in the RAW file format with Xcalibur 2.0.7 and subjected to database search for protein identification using Mascot Distiller 2.6.1.0 and Mascot Server 2.5.1 with its automatic decoy database search. The searched database contained the E. Coli reference proteome from Uniprot (UP000000625, April 2017), the contaminants database from Mascot and the sequence of the R1-3 protein fragment (74285 sequences, 14595443 residues). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursors and to 0.5 Da for fragments. Trypsin was selected as enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine and variable pacFA PC . The pacFA PC modification (C39H72NO8P, 713.4996 Da) was manually defined in the Mascot configuration editor with a neutral loss of phosphocholine (C5H14NO4P, 183.066 Da). Since the photo-activation of diazirine forms carbene intermediates that can react with any amino acid side chain or peptide backbone, all amino acids were selected as possible modified sites. Proline Studio 1.4 was used for identification validation (peptide rank =1; false discovery rate <1% at the peptide spectrum match level)

### Publication Abstract
Scaffolding proteins play important roles in supporting the plasma membrane (sarcolemma) of muscle cells. Among them, dystrophin strengthens the sarcolemma through protein-lipid interactions, and its absence due to gene mutations leads to the severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Most of the dystrophin protein consists of a central domain made of 24 spectrin-like coiled-coil repeats (R). Using small angle neutron scattering (SANS) and the contrast variation technique, we specifically probed the structure of the three first consecutive repeats 1-3 (R1-3), a part of dystrophin known to physiologically interact with membrane lipids. R1-3 free in solution was compared to its structure adopted in the presence of phospholipid-based bicelles. SANS data for the protein/lipid complexes were obtained with contrast-matched bicelles under various phospholipid compositions to probe the role of electrostatic interactions. When bound to anionic bicelles, large modifications of the protein three-dimensional structure were detected, as revealed by a significant increase of the protein gyration radius from 42 &#xb1; 1 to 60&#xa0;&#xb1; 4&#xa0;&#xc5;. R1-3/anionic bicelle complexes were further analyzed by coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations. From these studies, we report an all-atom model of R1-3 that highlights the opening of the R1 coiled-coil repeat when bound to the membrane lipids. This model is totally in agreement with SANS and click chemistry/mass spectrometry data. We conclude that the sarcolemma membrane anchoring that occurs during the contraction/elongation process of muscles could be ensured by this coiled-coil opening. Therefore, understanding these structural changes may help in the design of rationalized shortened dystrophins for gene therapy. Finally, our strategy opens up new possibilities for structure determination of peripheral and integral membrane proteins not compatible with different high-resolution structural methods.

### Keywords
Phosphlipid, Click-chemistry, Dystrophin

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Protim

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim


