### Accession
PXD015553

### Title
Systems Proteomics of the Intermittent Fasting Response Identifies a Key Role for HNF4a

### Description
Intermittent fasting (IF) increases lifespan, decreases metabolic disease phenotypes, and cancer risk in model organisms, but the mechanisms mediating these effects are not fully characterized. In particular, the altered transcriptional programming has yet to be defined in key fasting responsive tissues such as liver from animals undergoing intermittent fasting. In this study, we employed every-other-day-fasting (EODF) in mice and high-resolution proteome analysis of liver and blood plasma as a screening tool to identify key regulated pathways with comparison to ad libitum fed animals. We observed many changes in the liver proteome abundance profile that were distinct from those observed after a single bout of fasting. Key among these were the induction by EODF of de novo lipogenesis (DNL) and cholesterol biosynthesis pathway enzymes, which were mirrored by related metabolite changes such as increased triacylglycerides and HMG-CoA in EODF liver of fed mice. Paradoxically, we also observed the up-regulation of mitochondrial proteins associated with fatty-acid beta oxidation including ACOT2, which is known to accelerate this pathway in vivo. The most surprising observation was the EODF-mediated 16-fold down-regulation of alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1E) in liver, which is an abundant plasma protein made exclusively in this tissue.  Plasma proteome analysis confirmed a 3-fold decrease in SERPINA1E after 2 weeks of EODF among other significant changes such as increased levels of APOA4, a finding in common with previous human EODF intervention studies. We determined that in liver the SREBP1c and HNF4A transcription factors were playing a major role in the up-regulation of lipid/cholesterol synthesis and down-regulation of AAT, respectively. Further characterization of HNF4A function suggested a global inhibition of its ability to bind promoters of target genes in livers from EODF animals, which we hypothesize is mediated by either increased linoleic acid binding, or post translational modifications of HNF4A protein in EODF animal liver tissue. Together these data provide a comprehensive Omics resource highlighting the key changes observed during the intermittent fasting response in a model animal.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry (liver tissue) 50mg of frozen liver tissue was weighed out and lysed in 1mL of 4% SDS, 100mM NaCl, 20mM NaPO4- (pH 6), 10mM NaF, 10mM NEM, 10mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2mM Sodium orthovanadate and 60mM sodium β-glycerophosphate containing Complete miniprotease inhibitor tablets (EDTA-free) (Roche), using an Ultra-Turrax T8 stick homogeniser (IKA® – Werke) to blend tissue before heating lysates to 65°C for 10 minutes. Lysates were then sonicated at 80% amplitude for 15:15 second pulses with 10 minutes total on-time at 20°C (QSONICA) before centrifugation at 18000g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The lipid layer was aspirated from the clarified lysate and protein concentration was determined by BCA Total protein assay (Pierce). 100µg of protein was subjected to reduction with TCEP for 10 minutes at 65°C and alkylated with NEM for 30 minutes at room temperature. Excess NEM was removed and proteins were bound to a Speedbead mixture (1:1 hydrophilic:hydrophobic) before being digested with Trypsin (Pierce) at a 1:50 enzyme ratio for 16 hr at 37°C. Peptides were eluted from magnetic beads and spun through double stacked SDB-RPS discs (Sigma, cat#66886-U) mounted in 200µl StageTips. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic lipophilic balance followed by elution by 5% ammonium hydroxide and 80% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Genevac). Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and stored at 4°C until acquired by LC-MS.  Plasma sample preparation using SDB-RPS StageTips Plasma sample preparation was performed as described previously (Harney et al., 2019). Briefly, 1 µl of plasma (60-70 ug protein) was added to 24µl of SDC buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and heated to 95°C for 10 minutes to denature, reduce and alkylate proteins. Once cooled to room temperature and diluted 10-fold with water, LysC and Trypsin were added (from 1 mg/ml stock solutions in either water, or 50 mM acetic acid, respectively) to digest proteins at 1:100 ratio (each protease:protein, ug/ug) and digested at 37°C for 16 h. An equal volume (250 uL) of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA was added to the digested peptides and vortexed. SDB-RPS StageTips were generated by punching double-stacked SDB-RPS discs (Sigma, Cat#66886-U) with an 18-gauge needle and mounted in 200µl tips (Eppendorf). For clean-up utilising the Spin96, each tip was wetted with 100 L of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 100 L of 0.1% TFA in H2O and 30% methanol/1% TFA with centrifugation for each at 1,000 x g for 3 min. Each StageTip was then loaded with the equivalent of ~10ug peptide in 49.5% ethylacetate and 0.5% TFA (equal volumes of each phase used). The peptides were washed twice with 100 ul of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA, which was followed by one wash with 100 ul of 0.2% TFA in water. To elute, 100 L of 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min into a unskirted PCR plate. Samples in the PCR plate were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the ammonia setting at 35oC for 1 h. Dried peptides were resuspended in 30 uL of 5% formic acid and stored at 4°C until analysed by LC-MS.  LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra Using a Thermo Fisher Dionex RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 45 cm x 75 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 60 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on either a Q-Exactive HFX, or Q-Exactive classic, mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 10 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.7.0), and the MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy and proteins were filtered such that they must have >2 razor and unique peptides. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the human UniProt database downloaded on the 30th September 2017, containing 42,170 protein sequence entries and the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Either N-ethylmaleimide (liver proteomics), carbamidomethyl (plasma proteomics) on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. We used the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008). Maxquant ouput was processed and statistical tests performed using the R software package (version 3.4.3). Processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 10.0.2).

### Publication Abstract
Every-other-day fasting (EODF) is an effective intervention for the treatment of metabolic disease, including improvements in liver health. But how the liver proteome is reprogrammed by EODF is currently unknown. Here, we use EODF in mice and multi-omics analysis to identify regulated pathways. Many changes in the liver proteome are distinct after EODF and absent after a single fasting bout. Key among these is the simultaneous induction by EODF of de novo lipogenesis and fatty acid oxidation enzymes. Together with activation of oxidative stress defenses, this contributes to the improvements in glucose tolerance and lifespan after EODF. Enrichment analysis shows unexpected downregulation of HNF4&#x3b1; targets by EODF, and we confirm HNF4&#x3b1; inhibition. Suppressed HNF4&#x3b1; targets include bile synthetic enzymes and secreted proteins, such as &#x3b1;1-antitrypsin or inflammatory factors, which reflect EODF phenotypes. Interactive online access is provided to a data resource (https://www.larancelab.com/eodf), which provides a global view of fasting-induced mechanisms in mice.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Plasma, Mouse, Intermittent fasting, Liver, Proteomics, Hnf4a, Ppara, Srebp1c

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


