### Accession
PXD015083

### Title
Assessing protein sequence database suitability using de novo sequencing

### Description
The analysis of samples from unsequenced and/or understudied species as well as samples where the proteome is derived from multiple organisms poses two key questions.  The first is whether the proteomic data obtained from an unusual sample type even contains peptide tandem mass spectra.  The second question is whether an appropriate protein sequence database is available for proteomic searches. We describe the use of automated de novo sequencing for evaluating both the quality of a collection of tandem mass spectra and the suitability of a given protein sequence database for searching that data. Applications of this method include the proteome analysis of closely related species, metaproteomics, and proteomics of extant organisms.

### Sample Protocol
A human K562 cell extract was obtained from Promega.  A C. elegans tryptic digest was prepared as previously described.  Tryptic digests of whole Asian citrus psyllids (D. citri) were performed as described.   100 mg of powdered cave bear bone provided by Richard E. Green (University of California, Santa Cruz) was placed in 500 μl of 0.2% PPS Silent Surfactant (Expedeon) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), and probe sonicated three times for 20 seconds while on ice.  An additional 500 μl of 50 mM ABC brought the final extract to 1.0 ml in 0.1% PPS.  The extract was centrifuged, and the supernatant shown to contain 1.2 mg/ml total protein using a BCA assay.  A spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei) and a little skate (Leucoraja erinacea) were collected and euthanized in compliance with IACUC protocol numbers, IACUC16-014 and AUP18-0001 respectively. The ratfish was collected from Puget Sound and experimentation was carried out at the Benaroya Research Institute in Seattle, WA. The skate was shipped from the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA to the University of California, Merced where studies were performed. For both specimens, viscous hydrogel found within the electrosensory ampullae of Lorenzini was extracted by applying pressure on the organs externally. Dilution of 100 μl of this material with 200 μl of 0.2% PPS and 50 mM Tris buffer at pH 8 reduced the sample viscosity prior to tryptic digestion.  Glacial silt from Greenland meltwater was isolated at the field site.  Sample preparation, including DNA extraction, is described in detail in the supplemental section.  Reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds employed treatment with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for an hour at 37 C, cooling to room temperature, and adding 5.5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes. Tryptic digestion proceeded overnight using 1:50 by weight of Promega trypsin at 37 C.  Digestion was stopped and PPS cleaved by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (0.2% by volume and pH 2, as verified by pH paper).  In most cases, the tryptic digestions were analyzed directly; however, the fish hydrogel samples were subjected to solid phase extraction using MCX cartridges (Waters) per manufacturer’s instructions, dried on a vacuum centrifuge, and resolubilized in 100 μl of 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed with Comet using FASTA files that had been modified by appending high scoring de novo sequences.  In all cases, enzymatic cleavage was semi-tryptic, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide.  This could result in matches to a partial de novo sequence or to combinations of multiple de novo sequences; however, if such matches scored higher than any FASTA-derived sequence, the latter could still be considered to be poor matches. The precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the fragment tolerance in Comet was set via a fragment bin tolerance value of 0.02 m/z units.  Either iodoacetamide or methyl methanethiosulfonate were used, as appropriate (only the psyllid proteome was modified using the latter), for static modifications of cysteine.  Variable modifications included oxidized methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and cleavage of the protein N-terminal methionine.  The concatenated decoy search option was used.  The resulting pep.xml file output from Comet was then modified using a custom Python script to deal with the observation that correct sequences derived from a FASTA file entry can sometimes have a slightly lower Comet cross-correlation score than a de novo sequence.  This occurs when the two sequences are nearly identical, but a slight sequence variation allows the de novo sequence to account for one or two additional minor fragment ions.  Hence, in these cases the first and second rankings need to be reversed.  The differences between the first and second ranked decoy sequences were used to model this effect.  The rationale for this approach is that we know all decoy sequences are incorrect regardless of their rankings, and that the first ranked decoy has a slightly higher score due to some extra random matches.  This is similar to when a de novo sequence score is slightly higher than a correct FASTA file sequence score.  To account for the effect of peptide size on cross-correlation scores, these decoy differences were normalized to the peptide molecular weight.  The suitability of this modeling is demonstrated in Figure S1, which shows the close match between score differences.  The algorithm sorts the decoy score difference (normalized by MW), and counts down through a specified percent of the list (1% is used in all cases described here) to extract a normalized score difference that can be used as a cutoff.  Score differences less than that cutoff would capture 99% of the decoy score differences.  Likewise, score differences would capture about 99% of the cases when a de novo sequence scores slightly better than a target FASTA sequence. Once the Comet pep.xml file has been modified thusly, PeptideProphet was used to determine the FDR where the cutoff was 0.01 in conjunction with the Comet E-value cutoff of 0.01 (the only exception being the determination of high confidence sequences for Novor score evaluations as described above).

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of samples from unsequenced and/or understudied species as well as samples where the proteome is derived from multiple organisms poses two key questions. The first is whether the proteomic data obtained from an unusual sample type even contains peptide tandem mass spectra. The second question is whether an appropriate protein sequence database is available for proteomic searches. We describe the use of automated <i>de novo</i> sequencing for evaluating both the quality of a collection of tandem mass spectra and the suitability of a given protein sequence database for searching that data. Applications of this method include the proteome analysis of closely related species, metaproteomics, and proteomics of extinct organisms.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Proteomics, Fasta

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
University of Washington

### Submitter
Richard Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. MacCoss
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States


