### Accession
PXD030034

### Title
The molecular landscape of homologous recombination deficient, end-stage, high grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
High grade serous cancer (HGSC) is frequently characterizsed by homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair deficiency, and while most such tumours are sensitive to initial treatment, acquired resistance is common. We undertook a multi-omics approach to interrogating mechanisms of resistance, using multiple autopsy samples collected from 15 women with HR-deficient HGSC. We observed frequent reversion mutations, resistance mechanisms restoring HR by other means, a high frequency of whole-genome duplication (WGD) suggestive of an evolutionary advantage, and global changes in immune composition with evidence of immune escape. Collectively these findings have implications for therapeutic intervention for HR-deficient HGSC.

### Sample Protocol
LMD tissue was digested and labelled using isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTpro 16-Plex, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc) per the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested LMD samples, along with a representative pooled reference sample of LMD enriched tumor or stroma, generated by combining a small amount of peptide digest from each unique specimen, were organized into two sets of multiplexes for TMT labelling in which samples of the same LMD collection type were randomized and multiplexed together (160 µg/multiplex; n=14 multiplexes total). Seven TMT-16 multiplexes each of LMD enriched tumor or stroma samples were generated, fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC), combined into 36 concentrated fractions, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) coupled online with a Q Exactive HF-X MS (ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral match identification (Proteome Discoverer v2.2.0.388; Mascot v2.6.0), TMT reporter ion extraction, and protein-level quantitative data were generated as previously described (DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.066).

### Publication Abstract
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is frequently characterized by homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair deficiency and, while most such tumors are sensitive to initial treatment, acquired resistance is common. We undertook a multiomics approach to interrogate molecular diversity in end-stage disease, using multiple autopsy samples collected from 15&#x2009;women with HR-deficient HGSC. Patients had polyclonal disease, and several resistance mechanisms were identified within most patients, including reversion mutations and HR restoration by other means. We also observed frequent whole-genome duplication and global changes in immune composition with evidence of immune escape. This analysis highlights diverse evolutionary changes within HGSC that evade therapy and ultimately overwhelm individual patients.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer; high grade serous cancer; multi-omics; acquired resistance

### Affiliations
Inova Health System
Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Thomas Conrads

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Elizabeth L Christie
Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia


