### Accession
PXD003711

### Title
Proteomics analysis of soybean root exposed to varying sizes of silver nanoparticles under flooding stress

### Description
Because of the tremendous use of NPs in the agricultural sector (Vernikov et al., 2009) and their interactions with the plants, the effect of NPs in plants needs to be explored at the molecular level. To investigate the effects of varying sizes of silver NPs on early-stage soybean under flooding stress, morphological and proteomic analyses were performed. In this study, 5 ppm silver NPs were used because 5 ppm of silver NPs were reported to promote the soybean growth under flooding stress (Mustafa et al., 2015). In the present study, the silver NPs induced changes, in the soybean proteins under flooding stress, was evaluated using gel-free proteomic technique.

### Sample Protocol
To study the effects of different sizes of silver nanoparticles on the soybean, 2-day-old soybean were treated with silver nanoparticles of 2, 15, and 50-80 nm at 5 ppm. root including hypocotyl was collected as samples. proteins were extracted, purified and digested with trypsin and the digested peptides were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences; Phytozome, version 9.1; http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) (Schmutz et al., 2010). In the Mascot search, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification.In the Mascot search, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Silver nanoparticles

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan


