### Accession
PXD028273

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of byssus components in the pearl oyster, Pinctada maxima

### Description
Many bivalve species produce groups of strong proteinaceous byssal threads to rigidly attach to underwater substrates. Fibres like these have potential applications as biomedical materials due to their unique mechanical characteristics. The byssus and byssal thread producing glands of Pinctada maxima have not yet been characterised. RNA was isolated from P. maxima foot and byssal stem region tissues and sequenced using the Illumina platform. A de novo reference transcriptome comprising 34,281 contiguous sequences was assembled, and tissue replicates were mapped against the reference for quantitative analysis. Tryptic digests of byssal threads were analysed by LC-MS/MS. The resultant peptides were matched to 62 protein sequences derived from our reference transcriptome. Components of the byssus were identified for further characterisation, including a highly expressed perlucin-like foot protein (Pmfp1) and a recently identified protein that we refer to herein as glycine-rich thread (GRT) protein. This work provides principal knowledge on the molecular components of the byssus for P. maxima and the foot ultrastructure involved in the creation of byssal threads. This study advances our knowledge of byssus biosynthesis in non-mytilids, providing a platform for the design of new marine biopolymers.

### Sample Protocol
Byssal thread preparation for proteomics Thread protein extraction approach was based on previously described methods for the extraction of spider silk proteins with some additional wash and drying steps [80]. Briefly, byssal threads were rinsed three times in ddH2O before allowing the threads to dry completely at 95°C for 25 min. Threads were ground with a pestle and vortexed for 15 min at RT (room temperature) with extraction buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, < 5% SB 3-10 [n-Decyl-N, N-dimethyl-3-ammino-1-propanesulfonate]), 30 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 10% SDS. The ground threads in extraction buffer were subjected to 20 min in a sonicating water bath at RT. Finally, byssus samples were pelleted twice at 12,000 x g x 10 min, the supernatant removed and concentrated by Speedvac (Thermofisher).      In-solution trypsin digestion  In-solution trypsin digestion was undertaken using methods previously described [81]. Briefly, concentrated total byssal proteins were resuspended in 6 M urea, vortexed and sonicated for 2 min followed by incubation in reducing reagent (200 mM dithiothreitol, 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 60 min at 37°C. Byssal proteins were vortexed upon addition of alkylating reagent (200 mM iodoacetamide, 25 mM NH4HCO3) and the solution incubated for 60 min at RT. A further reduction step was undertaken for 60 min at RT. The solution was diluted by the addition of ddH2O and vortexed before the addition of the enzyme. Trypsin was added in a 1:10 ratio, mixed thoroughly and incubated overnight at 37°C. The enzyme was inhibited at pH < 3 by addition of 10% formic acid.  uHPLC tandem QTOF MS/MS analyses and protein identification The trypsin-digested byssal thread extracts were analysed by LC-MS/MS on an ExionLC system (AB SCIEX) coupled to a QTOF X500R mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) equipped with an electrospray ion source, using a method previously described [82]. Briefly, 25 µL of each sample was injected onto an Aeris brand 1.7μm PEPTIDE XB-C18 100 Å uHPLC column (Phenomenex, Sydney, Australia) equipped with a SecurityGuard column for mass spectrometry analysis. For mobile phases, solvent A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, and solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Linear gradients of 5 to 35% solvent B over 10 min at 400 µL/min flow rate, followed by a steeper gradient from 35 to 80% solvent B in 2 min and 80 to 95% solvent B in 1 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B was held at 95% for 1 min for washing and returned to 5% solvent B for equilibration prior to the next sample being injected. The ionspray voltage was set to 5500 V, declustering potential to 100V, curtain gas flow 30, ion source gas 1 to 40, ion source gas 2 (GS2) to 50, and spray temperature at 450°C. The mass spectrometer acquired mass spectral data in an Information Dependant Acquisition mode. Full scan TOF-MS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1400 and for product ion MS/MS 50–1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 counts per second and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ions. The data were acquired and processed using SCIEX OS software (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to mzML format utilising msConvert from ProteoWizard and imported into the PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0) [83]. The database search utilised our own Pinctada maxima transcriptome-derived protein database which included all six open reading frames. Further, a CD-search [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi] was utilised to identify specific hits to protein domains and superfamilies for transcripts identified from peptide hits using an e-value cut-off of 0.001.  De novo sequencing of peptides, database search, and characterising specific PTMs were used to analyse the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and [-10*log(p)] was calculated accordingly where p is the probability that an observed match is a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisotopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including lysine acetylation, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and conversion of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamate.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pinctada maxima</i> are most well known for their production of high-quality natural pearls. They also generate another natural material, the byssus, an adhesive thread critical for steadfast attachment underwater. Herein, <i>P. maxima</i> byssal threads were analysed <i>via</i> proteotranscriptomics to reveal 49 proteins. Further characterisation was undertaken on five highly expressed genes: glycine-rich thread protein (GRT; also known as PUF3), apfp1/perlucin-like protein (Pmfp1); peroxidase; thrombospondin 1, and Balbiani ring 3 (BR3), which showed localised tissue expression. The spatial distribution of GRT and Pmfp1 <i>via</i> immunodetection combined with histology helped to identify glandular regions of the foot that contribute to byssal thread production: the byssal gland, the duct gland, and two thread-forming glands of basophilic and acidophilic serous-like cells. This work advanced primary knowledge on the glands involved in the creation of byssal threads and the protein composition of the byssus for <i>P. maxima</i>, providing a platform for the design of marine biopolymers.

### Keywords
Pinctada maxima, Transcriptomics, Byssal threads, Proteomics, Nacre, Byssus

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast


