### Accession
PXD007214

### Title
Systematic proteomic analysis of LRRK2-mediated Rab GTPase phosphorylation establishes a connection to ciliogenesis

### Description
We previously reported that Parkinson’s disease (PD) kinase LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases on a conserved residue in their switch-II domains (Steger, Tonelli et al., 2016) (PMID: 26824392). Here, we systematically analyzed the Rab protein family and found 14 of them (Rab3A/B/C/D, Rab5A/B/C, Rab8A/B, Rab10, Rab12, Rab29, Rab35 and Rab43) to be specifically phosphorylated by LRRK2, with evidence for endogenous phosphorylation for ten of them (Rab3A, Rab3B, Rab3C, Rab3D, Rab8A, Rab8B Rab10, Rab12, Rab35 and Rab43). Affinity enrichment mass spectrometry revealed that the primary ciliogenesis regulators RILPL1 specifically interacts with the LRRK2-phosphorylated forms of Rab8A and Rab10, whereas RILPL2 binds to phosphorylated Rab8A, Rab10, and Rab12. Induction of cilia formation by serum starvation led to a two-fold reduction in ciliogenesis in fibroblasts derived from pathogenic LRRK2-R1441G knock-in mice. These results implicate LRRK2 in primary cilia formation and suggest that Rab-mediated protein transport and/or signaling defects at cilia may contribute to LRRK2-dependent pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were purified using in-house prepared SDB-RPS (Empore) stage tips (Rappsilber, Ishihama et al., 2003) before LC-MS/MS analysis as described previously (Kulak, Pichler et al., 2014). Briefly, stage tips were prepared by inserting two layers of SDB-RPS matrix into a 200 µl pipette tip using an in-house prepared syringe device. Stage-tips were first activated with 100 µl of 30 % Methanol/1% Trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and then washed with 100 µl 2 % Acetonitrile (ACN)/0.2 % TFA before loading of the acidified peptides (1 % TFA v/v). After centrifugation, the stage-tips were washed trice (200 µl each) with 2 % ACN/0.2 % TFA. Elution was performed using 60 µl of 60 % ACN/1.25 % NH4OH. Eluates were collected in 200 µl PCR tubes and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus) at 60⁰C. Peptides were resuspended in buffer A* (2 % ACN/0.1 % TFA) and briefly sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics) before LC/MS-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.15 or 1.5.8.3 (pRab8 IP of Figure 2-figure supplement 2B) (Cox & Mann, 2008, Cox, Neuhauser et al., 2011) with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Searches were performed against the Mouse or Human UniProt FASTA database (September 2015). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, GluC, AspN, LysC or chymotrypsin depending on the employed enzyme. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, and/or phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, Tyr residue (PhosphoSTY) as variable modifications. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion. Protein quantification was performed by MaxQuant (Label free quantification MaxLFQ (Cox, Hein et al., 2014)), ‘match between runs’ was enabled, with a matching time window of 0.7 min. Ion chromatograms of the SIM-MS files were extracted using Skyline (version 3.7.0.10940) (MacLean, Tomazela et al., 2010). Bioinformatic analyses were performed with Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org) and Microsoft Excel and data visualized using Graph Prism (GraphPad Software Inc) or Perseus (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016). Significance was assessed using one sample t-test, two-sample student’s t-test and ANOVA analysis, for which replicates were grouped, and statistical tests performed with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Were indicated, missing data points were replaced by data imputation after filtering for valid values (all valid values in at least one experimental group). Error bars are mean ± SEM or mean ± SD.

### Publication Abstract
We previously reported that Parkinson's disease (PD) kinase LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases on a conserved residue in their switch-II domains (Steger et al., 2016) (PMID: 26824392). Here, we systematically analyzed the Rab protein family and found 14 of them (Rab3A/B/C/D, Rab5A/B/C, Rab8A/B, Rab10, Rab12, Rab29, Rab35 and Rab43) to be specifically phosphorylated by LRRK2, with evidence for endogenous phosphorylation for ten of them (Rab3A/B/C/D, Rab8A/B, Rab10, Rab12, Rab35 and Rab43). Affinity enrichment mass spectrometry revealed that the primary ciliogenesis regulator, RILPL1 specifically interacts with the LRRK2-phosphorylated forms of Rab8A and Rab10, whereas RILPL2 binds to phosphorylated Rab8A, Rab10, and Rab12. Induction of primary cilia formation by serum starvation led to a two-fold reduction in ciliogenesis in fibroblasts derived from pathogenic LRRK2-R1441G knock-in mice. These results implicate LRRK2 in primary ciliogenesis and suggest that Rab-mediated protein transport and/or signaling defects at cilia may contribute to LRRK2-dependent pathologies.

### Keywords
Rabgtpases, Parkinson's disease, Proteomics, Lrrk2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Martin Steger

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


