### Accession
PXD039002

### Title
N-glycosite mapping in Brugia malayi female worms, male worms, and microfilariae

### Description
N-linked glycosylation is a critical post translational modification of eukaryotic proteins. N-linked glycans are present on surface and secreted filarial proteins that play a role in host parasite interactions. Examples of glycosylated Brugia malayi proteins have been previously identified but there has not been a systematic study of the N-linked glycoproteome of this or any other filarial parasite. In this study, we applied an enhanced N-glyco FASP protocol using an engineered carbohydrate-binding protein, Fbs1, to enrich N-glycosylated peptides for analysis by LC-MS/MS. We then mapped the N-glycosites on proteins from three host stages of the parasite: adult female, adult male and microfilariae. Fbs1 enrichment of N-glycosylated peptides enhanced the identification of N-glycosites. Our data identified 582 N-linked glycoproteins with 1273 N-glycosites. Gene ontology and cell localization prediction of the identified N-glycoproteins indicated that they were mostly membrane and extracellular proteins. Comparing results from adult female worms, adult male worms, and microfilariae, we find variability in N-glycosylation at the protein level as well as at the individual N-glycosite level. These variations are highlighted in cuticle N-glycoproteins and adult worm restricted N-glycoproteins as examples of proteins at the host parasite interface that are well positioned as potential therapeutic targets or biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
B. malayi total lysate prep: Approximately 200 female worms, 100 male worms, or 2 million microfilariae (TRS Labs Inc., Athens GA) were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM DTT, 4% SDS(v/v)) at 10 ml per 0.3 grams wet cell pellet. To begin lysis, samples were frozen on dry ice for 10 minutes and then thawed at 37°C four times prior to homogenization with a glass Dounce homogenizer. The homogenized samples were then heated to 100°C for 5 minutes and then chilled on ice. Cellular debris and unbroken cells were pelleted at 15,000 x g for 10 minutes. The protein concentration of each supernatant was determined using Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA). Filter aided sample prep (FASP): Tryptic peptides were produced as described previously 29. In brief, a maximum 400 µg of each protein lysate was buffer exchanged into urea buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.2, 8 M Urea.) using Microcon 30K centrifugal filters (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA). This was followed by alkylation of cysteine resides with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in the same urea buffer in the dark for 20 minutes. Excess iodoacetamide was washed away and then buffer was again exchanged, this time into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein mixture was then digested with Trypsin (P8101S, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) in a 1:100 ratio of enzyme to protein at 37°C overnight and the resulting peptides collected. Peptide concentration was determined by Pierce Colorimetric Peptide Assay quantitation kit. (ThermoFisher Scientific) Fbs1-mediated N-glycopeptide enrichment (N-FASP): N-glycopeptides were enriched as described previously 30. In brief, 100 µg of total lysate peptide mix was mixed with 200 µg of Fbs1 GYR in a Microcon 30K centrifugal filter and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. The unbound peptides were removed by centrifugation. After washing to ensure all unbound peptides were removed, the enriched N-glycosylated peptides were eluted with 50% formic acid. The elution was then lyophilized to remove the formic acid and water. N-glycan release by PNGase F in the presence of 18O water: 100 µg of lyophilized total peptide mix or the Fbs1 GYR enriched peptide mix from 100 µg starting total peptide mix were each resuspended in 50 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prepared with 18O water (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc. Andover, MA). 1000 units of PNGase F (P0704, New England Biolabs) buffer exchanged into 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prepared with 18O water were added and the reaction was incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. Samples were run on LC-MS/MS as noted below immediately to avoid spurious chemical deamidation events. LC-MS/MS: Peptides from each of the six samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry. For each sample, 6% of the resultant peptide volume was loaded onto a reversed phase analytical column (Ion Opticks Aurora UHPLC column, 25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) via a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). The column was housed in a Sonation Column Oven (Sonation Lab Solutions) and kept at 50°C. Peptides were eluted over a three-hour window consisting of a 156-minute linear gradient from 2-35% B, a three-minute gradient to 85% B and an isocratic flow at 85% B for seven minutes where mobile phase A is water containing 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B is acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were introduced into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by electrospray using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The ten most abundant ions from each full scan (70k resolution, scan range 400-1600 m/z) were selected for fragmentation by HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation), and fragmentation spectra were acquired with 35k resolution. A stepped normalized collision energy of 20, 30, and 40 was used. Charge states of one and greater than eight were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Each sample was analyzed with three technical replicates and the spectra from each triplicate set were combined for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were searched against the combined B. malayi proteome (brugia_malayi.PRJNA10729.WBPS10.protein.fa) from Wormbase 31 and the Wolbachia endosymbiont of B. malayi proteome from NCBI 32, both downloaded in December 2019 and then analyzed using Byonic software (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA). Common contaminants such as keratins, caseins, trypsin, and BSA were removed from the analysis. Protein output was set at 1% FDR. Other parameters used for each Mass Spectrometry dataset were Cleavage site = RK, C-terminal side = semi specific; missed cleavage = 2; Mass tolerance = 10 ppm; QTOF/HCD fragmentation with 0.02Da fragment mass tolerance. Fixed modifications = carbamidomethyl @ C/+57.021464. Variable Modifications = deamidated:18O(1) /+2.988261 @ N, oxidation/ +15.994915 @ M, deamidated /+0.984016 @ N and Q, acetyl @Protein N-term /+42.010565, Gln->pyro-Glu/ -17.026549, amidated @ D and E / -0.984016 We filtered the results such that peptides were required to have a Byonic score >300 and a peptide length >4 for the total proteome which had a higher sample complexity. For the Fbs1 enriched sample, we used a Byonic score > 200 and a peptide length > 4

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Filarial parasite, Lc-msms, N-glyco fasp

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist Protein Expression and Modification Division New England Biolabs
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
Fana Mersha

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy M. Foster
Senior Scientist Protein Expression and Modification Division New England Biolabs


