### Accession
PXD023593

### Title
Structural analysis of neurofibromin by crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Description
Neurofibromin (NF1) is a fundamental inhibitor of cell growth that is conserved from yeast to humans. NF1 negatively regulates oncogenic RAS proteins by accelerating the hydrolysis of RAS-bound GTP. This activity blocks growth factor signalling upstream of both mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. However, the structure and regulatory mechanisms of NF1 have remained elusive. Here we report crosslinking mass spectrometry analysis of the 320 kDa NF1 protein.

### Sample Protocol
CLMS was performed by adding either BS3 (Thermo Fisher) or BS2G (Thermo Fisher) crosslinkers at a 1:100 molar ratio to 4 µM NF1 in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 2 mM DTT. For BS3, samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 min prior to the addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to quench the reaction. For BS2G, samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min prior to the addition of 20 mM NH4HCO3 to quench the reaction. For both crosslinkers, samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to further processing. Samples were subsequently denatured for 30 min at 65°C in the presence of 10 mM DTT. 40 mM chloroacetamide was then added to the samples prior to incubation for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. A 1:100 (w:w) ratio of trypsin was added to the samples and further incubated at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped upon the addition of 1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were subsequently cleaned using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and stored in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled onto an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Fisher). An Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) were used to separate tryptic peptides by increasing concentrations of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (can) / 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow of 250 nl/min for 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with the following parameters. The cycle time was controlled for 3 seconds. The MS1 resolution was set at 120,000 and scan range of 375-2000 m/z. The AGC target was set at 1.0e6 with an injection time of 118 ms. The MS2 resolution was set at 60,000 and the AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with an injection time of 118 ms. pLink and pLink2 were used to identify BS3- or BS2G-crosslinked peptides18. Each CLMS dataset is derived from three repeats and crosslinked peptides were analysed if they had been identified at least twice with a P value of less than 10−4. Each crosslinked sample also had a corresponding negative control containing no crosslinker.

### Publication Abstract
Neurofibromin (NF1) mutations cause neurofibromatosis type 1 and drive numerous cancers, including breast and brain tumors. NF1 inhibits cellular proliferation through its guanosine triphosphatase-activating protein (GAP) activity against rat sarcoma (RAS). In the present study, cryo-electron microscope studies reveal that the human ~640-kDa NF1 homodimer features a gigantic 30&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10&#x2009;nm array of &#x3b1;-helices that form a core lemniscate-shaped scaffold. Three-dimensional variability analysis captured the catalytic GAP-related domain and lipid-binding SEC-PH domains positioned against the core scaffold in a closed, autoinhibited conformation. We postulate that interaction with the plasma membrane may release the closed conformation to promote RAS inactivation. Our structural data further allow us to map the location of disease-associated NF1 variants and provide a long-sought-after structural explanation for the extreme susceptibility of the molecule to loss-of-function mutations. Collectively these findings present potential new routes for therapeutic modulation of the RAS pathway.

### Keywords
Tumour-suppressor protein, Neurofibromin, Cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Ellisdon
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


