### Accession
PXD045045

### Title
LC-MS of Human Blood of Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors

### Description
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine tumors are challenging to diagnose and often detected at advanced stages due to lack of specific and sensitive biomarkers. This study utilized proteomics as a valuable approach for cancer biomarker discovery, therefore, mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling was conducted on plasma samples from 12 subjects (3 controls; 9 PanNET patients) to identify potential proteins capable of effectively distinguish PanNET from healthy controls. 13.2% of proteins were uniquely identified in PanNET, while 60% were commonly expressed in PanNET and controls. 17 proteins exhibiting significant differential expression between PanNET and controls were identified with downstream analysis.

### Sample Protocol
A quantity of 100 micrograms of total protein was utilized. Samples were incubated with 5 mM DTT concentration, at 37 °C for 30 minutes. Next, incubated in 15 mM final IAA concentration at 25 °C in darkness for 30 minutes. Trypsin was added to achieve a 1:50 ratio (trypsin: protein). Samples were kept overnight at 37°C for protein digestion. Further, The tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 spin column. After elution, the samples were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS was analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the nano-LC Easy nLC 1200 system. Full scan MS1 data was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, operating at a resolution of 120,000 and covering a mass range of 375-2000 Da. The data acquisition utilized Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., 2019). Fragmented parent ions were excluded for 40 seconds with an exclusion mass width of +/- 10 ppm. Furthermore, a reference mass of polydimethylcyclosiloxane with m/z 445.120025 was employed for locking and enhancing the accuracy of protein mass measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine tumors (PanNET) are challenging to diagnose and often detected at advanced stages due to a lack of specific and sensitive biomarkers. This study utilized proteomics as a valuable approach for cancer biomarker discovery; therefore, mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling was conducted on plasma samples from 12 subjects (3 controls; 5 Grade I, 4 Grade II PanNET patients) to identify potential proteins capable of effectively distinguishing PanNET from healthy controls. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD045045. 13.2% of proteins were uniquely identified in PanNET, while 60% were commonly expressed in PanNET and controls. 17 proteins exhibiting significant differential expression between PanNET and controls were identified with downstream analysis. Further, 5 proteins (C1QA, COMP, HSP90B1, ITGA2B, and FN1) were selected by pathway analysis and were validated using Western blot analysis. Significant downregulation of C1QA (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.001: within groups, 0.03: control vs. grade I, 0.0013: grade I vs. grade II) and COMP (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.011: within groups, 0.019: control vs grade I) were observed in PanNET Grade I &amp; II than in controls. Subsequently, ELISA on 38 samples revealed significant downregulation of C1QA and COMP with increasing disease severity. This study shows the potential of C1QA and COMP in the early detection of PanNET, highlighting their role in the search for early-stage (Grade-I and Grade-II) diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for PanNET.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Plasma, Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi

### Submitter
Priya Kumari Gorai

### Lab Head
Dr Neerja Rani
Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India


