### Accession
PXD005912

### Title
A375 melanoma cell line, Expanded database search comparisons

### Description
Thousands of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) dynamically impact nearly all cellular functions. Mass spectrometry is well suited to PTM identification, but proteome-scale analyses are biased towards PTMs with existing enrichment methods. To measure the full landscape of PTM regulation, software must overcome two fundamental challenges: intractably large search spaces and difficulty distinguishing correct from incorrect identifications. Here, we describe TagGraph, software that overcomes both challenges with a string-based search method orders of magnitude faster than current approaches, and probabilistic validation model optimized for PTM assignments. When applied to a human proteome map, TagGraph tripled confident identifications while revealing thousands of modification types on nearly one million sites spanning the proteome. We expand known sites by orders of magnitude for highly abundant yet understudied PTMs such as proline hydroxylation, and derive tissue-specific insight into these PTMs’ roles. TagGraph expands our ability to survey the full landscape of PTM function and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
A375 melanoma cells (ATCC) 1 were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS and antibiotics. Cells were detached by trypsinization, pelleted, washed with PBS and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. 5x107 flash-frozen A375 cells were thawed on ice and lysed by tip sonication in Urea lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 1 mM PMSF, 10 µM E-64, 100 nM bestatin, pH 8.2). The cell lysate was reduced (5 mM DTT, 55 ºC, 30 min), alkylated (12.5 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature, 1 hr in the dark), and digested overnight with LysC at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 (37 ºC). The resulting peptide mixture was desalted using C-18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters), dried using vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 prior to high pH reverse phase (HPRP) separation. HPRP was performed using an Agilent 1100 binary HPLC, delivering a gradient (0%-5% B over 10 min, 5%-35% B over 60 min, 35%-70% B over 15 min, 70% B for 10 min) across an Agilent C-18 Zorbax Extend column. Buffer A was 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 and buffer B was 10 mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10. Sixty one-minute fractions were collected and concatenated into twelve fractions as described previously 2.  1.a.ii. Mass Spectrometry All HPRP fractions were desalted using C-18 Sep-pak cartridges (Waters), vacuum centrifuged, and resuspended in 5% ACN, 5% formic acid at approximately 1 ug/ul. One microgram of each fraction was analyzed by microcapillary liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an in-house built nanospray source, an Agilent 1200 Series binary HPLC pump, and a MicroAS autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 125 um ID x 18 cm fused silica microcapillary column with an in-house pulled emitter tip with an internal diameter of approximately 5 um. The column was packed with ProntoSIL C18 AQ reversed phase resin (3 um particles, 200Å pore size; MAC-MOD, Chadds Ford, PA). Each sample was separated by applying a two-step gradient: 7% -25% buffer B over 2h; 25-45% B over 30 min. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, 2.5% ACN and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid, 97.5% ACN. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode in which a full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap (AGC: 5x105; resolution: 6x104; m/z range: 360-1600; maximum ion injection time, 500 ms), followed by up to 10 HCD MS/MS spectra, collected from the most abundant ions from the full MS scan. MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (AGC: 2x105; resolution: 7.5x103; minimum m/z: 100; maximum ion injection time, 1000 ms; isolation width: 2 Da; normalized collision energy: 30; default charge state: 2; activation time: 30 ms; dynamic exclusion time: 60 sec; exclude singly-charged ions and ions for which no charge-state could be determined).The mass calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was maintained to deliver mass accuracies of ±5 ppm without an external calibrant

### Data Protocol
Data set searched with SEQUEST, Peaks-PTM, Byonic (partially), MODa, Open Search, and TagGraph.  FDRs estimated by target-decoy + linear discriminant (SEQUEST, MODa, Open Search), internal method (Peaks-PTM, Byonic), or Expectation Maximization (TagGraph)

### Publication Abstract
Although mass spectrometry is well suited to identifying thousands of potential protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), it has historically been biased towards just a few. To measure the entire set of PTMs across diverse proteomes, software must overcome the dual challenges of covering enormous search spaces and distinguishing correct from incorrect spectrum interpretations. Here, we describe TagGraph, a computational tool that overcomes both challenges with an unrestricted string-based search method that is as much as 350-fold faster than existing approaches, and a probabilistic validation model that we optimized for PTM assignments. We applied TagGraph to a published human proteomic dataset of 25&#x2009;million mass spectra and tripled confident spectrum identifications compared to its original analysis. We identified thousands of modification types on almost 1&#x2009;million sites in the proteome. We show alternative contexts for highly abundant yet understudied PTMs such as proline hydroxylation, and its unexpected association with cancer mutations. By enabling broad characterization of PTMs, TagGraph informs as to how their functions and regulation intersect.

### Keywords
Taggraph opensearch a375 melanoma

### Affiliations
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University

### Submitter
Joshua Elias

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E. Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University


