### Accession
PXD036977

### Title
Proteomic of huh7 grown in normal and glucose-deficient conditions

### Description
Tumor cell metabolic plasticity is essential for tumor progression and therapeutic response, but the mechanism for regulation of metabolic plasticity remain poorly explored. Here, we identify PROX1 as an essential determinant for tumor metabolic plasticity. Notably, PROX1 is significantly reduced in response to metabolic stress or AMPK activation and is elevated in LKB1-deficient tumors in mice and human. Furthermore, the Ser79 phosphorylation of PROX1 by AMPK significantly alters its protein activity and allows a rapid recruitment of CUL4-DDB1 E3 ubiquitin ligase to promote PROX1 degradation under glucose starvation, a critical event that drives BCAA metabolism rewiring to suppress mTOR signaling. Importantly, PROX1 loss or Ser79 phosphorylation in HCC shows therapeutic resistance to metformin. Consistently, genetic ablation of PROX1 renders LKB1‐deficient KRAS-driven lung cancer resistant to phenformin treatment. Conversely, mice harboring non-phosphorylated PROX1 mutant or LKB1 mutant exhibit high PROX1 stabilization, promoting liver and lung cancer progression. Clinically, AMPK-PROX1 axis in human cancers is important for patient clinical outcomes. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the deficiency in the LKB1-AMPK axis in cancers reactivates PROX1 to sustain intracellular BCAA pools, resulting in enhanced mTOR signaling, and facilitating tumorigenesis and aggressiveness.

### Sample Protocol
One milliliter of lysis buffer (7M urea, 4% SDS, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Ltd. Basel, Switzerland)) was added to samples, followed by sonication on ice and centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10min at 4℃. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Determine the protein concentration of the supernatant using the BCA protein assay, and then transfer 100 μg protein per condition into a new tube and adjust to a final volume of 100μL with 100mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate). Add 5μL of the 200mM DTT and incubate sample at 55℃ for 1 hour, then add 5μL of the 375mM iodoacetamide to the sample and incubate for 30 minutes protected from light at room temperature. For each sample, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone, and then were redissolved in 100μL TEAB. Proteins were tryptically digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and the resultant peptide mixture was labeled using chemicals from the TMT reagent kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, USA). The labeled samples were combined, desalted using C18 SPE column (Sep-Pak C18, Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in vacuo. The peptide mixture was redissovled in the buffer A (buffer A: 10mM ammonium formate in water, pH10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using a Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a reverse phase column (BEH C18 column, 2.1mm x 150 mm, 1.7μm, 300 Å, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient. Starting from 0% B to 45% B in 35 min (B: 10mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column flow rate was maintained at 250μL/min and column temperature was maintained at 45℃. Thirteen fractions were collected, each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step. The fractions were resuspended with 22μl solvent C respectively (C: water with 0.1% formic acid; D: ACN with 0.1% formic acid), separated by nanoLC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiments were performed on a Nano Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source. 4 μl peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100μm x 2cm), with a flow of 10μl/min for 3 min and subsequently separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75μm x 25cm) with a linear gradient,  from 5% D to 30% D in 85 min. The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 5 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 300nL/min and column temperature was maintained at 45℃. The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1600) were acquired with a mass resolution of 70K, followed by fifteen sequential high energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The AGC taget was set to 5E105, and the maximum injection time was 50ms. MS/MS acquisition was performed in Orbitrap, the resolution was 17500 at m/z 200. The intensity threshold was 50 000, and the maximum injection time was 150 ms. The AGC target was set to 2E105, and the isolation window was 2 m/z. Ions with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%, fixed first mass was set at 110. In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.0.288). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot-SwissProt database (Taxonomy: Homo sapiens, 20245 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT 6plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Use the percolator algorithm to control peptide level false discovery rates (FDR) lower than 1%.  Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantitate label based quantitation (TMT) peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 84.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Channels were corrected by the matrix in all samples according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker. Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using Mann Whitney Test analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Huh7

### Affiliations
Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China
Renji-MedX Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University

### Submitter
Fan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Feng Liu
Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, China


