### Accession
PXD030387

### Title
Targeted Profiling of Epitranscriptomic Reader, Writer and Eraser Proteins in Radioresistant Breast Cancer Cells

### Description
Epitransciptomic reader, writer and eraser (RWE) proteins recognize, install, and remove modified nucleosides in RNA, which are known to play essential roles in RNA processing, splicing, and stability. Here, we established a liquid chromatography–parallel reaction monitoring (LC-PRM) method for high-throughput profiling of a total of 152 epitransciptomic RWE proteins, including 68 human epitranscriptomic RWE proteins deposited in the Modomics database. To our knowledge, this is the first report of quantifying a comprehensive list of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins using LC-PRM. To access the roles of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in breast cancer radioresistance, we applied the LC-PRM method, in conjunction with stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), to quantify these proteins in two pairs of matched parental/radioresistant breast cancer cells (i.e., MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells, and their radioresistant counterparts, i.e., C5 and C6 cells). We found that eight epitranscriptomic RWE proteins were commonly altered by over 1.5-fold in the two pairs of matched breast cancer cells, from which TRMT1 (an m2,2G writer) may play a role in promoting breast cancer radioresistance due to its clinical relevance and correlation with DNA repair gene sets. Furthermore, we envision that the LC-PRM method is applicable for studying the roles of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in the metastatic transformation of cancer and therapeutic resistance of other types of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
After the complete SILAC labelling of MDA-MB-231/C5 and MCF-7/C6 paired cells, cells were lysed on ice for 30-min using CelLytic M cell lysis reagent (Sigma) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, centrifuged at 9000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, then quantified the total protein using Bradford assay. In the forward SILAC labelling experiments, light-isotope labelled C5 or C6 cell lysate were mixed at 1:1 ratio with heavy-isotope labelled MDA-MB-231 or MCF-7 cell lysate. In the reverse SILAC labelling experiments, light-isotope labelled MDA-MB-231 or MCF-7 cell lysate were mixed at 1:1 ratio with heavy-isotope labelled C5 or C6 cell lysate. Two forward and two reverse labelling experiments were carried out for MDA-MB-231/C5 and MCF-7/C6 paired cells.  Based on the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, 50 µg of protein samples (25 µg of heavy- and light- isotope labelled cell lysate combined) were denatured twice in 8M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in the Polyethersulfone (PES) Membrane 30kDa centrifugal filter unit (VWR) by centrifuging at 11,000g for 25-min. The denatured samples were reduced with dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 1-hr, then alkylated with iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30-min, followed by washed twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3 by centrifuging at 11,000g for 25-min. The samples were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) at 1:50 ratio (trypsin: protein) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation, dried in a Speed-vac, desalted using OMIX C18 pipet tips (Agilent Technologies), and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid for LC-PRM analysis. A PRM library containing 152 epitrancriptomic RWE proteins was established in Skyline. Two or three unique peptides exhibiting high intensities in previous published shotgun proteomic data were selected to represent each RWE protein in the PRM library. MS/MS of each peptide were deposited in the PRM library. Additionally, iRT of each peptide was derived from the linear regression of RT and iRT of analyzing a tryptic digestion mixture of BSA under the same chromatographic condition. Samples were subjected to LC-PRM analysis on a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system. The analytical column was packed in-house using packing material of 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) in an around 25-cm long, 75 μm i.d. fused silica column. The trapping column was also prepared in-house using packing material of 5 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) in a 4-cm long, 150 μm i.d. fused silica column. 500 ng of SILAC samples were separated using a 125 min linear gradient from 6% – 43% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The spray voltage was 1.8 kV. Before analyzing samples, the tryptic digestion mixture of BSA was analyzed using the LC-PRM method with the same settings, but with m/z values of ten tryptic peptides of BSA in the inclusion list. After importing the acquired data of BSA into Skyline, three inclusion lists with m/z and a 7-min RT window of each precursor ion were generated and exported from Skyline with the maximum concurrent precursor ions set to 40. Those inclusion lists were imported individually to the Q Exactive Plus. The precursor ions were set to isolate in the quadrupole at an isolation window of 1.0 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. Other settings are listed below. MS/MS resolution, 17, 500; automated gain control (AGC) target, 1×10^5; maximum accumulation time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-PRM data were imported into Skyline. In Skyline, the acquired MS/MS of each precursor ion was compared with that in the spectral library acquired in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, where similarity is measured by dot product (dotp) value. A dotp value of > 0.7 is considered an important criterion for positive identification. In addition, 4-6 fragment ions in the light and heavy forms should co-elute. The potential interfering fragment ions that do not overlay with other fragment ions were manually excluded (i.e., processed data). The SILAC ratios of each precursor ion were calculated automatically in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptomic reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins recognize, install, and remove modified nucleosides in RNA, which are known to play crucial roles in RNA processing, splicing, and stability. Here, we established a liquid chromatography-parallel-reaction monitoring (LC-PRM) method for high-throughput profiling of a total of 152 epitranscriptomic RWE proteins. We also applied the LC-PRM method, in conjunction with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), to quantify these proteins in two pairs of matched parental/radioresistant breast cancer cells (i.e., MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells and their corresponding radioresistant C5 and C6 clones), with the goal of assessing the roles of these proteins in radioresistance. We found that eight epitranscriptomic RWE proteins were commonly altered by over 1.5-fold in the two pairs of breast cancer cells. Among them, TRMT1 (an m<sup>2,2</sup>G writer) may play a role in promoting breast cancer radioresistance due to its clinical relevance and its correlation with DNA repair gene sets. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a targeted proteomic method for comprehensive quantifications of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins. We envision that the LC-PRM method is applicable for studying the roles of these proteins in the metastatic transformation of cancer and therapeutic resistance of other types of cancer in the future.

### Keywords
Writer and eraser (rwe) proteins, Epitransciptomic reader, Trmt1, Lc-prm, Radioresistant breast cancer

### Affiliations
UC RIVERSIDE
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA, 92521-0403, USA

### Submitter
Tianyu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA, 92521-0403, USA


