### Accession
PXD008228

### Title
Proteomic approach for the analysis response of macrophages to Borrelia burgdorferi

### Description
Macrophages are cells of the innate immune system with the ability to phagocytose and induce a global pattern of responses that depend on several signalling pathways. In this work we tried to uncover the biosignature of murine bone marrow-derived macrophages and human blood monocytes upon Borrelia infection using transcriptomics and proteomics approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein from B. burgdorferi-stimulated and unstimulated BMMs was extracted using 3.5 M urea, 1 M thiourea and 2% CHAPS. The samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with minor modifications. Trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. The equivalent of approximately 500 ng of each sample were analyzed by LC-MS label-free analysis. Peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain) connected on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific ). An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column (180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm -Waters-). The pre-column was connected to a BEH130 C18 column (75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm (Waters), and equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted directly into an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, Somerset, NJ) through a nanoelectrospray capillary source (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific), at 300 nl/min and using a 120 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Full MS scan survey spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with mass resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. After each survey scan, the six most intense ions above 1000 counts were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Peptides were excluded from further analysis during 60 s using the dynamic exclusion feature.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS (version 2.0.5556.29015, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK) was used for the label-free differential protein expression analysis. One of the runs was used as the reference to which the precursor masses in all other samples were aligned to. Only features comprising charges of 2+ and 3+ were selected. The raw abundances of each feature were automatically normalized and logarithmized against the reference run. Samples were grouped in accordance to the comparison being performed, and an ANOVA analysis was performed. A peak list containing the information of all the features was generated and exported to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). This file was searched against a Uniprot/Swissprot database, and the list of identified peptides was imported back to Progenesis LC-MS. Protein quantitation was performed based on the three most intense non-conflicting peptides (peptides occurring in only one protein), except for proteins with only two non-conflicting peptides. The significance of expression changes was tested at protein level, and proteins with an ANOVA p-value ≤ 0.05 were selected for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are cells of the innate immune system with the ability to phagocytose and induce a global pattern of responses that depend on several signaling pathways. We have determined the biosignature of murine bone marrow-derived macrophages and human blood monocytes using transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. We identified a common pattern of genes that are transcriptionally regulated and overall indicate that the response to B. burgdorferi involves the interaction of spirochetal antigens with several inflammatory pathways corresponding to primary (triggered by pattern-recognition receptors) and secondary (induced by proinflammatory cytokines) responses. We also show that the Toll-like receptor family member CD180 is downregulated by the stimulation of macrophages, but not monocytes, with the spirochete. Silencing Cd180 results in increased phagocytosis while tempering the production of the proinflammatory cytokine TNF. Cd180-silenced cells produce increased levels of Itgam and surface CD11b, suggesting that the regulation of CD180 by the spirochete initiates a cascade that increases CR3-mediated phagocytosis of the bacterium while repressing the consequent inflammatory response.

### Keywords
Borrelia, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Zamudio, Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Zamudio, Spain


