### Accession
PXD028858

### Title
Histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation regulates RNA polymerase II promoter-proximal pause-release

### Description
Trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) is associated with transcriptional start sites and proposed to regulate transcription initiation. However, redundant functions of the H3K4 SET1/COMPASS methyltransferase complexes complicate elucidation of the specific role of H3K4me3 in transcriptional regulation. Here, we show that acute ablation of shared subunits of the SET1/COMPASS complexes leads to complete loss of all H3K4 methylation. H3K4me3 turnover occurs more rapidly than H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 and is dependent on KDM5 demethylases. Surprisingly, acute loss of H3K4me3 does not have detectable effects on transcriptional initiation but leads to a widespread decrease in transcriptional output, an increase in RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) pausing and slower elongation. Our study demonstrates a distinct role for H3K4me3 in transcriptional pause-release and elongation rather than transcriptional initiation.

### Sample Protocol
To measure the difference between RNAPII interactome in the presence and absence of DPY30, 1 × 108 DPY30-mAID cells were incubated with Auxin for 8 hours to induce DPY30 degradation (8h samples), while 1 × 108 DPY30-mAID cells treated with DMSO served as control (0h samples). Cells were collected and frozen on dry ice and kept at -80 °C until the IP. The cells were thawed at 37 °C for 30 seconds lysed in 1.6 mL of ice cold 50 mM EPPS pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 with cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1 tablet per 20 mL of lysis buffer), 1:100 of sigma phosphatase inhibitors 2 and 3 cocktails and 250 U/μl of Benzonase. Lysates were incubated on ice for 5 min to allow DNA digestion, centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 5 min, to remove insoluble material and filtered through acroprep 1.0 μm glass filter plate at 2000 × g for 1 minute. The concentration of protein was then estimated by BCA. For each of the samples (DMSO- and Auxin-treated cells) 6 immunoprecipitation reactions were performed: 3 with the anti-RNAPII antibody (Abcam, ab817, 8WG16) and 3 with IgG control (Invitrogen, 02-6102). Each reaction was performed with 1 mg of lysate at 3.3 g/L lysate concentration and 5 μg of antibody bound to Protein G Sepharose (Sigma-Aldrich, 17-0618-02). The incubation was performed at 4 °C shaking at 1100 × rpm for one hour. The beads were then transferred to OF 1100 filter plate (Orochem Technologies) and washed 5 times with ice cold 50 mM EPPS pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl using vacuum manifold. An 18 μl of 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 20 ng/μl trypsin, 10 ng/μl LysC was added to the beads in each well and digestion was performed for 2 hours at 37 °C at 2000 × rpm. The partial digest was then collected into 96 well PCR plate and left overnight at room temperature to complete digestion. A 4 μl of 22 g/L 11 plex TMTPro tags were added to each sample. The samples were then pulled and 20 μl of the combined sample was set aside, while the rest was fractionated into 6 fractions using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, as suggested by manufacturer. The fractions were concatenated into 4 fractions (1st and 5th fractions, 2nd and 6th and so on were mixed) and evaporated in speed vac (0.5 μl of DMSO was added to each sample to prevent complete evaporation) and resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% TFA. For data acquisition, 4.5 μl of unfractionated sample and every fraction was analyzed by nanoAcquity with 2 mm particle size, 75 mm × 500 mm easyspray column in direct injection mode. The samples were separated using the following gradient at 300 nl/min of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile): 0%–7% in 10 min, 7%–30% in 92 min, 30%–60% in 18 min, the column was then washed with 95% B for 10 min at 400 nl/min. The column was kept at 60 °C. Eluting peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using MS3 SPS with the settings recommended by the instrument manufacturer for TMT11 plex analysis with the following modifications: 1, CID NCE for MS2 was set at 32; 2, HCD NCE for MS3 was set at 45; 3, C series exclusion was disabled, since TMTPro reagent was not enabled in C-series exclusion node. Cycle time was set at 3 seconds and dynamic exclusion time was set at 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
4.5 ul of unfractionated sample and every fraction was analyzed by nanoAcquity with 2mm particle size, 75mm x 500 mm easyspray column in directinjection mode. The samples were separated using the following gradient at 300nl/min of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1%formic acid in acetonitrile): 0%–7% in 10 min, 7%–30% in 92 min, 30%–60% in 18min, the column was then washed with 95% B for 10 min at 400nl/min. The column was kept at 60C. Eluting peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using MS3 SPS with the settings recommended by the instrument manufacturer for TMT11 plex analysis witht he following modifications: 1. CID NCE for MS2 was set at 32; 2. HCD NCE for MS3 was set at 45; 3. C series exclusion was disabled, sinceTMTPro reagent was not enabled in C-series exclusion node. Cycle time was set at 3 sec and dynamic exclusion time was set at 15 sec.   Data analysis Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 3.1 software. A database searchwas performed with Sequest HT search engine using Mouse UniProt database containing only reviewed entries and canonical isoforms (retrieved on 10/10/2019). Oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification, while TMT6plex was set as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. PSMs were validated by percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. Only PSMs with isolation interference < 25% and at least 5 MS2 fragments matched to peptide sequence selected for MS3 were considered. The quantification reuslts of PSMs were combined into protein-level quantitation using MSstatsTMT R package [PMID: 24794931]. Only proteins with at least 3 peptides were reported.  To identify interactors we preformed differential abundance analysis between the IP samples and their corresponding controls (i.e. 0h IP was compared to 0h IgG control and 8h IP was compared to 8h IgG control). A protein was considered an interactor if in one or both comparisons its levels were statistically significantly different  (Q value ≤ 0.05, limma test, with P values adjusted by the Storey method) and at least twice higher in IP reactions than in the corresponding IG control."

### Publication Abstract
Trimethylation of&#xa0;histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) is associated with transcriptional start sites and has been proposed to regulate transcription initiation<sup>1,2</sup>. However, redundant functions of the H3K4 SET1/COMPASS methyltransferase complexes complicate the elucidation of the specific role of H3K4me3 in transcriptional regulation<sup>3,4</sup>. Here, using mouse embryonic stem cells as a model system, we show that acute ablation of shared subunits of the SET1/COMPASS complexes leads to a complete loss of all H3K4 methylation. Turnover of&#xa0;H3K4me3 occurs more rapidly than that of&#xa0;H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 and is dependent on KDM5 demethylases. Notably, acute loss of H3K4me3 does not have detectable effects on transcriptional initiation but leads to a widespread decrease in transcriptional output, an increase in RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) pausing and slower elongation. We show that H3K4me3 is required for the recruitment of the integrator complex subunit 11 (INTS11), which is essential for the eviction of paused RNAPII and transcriptional elongation. Thus, our study demonstrates a distinct role for H3K4me3 in transcriptional pause-release and elongation rather than transcriptional initiation.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase ii, Histone

### Affiliations
Microchemistry and Proteomics Core Facility, Memorial Sloan KetteringCancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA (lab head)
Syddansk University

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Hendrickson
Microchemistry and Proteomics Core Facility, Memorial Sloan KetteringCancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA (lab head)


