### Accession
PXD004635

### Title
Identification of novel Coronin 1A interacting proteins

### Description
Severe combined immunodeficiency 8 (IMD8) is caused by mutations in the human Coronin 1A (Coro1A). The clinical presentation of IMD8 patients is characterized by recurrent bacterial infections, suggesting an important role of Coro1A in innate immunity. To analyze the molecular mechanism of Coro1A during neutrophil recruitment, we identified the Coro1A interactome by conducting co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments using GFP NanoTrap technology and subsequent mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using human neutrophil-like differentiated HL-60 (dHL-60) cells stably expressing Coro1A-EGFP (dHL-60-Coro1A-EGFP) cells.

### Sample Protocol
dHL-60-Coro1A-EGFP or control dHL-60 cells were exposed to immobilized fibrinogen. Cells were left untreated or stimulated with 1 mM Mn2+ for 15 min. Co-IP was performed by using GFP-Trap® (Chromotek, Germany) beads. For mass spectrometry (MS), beads with bound precipitates were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3, incubated with 10 ng/µL trypsin in 1 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min, and washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3. The supernatant was digested overnight in presence of 1 mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to liquid chromatography-MS analysis. The desalted tryptic peptides were separated using a 15 cm analytical column C18 (75 μm) ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany) with a 40 min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system, Thermo Scientific Dionex, Germany). The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The MS instrument was operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 – 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a ‘target value’ of 500,000 in the linear ion trap). The six most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID). All fragmentation spectra were recorded in the LTQ part of the instrument. For all measurements with the Orbitrap detector, 3 lock-mass ions from ambient air were used for internal calibration as described before. Typical MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200ºC; normalized CID energy 35%; activation q = 0.25; activation time = 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 software was used to identify proteins and quantified by intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Conditions were: Database, human uniprot (uniprot_P000005640 downloaded on November 6th 2015); MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.01; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; minimum peptides = 1; minimum ratio count = 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners if their MaxQuant/iBAQ values were greater than log2 2-fold change and p-value < 0.05 (ANOVA) compared to control.

### Publication Abstract
Trafficking of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) during inflammation critically depends on the &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) (CD11a/CD18) and macrophage-1 antigen (CD11b/CD18). Here, we identify coronin 1A (Coro1A) as a novel regulator of &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins that interacts with the cytoplasmic tail of CD18 and is crucial for induction of PMN adhesion and postadhesion events, including adhesion strengthening, spreading, and migration under flow conditions. Transition of PMN rolling to firm adhesion critically depends on Coro1A by regulating the accumulation of high-affinity LFA-1 in focal zones of adherent cells. Defective integrin affinity regulation in the genetic absence of <i>Coro1A</i> impairs leukocyte adhesion and extravasation in inflamed cremaster muscle venules in comparison with control animals. In a <i>Helicobacter pylori</i> mouse infection model, PMN infiltration into the gastric mucosa is dramatically reduced in <i>Coro1A</i><sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice, resulting in an attenuated gastric inflammation. Thus, Coro1A represents an important novel player in integrin biology, with key functions in PMN trafficking during innate immunity.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Maxquant, Gfp nanotraps, Lc-ms/ms, Hl-60 cells, Coronin 1a

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine Department of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology  Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Walzog
Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine Department of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology  Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Germany


