### Accession
PXD037401

### Title
LncRNA LETS1 promotes TGF--induced EMT and cancer progression

### Description
Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling is a critical driver of epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer progression. However, the regulatory roles of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in TGF--induced EMT and cancer progression are not well understood. Here, we identified an unannotated nuclear lncRNA LETS1 (LncRNA Enforcing TGF- Signaling 1) as a novel TGF-/SMAD target gene. Loss of LETS1 attenuates TGF--induced EMT, migration and extravasation in breast and lung cancer cells. LETS1 potentiates TGF-/SMAD signaling by stabilizing cell surface TGF- type I receptor (TRI) and thereby forms a positive feedback loop. Mechanistically, LETS1 inhibits TRI polyubiquitination by inducing the orphan nuclear receptor 4A1 (NR4A1) expression, a critical determinant of a destruction complex for inhibitory SMAD7. An unbiased interactome analysis identified the Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells (NFAT5) as a protein partner of LETS1 to mediate activation of NR4A1 promoter. Overall, our findings characterize LETS1 as an EMT-promoting lncRNA and elucidate the mechanism by which nuclear LETS1 potentiates TGF- receptor signaling.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells with stable TurboID-dCasRx and CRISPR-CasRx gRNA expression CARPID was used for CARPID. 200 μM of biotin (Sigma; B4639) dissolved in medium was used to activate biotinylation in cells cultured in a 15-cm dish for 30 min. Cells were washed with cold PBS twice and suspended with 600 l of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, H2O, 1 mM DTT). After mixing with 240 L of 20% Triton X-100, cell lysates were sonicated at 80% amplitude for 10 s for 4 times. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C and added with 1 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). 25 L of Streptavidin Agarose beads (Millipore; 69203) was added to the supernatant and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4°C. After washing with wash buffer 1 (2 % SDS), wash buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA and 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5)), wash buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5% Deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA and 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.1)), wash buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 50 mM NaCl), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times, the beads were resuspended in 250 L of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with 250 ng of Trypsin (V5280; Promega) overnight at 37°C. The beads were separated with a prewashed 0.4 m filter (Millipore; UFC30HV00). Digested peptides were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) and analyzed as in (Salas-Lloret et al, 2022). Briefly, samples were measured in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex). Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm long fused silica emitter (FS360-75-15-N-5-C50, New Objective, Massachusetts, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50ºC in a Column Oven for ESI/Nano Spray (Sonation, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 60 min followed by column re-conditioning for 25 minutes. A Lock Mass of 445.12003 (polysiloxane) was used for internal calibration.  Data was acquired in a Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a TopSpeed method with cycle time of 3 s with a scan range of 350-1600 m/z and resolutions of 60,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, respectively. For MS2, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 30% was applied. Precursors with a charge of 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 as well as previously analyzed precursors with a dynamic exclusion window of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant v2.1.3.0 according to Tyanova et al(Tyanova et al, 2016a) with the following modifications: Maximum missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 3. Searches were performed against an in silico digested database from the human proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 29th August 2022). Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), were set as variable modifications with a maximum of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. Label-free quantification was activated not enabling Fast LFQ. The match between runs feature was activated with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling is a critical driver of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer progression. In SMAD-dependent TGF-&#x3b2; signaling, activation of the TGF-&#x3b2; receptor complex stimulates the phosphorylation of the intracellular receptor-associated SMADs (SMAD2 and SMAD3), which translocate to the nucleus to promote target gene expression. SMAD7 inhibits signaling through the pathway by promoting the polyubiquitination of the TGF-&#x3b2; type I receptor (T&#x3b2;RI). We identified an unannotated nuclear long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) that we designated LETS1 (lncRNA enforcing TGF-&#x3b2; signaling 1) that was not only increased but also perpetuated by TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. Loss of LETS1 attenuated TGF-&#x3b2;-induced EMT and migration in breast and lung cancer cells in vitro and extravasation of the cells in a zebrafish xenograft model. LETS1 potentiated TGF-&#x3b2;-SMAD signaling by stabilizing cell surface T&#x3b2;RI, thereby forming a positive feedback loop. Specifically, LETS1 inhibited T&#x3b2;RI polyubiquitination by binding to nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT5) and inducing the expression of the gene encoding the orphan nuclear receptor 4A1 (NR4A1), a component of a destruction complex for SMAD7. Overall, our findings characterize LETS1 as an EMT-promoting lncRNA that potentiates signaling through TGF-&#x3b2; receptor complexes.

### Keywords
Lncrna; tfg-beta; cancer; emt

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Genome Proteomics Laboratory, CABIMER-US, Seville, Spain

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
Genome Proteomics Laboratory, CABIMER-US, Seville, Spain


