### Accession
PXD024840

### Title
The Arabidopsis F-box protein FBW2 degrades AGO1 to avoid spurious loading of illegitimate small RNA

### Description
RNA silencing is a conserved mechanism in eukaryotes and is involved in development, heterochromatin maintenance and defense against viruses. In plants, ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) protein plays a central role in both microRNA (miRNA) and small interfering RNA (siRNA)-directed silencing and its expression is regulated at multiple levels. Here, we report that the F-box protein FBW2 targets proteolysis of AGO1 by a CDC48-mediated mechanism. We found that FBW2 assembles an SCF complex that recognizes the MID-PIWI domain of AGO1 and requires its C-terminal domain containing a GW motif for AGO1 turnover. We showed that FBW2 has a preference for the unloaded and for some mutated forms of AGO1 protein. While FBW2 loss of function does not lead to strong growth or developmental defects, it significantly increases RNA silencing activity. Interestingly, under conditions in which small RNA production or accumulation is affected, the failure to degrade AGO1 in fbw2 mutants becomes more deleterious for the plant. Hence, we showed that the non-degradable AGO1 protein assembles high molecular complexes and binds illegitimate small RNA leading to the cleavage of new target genes that belong to stress responses and cellular metabolic processes. Therefore, the control of AGO1 homeostasis by ubiquitin ligases, plays an important quality control to avoid off-target cleavage.

### Sample Protocol
For each IP, 1g of seedlings were ground in liquid nitrogen for 10 minutes in 3 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 50mM NaCl, 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630, 2mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, 0.375% formaldehyde, protease inhibitors (Complete–EDTA free, Roche). The crosslinked protein extract was quenched 2 minutes with glycine to a final concentration of 200mM. The cleared supernatants were divided in two affinity purifications, incubated with magnetic microbeads coupled to HA antibodies (Miltenyi, catalogue number 130-091-122), and complexes were eluted in 100 µl of pre-warmed elution buffer (Miltenyi). Co-IP experiments were performed in two independent biological replicates with two different transgenic lines (FBW2OE and FBW2OE/ago1.27). Each biological replicate was divided into two affinity-purification replicates. In parallel control IPs were carried out with HA antibodies in Col-0. Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the TAIRv10 fasta protein sequences from Arabidopsis thaliana with a decoy strategy (27.282 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v2.0 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least six independent biological and affinity replicates. After a DEseq2 normalization of the data matrix, the spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). For each identified protein, an adjusted p-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC). The results are presented in a Volcano plot using protein log2 fold changes and their corresponding adjusted (-log10adjp) to highlight upregulated and downregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna silencing, Ago1, F-box protein fbw2, Scf complex

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Esther Lechner
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France


