### Accession
PXD007657

### Title
Multi-omics biomarker pipeline reveals elevated levels of protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 4 in seminal plasma of prostate cancer patients

### Description
Prostate-specific antigen, a blood serum biomarker of prostate cancer, lacks specificity and prognostic significance, so considerable efforts are devoted to developing novel biomarkers. Seminal plasma, due to its proximity to prostate, is a promising fluid for biomarker discovery and non-invasive diagnostics. In this study, we investigated if seminal plasma proteins could increase specificity of detecting primary prostate cancer and discriminate between high- and low-grade cancers. To select 148 most promising biomarker candidates, we combined proteins identified through five independent data mining or experimental approaches: tissue transcriptomics, seminal plasma proteomics, cell secretomics, tissue specificity and androgen regulation. A rigorous biomarker development pipeline based on targeted proteomics assays was designed to evaluate the most promising candidates. We qualified 77 and verified 19 proteins in seminal plasma of 67 negative biopsy and 155 prostate cancer patients. Verification revealed a prostate-specific, secreted and androgen-regulated protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 4 (TGM4), which could predict prostate cancer on biopsy and outperformed age and serum PSA. Machine-learning approaches also revealed improved multi-marker combinations for diagnosis and prognosis. In the independent verification set measured by an in-house ELISA, TGM4 was up-regulated 3.7-fold (P=0.006) and revealed AUC 0.66 for detecting prostate cancer on biopsy for patients serum PSA≥4 ng/mL and age≥50. Low levels of TGM4 (120 pg/mL) were detected in blood serum, but could not differentiate between negative biopsy, prostate cancer or prostate inflammation.  To conclude, performance of TGM4 warrants its further investigation within the distinct genomic subtypes of prostate cancer and evaluation for the inclusion into emerging multi-biomarker panels.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion of proteins (500 µg total protein per pool) was performed as previously described (16,20). Briefly, proteins were denatured at 65°C in the presence of 0.02% of RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA), reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide and digested overnight at 37°C using sequencing grade modified trypsin (trypsin:total protein ratio 1:30; Promega, Madison WI, USA). RapiGest SF was cleaved with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and removed by centrifugation. Following protein digestion, peptides were fractionated by strong-cation exchange chromatography, twenty three fractions were collected for each pool replicate, concentrated with 10 µL OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Lake Forest, CA) and analyzed by the reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LTQ-Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific), as previously described (21).

### Data Protocol
XCalibur software (v. 2.0.5; Thermo Scientific) was used to generate RAW files.  MaxQuant software (version 1.1.1.25) was used for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ). MaxQuant executed spectral search against a concatenated International Protein Index (IPI) human protein database (version 3.71) and a decoy database. Parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity, 1 missed cleavage, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, minimum of 1 unique peptide, top 6 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ion and MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da and fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein at N-terminus. All entries were filtered using a false positive rate of 1% both at the peptide and protein levels, and false positives were removed. MaxQuant search file proteinGroups.txt was uploaded to Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3). Protein identifications annotated in the columns “Only identified by site”, “Reverse” and “Contaminant” as well as proteins identified only in a single replicate were filtered out. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and used to calculate means and statistical significance (t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg false-discovery rate-adjusted P-values) and generate volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal plasma, because of its proximity to prostate, is a promising fluid for biomarker discovery and noninvasive diagnostics. In this study, we investigated if seminal plasma proteins could increase diagnostic specificity of detecting primary prostate cancer and discriminate between high- and low-grade cancers. To select 147 most promising biomarker candidates, we combined proteins identified through five independent experimental or data mining approaches: tissue transcriptomics, seminal plasma proteomics, cell line secretomics, tissue specificity, and androgen regulation. A rigorous biomarker development pipeline based on selected reaction monitoring assays was designed to evaluate the most promising candidates. As a result, we qualified 76, and verified 19 proteins in seminal plasma of 67 negative biopsy and 152 prostate cancer patients. Verification revealed a prostate-specific, secreted and androgen-regulated protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 4 (TGM4), which predicted prostate cancer on biopsy and outperformed age and serum Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA). A machine-learning approach for data analysis provided improved multi-marker combinations for diagnosis and prognosis. In the independent verification set measured by an in-house immunoassay, TGM4 protein was upregulated 3.7-fold (<i>p</i> = 0.006) and revealed AUC = 0.66 for detecting prostate cancer on biopsy for patients with serum PSA &#x2265;4 ng/ml and age &#x2265;50. Very low levels of TGM4 (120 pg/ml) were detected in blood serum. Collectively, our study demonstrated rigorous evaluation of one of the remaining and not well-explored prostate-specific proteins within the medium-abundance proteome of seminal plasma. Performance of TGM4 warrants its further investigation within the distinct genomic subtypes and evaluation for the inclusion into emerging multi-biomarker panels.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; biomarker discovery; seminal plasma; proteomics; mass spectrometry; selected reaction monitoring; tgm4; protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 4

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto

### Submitter
Andrei Drabovich

### Lab Head
Dr Andrei P. Drabovich
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto


