### Accession
PXD045957

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the digestive gland of Mitylus galloprovincialis exposed to a mixture of three pharmaceuticals

### Description
Proteomics to decipher the cocktail effects of three pharmaceuticals (diclofenac, carbamazepine and venlafaxine) as a mixture on the digestive gland of male mussels Mytilus galloprovincialis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short electrophoretic migration. They were excised from the gel as a single polyacrylamide band and then subjected to trypsin proteolysis. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry coupled to reverse-phase liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed with the MASCOT pipeline. The results were then parsed. Spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure to single molecules under laboratory conditions has led to a better understanding of the mechanisms of action (MeOAs) and effects of pharmaceutical active compounds (PhACs) on non-target organisms. However, not taking the co-occurrence of contaminants in the environment and their possible interactions into account may lead to underestimation of their impacts. In this study, we combined untargeted metabolomics and proteogenomics approaches to assess the mixture effects of diclofenac, carbamazepine and venlafaxine on marine mussels (Mytilus galloprovincialis). Our multi-omics approach and data fusion strategy highlighted how such xenobiotic cocktails induce important cellular changes that can be harmful to marine bivalves. This response is mainly characterized by energy metabolism disruption, fatty acid degradation, protein synthesis and degradation, and the induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and oxidative stress. The known MeOAs and molecular signatures of PhACs were taken into consideration to gain insight into the mixture effects, thereby revealing a potential additive effect. Multi-omics approaches on mussels as sentinels offer a comprehensive overview of molecular and cellular responses triggered by exposure to contaminant mixtures, even at environmental concentrations.

### Keywords
Ecotoxicology, Proteomics, Data fusion, Mixture effect, Bivalves, Mechanism of action, Multi-omics, Pharmaceuticals

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France


