### Accession
PXD039068

### Title
Yeast Sis1 proximity labelling during heat shock

### Description
Proximity interactome labelling of Sis1 APEX2 during heat shock revealed its comprehensive interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on SDS-PAGE and gel bands were subjected for in-gel digestion. Gel bands were washed in 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic)/Acetonitrile (ACN) and reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 45 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 min in room temperature (RT). Gel bands were washed in 100mM AmBic/ACN prior to adding 1μg trypsin (Promega #V5111) for overnight incubation at 37°C. Supernatant containing peptides were collected into a new tube. Gel pieces were washed with gentle shaking in 50% ACN/1% FA at RT for ten minutes, and supernatant was collected in the previous tubes. Final peptide extraction step was done with 80% ACN/1% FA, and 100% ACN, and all supernatant was collected. The peptides were dried at speedvac and reconstituted with 5% ACN/0.1% FA in water before injecting into the LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed at the Nothwestern University Proteomics Core. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation nanoLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (QE) Quadrupole-Obitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 μm x 3 cm in-house packed with 3 um ReproSil-Pur® beads. The analytical column was a 75 um x 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 um ReproSil-Pur® beads (New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA). The flow rate was kept at 300nL/min. All fractions were eluted from the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an initial gradient elution of 5% B from 0 to 5 min, transitioned to 40% over 100 min, 60% for 4 mins, ramping up to 90% B for 3 min, holding 90% B for 3 min, followed by re-equilibration of 5% B at 10 min with a total run time of 120 min. Mass spectra (MS) and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded in positive-ion and high-sensitivity mode with a resolution of ∼60,000 full-width half-maximum. The 15 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy in the ion trap. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 s. Proteins were identified from the MS raw files using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK. version 2.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt Saccharomyces cerevisiae database. All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized Methionine, deamidated asparagine and aspartic Acid, and acetylated N-term as variable modifications. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at the peptide level. Only proteins with a minimum of two peptides above the cutoff were considered for further study. Identified peptides/protein were visualized by Scaffold software (version 5.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sis1, Apex2, Heat shock, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Chicago

### Submitter
Asif Ali

### Lab Head
Dr David Pincus
University of Chicago


