### Accession
PXD022448

### Title
Library-free BoxCarDIA solves the missing value problem in label-free quantitative proteomics

### Description
The last decade has seen significant advances in the application of quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics technologies to tackle important questions in plant biology. The current standard for quantitative proteomics in plants is the use of data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis with or without the use of chemical labels. However, the DDA approach preferentially measures higher abundant proteins, and often requires data imputation due to quantification inconsistency between samples. In this study we systematically benchmarked a recently developed library-free data-independent acquisition (directDIA) method against a state-of-the-art DDA label-free quantitative proteomics workflow for plants. We next developed a novel acquisition approach combining MS1-level BoxCar acquisition with MS2-level directDIA analysis that we call BoxCarDIA. DirectDIA achieves a 33% increase in protein quantification over traditional DDA, and BoxCarDIA a further 8%, without any changes in instrumentation, offline fractionation, or increases in mass-spectrometer run time. BoxCarDIA, especially, offers wholly reproducible quantification of proteins between replicate injections, thereby addressing the long-standing missing-value problem in label-free quantitative proteomics. Further, we find that the gains in dynamic range sampling by directDIA and BoxCarDIA translate to deeper quantification of key, low abundant, functional protein classes (e.g., protein kinases and transcription factors) that are underrepresented in data acquired using DDA. We applied these methods to perform a quantitative proteomic comparison of dark and light grown Arabidopsis cell cultures, providing a critical resource for future plant interactome studies. Our results establish BoxCarDIA as the new method of choice in quantitative proteomics using Orbitrap-type mass-spectrometers, particularly for proteomes with large dynamic range such as that of plants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation: Quick-frozen cells were ground to a fine powder under liquid N2 using a mortar and pestle. Ground samples were aliquoted into 400 mg fractions. Aliquoted samples were then extracted at a 1:2 (w/v) ratio with a solution of 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 4% (w/v) SDS. Samples were then vortexed and placed in a 95oC table-top shaking incubator (Eppendorf) at 1100 RPM for 15 mins, followed by an additional 15 mins shaking at room temperature. All samples were then spun at 20,000 x g for 5 min to clarify extractions, with the supernatant retained in fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Sample protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (23225; ThermoScientific). Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95oC for 5 mins, cooled, then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 30 min in the dark without shaking at room temperature. Subsequently, 10 mM DTT was added to each sample, followed by a quick vortex, and incubation for 10 min at room temperature without shaking. Total proteome peptide pools were generated using a KingFisher Duo (ThermoScientific) automated sample preparation device as outlined by Leutert et al. (2019)36 without deviation. Sample digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (V5113; Promega), with generated peptide pools quantified by Nanodrop, acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were then dissolved in 3% ACN/0.1% TFA, desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (ZTC18S960; Millipore) as previously described7, then dried and dissolved in 3.0% ACN/0.1% FA prior to MS analysis. HeLa proteome analysis was carried out using a HeLa Protein Digest Standard (88329; Pierce). Four replicate injections of this digest per analysis type were carried out with the same methods as for Arabidopsis cell samples. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis: Peptide samples were analyzed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA) modes. Dissolved peptides (1 µg) were injected using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (LC140; ThermoScientific) and separated on a 50 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C18 Column (ES803A; ThermoScientific). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water). Common MS settings between DDA and DIA runs included a spray voltage of 2.2 kV, funnel RF level of 40 and heated capillary at 300oC. All data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity with peptide match off and isotope exclusion selected. All gradients were run at 300 nL/min with analytical column temperature set to 50oC. DDA acquisition: Peptides were eluted with a solvent B gradient (0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN): 4% - 41% B (0 – 120 min); 41% - 98% B (120-125 min). DDA acquisition was performed using the Universal Method (ThermoScientific). Full scan MS1 spectra (350 - 2000 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z with a normalized AGC Target of 125% and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. DDA MS2 were acquired in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation in a window of 2.5 m/z. Selected ions were HCD fragmented with 35% fragmentation energy, with the ion trap run in rapid scan mode with an AGC target of 200% and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions with a charge state of +2 - +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5.0e3 were selected for fragmentation. All precursor signals selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30s. DIA acquisition: Peptides were eluted using a segmented solvent B gradient of 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN from 4% - 41% B (0 - 107 min). DIA acquisition was performed as per Bekker-Jensen et al. (2020)20 and Biognosys AG. Full scan MS1 spectra (350 - 1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z with a normalized AGC Target of 250% and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. ACG target value for fragment spectra was set to 2000%. Twenty-eight 38.5 m/z windows were used with an overlap of 1 m/z (Supplementary Table 21). Resolution was set to 30,000 using a dynamic maximum injection time and a minimum number of desired points across each peak set to 6. BoxCar DIA acquisition was performed using the same gradient settings as DIA acquisition outlined above. MS1 analysis was performed by using two multiplexed targeted SIM scans of 10 BoxCar windows each. Detection was performed at 120,000 and normalized AGC targets of 100% per BoxCar isolation window. Isolation windows used are described in Supplementary Table 22. Windows were designed using the custom boxcarmaker R script that divides the MS1 spectra list into 20 m/z bins, each with an equal number of precursors, using the equal_freq function in the funModeling package (http://pablo14.github.io/funModeling/). MS2 acquisition was performed according to the settings described above for DIA acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing: DDA files were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.1429,30. MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against a custom made decoyed (reversed) version of the Arabidopsis protein database from Araport 1137 concatenated with a collection of 261 known mass spectrometry contaminants. Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavage and a protein and PSM false discovery rate of 1%; respectively. Minimal peptide length was set to seven and match between runs option enabled. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, while variable modifications included methionine oxidation. DIA files were processed with the Spectronaut directDIA experimental analysis workflow using default settings without N-acetyl variable modification enabled. Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavages and a protein and PSM false discovery rate of 1%; respectively. Data filtering was set to Q-value and global normalization. For comparing BoxCarDIA and directDIA, the Spectronaut directDIA workflow was used with factory settings. For hybrid (library- and library-free) DIA analysis, DDA raw files were first searched with the Pulsar search engine implemented in Spectronaut 14 to produce a search archive. Next, the DIA files were searched along with this search archive to generate a spectral library. The spectral library was then used for normal DIA analysis in Spectronaut 14. Default settings (without N-acetyl variable modification) were used in all steps. Final optimized Excalibur method files for DDA, directDIA and BoxCarDIA are provided as Supplemental Information. Data analysis: Downstream data analysis for DDA samples was performed using Perseus version 1.6.14.038. Reverse hits and contaminants were removed, the data log2-transformed, followed by a data sub-selection criterion of n=3 of 4 replicates in at least one sample. Missing values were replaced using the normal distribution imputation method with default settings to generate a list of reliably quantified proteins. Subsequently, significantly changing differentially abundant proteins were determined and corrected for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni-corrected p-value < 0.05; q-value). DirectDIA and BoxCarDIA data analysis was performed on Spectronaut v.14 using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Directdia, Arabidopsis, Data acquisition, Label-free, Boxcar, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr R. Glen Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta


