### Accession
PXD016214

### Title
Phosphoproteomic characterization of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Influenza A virus synergism

### Description
Our understanding of the synergism between S. pneumoniae and influenza virus remains incomplete. The classic dogma has been that influenza attenuates the host innate immunity and increase the susceptibility to subsequent bacterial infection. Therefore, the majority of current studies have been focusing on the interaction of S. pneumoniae and influenza in the context of host cells. By contrast, in this study, we set out to investigate the response of pneumococcus alone to virus infection. Our hypothesis was that prior to causing any damages to host cells, influenza may have induced (lethal) changes to pneumococcus cell itself. Indeed, a very recent evidence has shown that direct viral treatment to pneumococcus will increase its adhesion to macrophage cells. Here, using quantitative phosphoproteomic approach, we attempt to investigate the global alterations of S. pneumoniae phosphorylation by influenza virus challenge, and provide a landscape of synergism between the IAV and pneumococcus.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using SDS buffer; proteins were digested using Suspension Trapping (STrap) method with the self-assembled filters. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 based approach. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and Q Exactive mass spec (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation by MaxQuant (v1.6); downstream bioinformatics analyses were performed on Perseus software (v1.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Influenza a virus, Synergism, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Drive Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Drive Rockville, MD 20850


