### Accession
PXD009390

### Title
Combining laser capture micro-dissection and proteomics reveals an active translation machinery controlling invadosome formation

### Description
We developed a method that combines laser micro-dissection and mass spectrometry, enabling the analysis of subcellular structures in their native state based on low amounts of input material. Using this combinatorial method, we showed that invadosomes contain specific components of the translational machinery, in addition to known marker proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Microdissected invadosomes and whole cells extracts were incubated in a Tris-HCl pH 6.8 solution for 2 h at 95°C. Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when the samples entered the resolving gel and the proteins were visualized by colloidal blue staining. The SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, the gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, the gel pieces were rehydrated with 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, the gel pieces were shrunk in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. The proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µL of trypsin (T6567, Sigma-Aldrich) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and were finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel in three steps: the first incubation was in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN for 15 min at room temperature and two subsequent incubations were in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and re-suspended with 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, we used the Mascot 2.5 algorithm available with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). It was used in batch mode by searching against the UniProt Mus musculus database (45 172 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release 2016_03) from [http://www.uniprot.org/website]. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were looked for dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. 13C(6) (K) or 13C(6) (R) labeling was searched as variable modification for contaminating analyses and as fixed modification for invadosomal proteome analyses. For the enrichment analysis compared with the total cellular proteome, raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio ([http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/]) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Protein identification was only accepted with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank=1 and with a protein FDR value less than 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out using the parameters indicated in Supplementary Table 4. Protein ratios were normalized by sum of peak intensities. Proteins with invadosomes/total ratios ≥1.5 were considered as enriched in comparison with the whole cellular proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Invadosomes are F-actin-based structures involved in extracellular matrix degradation, cell invasion, and metastasis formation. Analyzing their proteome is crucial to decipher their molecular composition, to understand their mechanisms, and to find specific elements to target them. However, the specific analysis of invadosomes is challenging, because it is difficult to maintain their integrity during isolation. In addition, classical purification methods often suffer from contaminations, which may impair data validation. To ensure the specific identification of invadosome components, we here develop a method that combines laser microdissection and mass spectrometry, enabling the analysis of subcellular structures in their native state based on low amounts of input material. Using this combinatorial method, we show that invadosomes contain specific components of the translational machinery, in addition to known marker proteins. Moreover, functional validation reveals that protein translation activity is an inherent property of invadosomes, which is required to maintain invadosome structure and activity.

### Keywords
Translation, Laser micro-dissection, Invadosome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
INSERM, UMR1053, BaRITOn Bordeaux Research in Translational Oncology, F-33000 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Saltel
INSERM, UMR1053, BaRITOn Bordeaux Research in Translational Oncology, F-33000 Bordeaux, France


