### Accession
PXD035649

### Title
Arabidopsis UVR8 peptide analysis

### Description
UVR8 phosphopeptides identified in plants exposed or not to UV light.

### Sample Protocol
IP Samples were run on SDS-PAGE and relevant gel bands excised. The gel bands were then in-gel processed, reductvely alkylated with DTT and Iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin (12.5ug/ml) prior to MS analysis using a Q-Exactive HF MS system coupled to an RSLC nano UHPLC system with an EasySpray column (75um x 50cm). The 120min gradient separation used was from 2-35%B at 300nl/min with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Q-Exactive Plus was run in positve mode and the MS1 scan (m/z range from 350-1600, ion injection time of 20 ms, resolution 70 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) 1e6) acquired in profile mode followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (resolution 17500) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC 2e5, maximum ion injection time 100 ms, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid.

### Data Protocol
Raw ms files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 with Mascot as the search engine using the following parameters: Mascot expectation value less than or equal to 0.05 with high peptide confidence and minimum of 1 peptide per protein.  Mascot search criteria: Protein Database: Sprot (Arabidopsis thaliana), fragment mass tolerance (0.06Da), precursor mass tolerance (10ppm), Dynamic modifications: (Acetyl (N-term),  Dioxidation (M), Oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidated (NQ), Phospho (ST) and Phospho (Y). Static modification: Carbamidomethyl (C).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
IMCS, University of Glasgow,Glasgow UK
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Gareth Jenkins
IMCS, University of Glasgow,Glasgow UK


