### Accession
PXD011627

### Title
Proteomics analysis of extracellular matrix remodeling during zebrafish heart regeneration

### Description
Adult zebrafish, in contrast to mammals, are able to regenerate their hearts in response to injury or experimental amputation. Our understanding of the cellular and molecular bases that underlie this process, although fragmentary, has increased significantly over the last years. However, the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during zebrafish heartregeneration has been comparatively rarely explored. Here, we set out to characterize theECM protein composition inadult zebrafish hearts, and whether it changed during the regenerative response. For this purpose, we first established a decellularization protocol of adult zebrafish ventricles that significantly enriched the yield of ECM proteins. We then performed proteomic analyses of decellularized control hearts and at different times of regeneration. Our results show a dynamic change in ECM protein composition, most evident at the earliest (7 dayspost-amputation) time-point analyzed. Regeneration associated withsharp increases inspecific ECM proteins, and with an overall decrease in collagens and cytoskeletal proteins. We finally tested by atomic force microscopythat the changes in ECM composition translatedto decreased ECM stiffness. Our cumulative results identify changes in the protein composition and mechanical properties of the zebrafish heart ECM during regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Three pools of whole hearts (n = 3, each pool), three pools of semi-decelularized hearts (n = 10, each pool) and three pools of fully decelularized hearts (n = 20, each pool) from zebrafish where analyzed by proteomics. The proteins of all the samples (n = 9) were solubilized by mixing with 50 l of 1%SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT, sonication (10’) and boiling for 5 minutes. Proteins extracts were clarified by centrifugation at 16.000xg for 5 min and quantified using the RcDc kit (Biorad). Then, 12 g of protein of each sample were digested with LysC and trypsin using a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol and further analyzed by mass spectrometry. The LC separation was conducted on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo) using 0.1% formic acid as Solvent A and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as B. Each run, was carried out at 250 nL/min with a gradient of 95% of solvent A to 65% A in 180 min. Blank samples with solvent A injections were run in between each sample. Shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis was performed online with an electrospray voltage of 1.9 kV using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) with collision-induced fragmentation using top 15 precursor with charge 2 to 5 for data-dependent acquisition (DDA). MS1 spectra were acquired in the mass range 390−1700 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 with a target value of 3 x 106 ions and maximum fill time of 20 ms. MS2 spectra were collected with a target ion value of 2 x 105 and maximum 100 ms fill time using a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic precursor exclusion was set at 15 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.6a) using the built-in Andromeda Search Engine. The Danio rerio TrEMBL database downloaded from www.uniprot.org (Oct, 8th 2018) (62078 entries) was used to search for peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched with a first search precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Then, the peptide masses were corrected and a second search was performed at 4.5 ppm of mass tolerance. The fragment tolerance was set to 0.5Da, the enzyme was trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. To improve the identifications the “match between runs” was enabled among the replicates of every experimental condition.     MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.6a) was used to validate the peptides and proteins identifications. The final list of peptides was obtained after applying a 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR). For proteins, only the proteins with at least 1 assigned peptide after applying a 5% FDR were considered. The non-unique peptides were assigned to the corresponding protein group according to the Razor peptides rule implemented in the software (principle of parsimony). Finally, the identified peptides and proteins were filtered to remove the peptides/proteins tagged as “Reverse” (significantly identified in the reverse database) and “potential contaminant” (items identified as contaminants in the “contaminants.fasta” file) as well as the proteins “Only identified by site” (proteins identified only with modified peptides). The lists can be found in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 (uploaded to the PRIDE repository). The proteins were quantified with the help of the label-free algorithm (LFQ) implemented in the MaxQuant software using the unique and razor peptides. The minimum number of peptides to be available in all the pair-wise comparisons was set to 2 and the “stabilize large LFQ ratios” enabled. To study the presence of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins we used the softwares R studio version 1.1.419 and R version 3.4.3. The complete workflow can be reproduced running the script called “Analysis_RscriptV2.R”. The script works with the “proteinGroups.txt” file and uses two (“log2Transf.R” and “proteinGroupsCleanner.R”) homemade functions (uploaded in the PRIDE repository) and the packages “xlsx”, “Vennerable”, “GO.db” and “rvest”. The script takes the gene names from the “proteinGroups.txt” file and maps them to the zebrafish gene ontology annotation file (goa_zebrafish.gaf, uploaded to the PRIDE repository) and the GO.db database in order to get the Gene Ontology terms associated to every protein. The proteins with the key word “extracellular” in any of their associated GO terms are considered ECM proteins.  Due to the redundancy found in the TrEMBL database the script also performs a cleaning of the data before to look for ECM proteins. First, rows with identical gene symbol but with different protein IDs or protein names were summarized in one single entry corresponding to that with the higher number of peptides assigned to all the samples. Second, protein groups with repeated protein names were simplified to have unique names.  The script also creates four excel files with the list of proteins found in all the experimental conditions (Supplementary Table 3) and three lists of the proteins found only in the whole hearts (Supplementary Table 4), the semi-decellularized hearts (Supplementary Table 5) and the fully decellularized hearts (Supplementary Table 6).  To allow to the scientific community to reproduce our results we also include in this repository the MaxQuant version used (MaxQuant_1.6.2.6a.rar) as well as the output generated (Raw files + MaxQuant Output.rar). You can also check to which experimental condition correspond every raw file by looking at the file "summary.txt" in the "combined" folder which is included in the file "Raw files + MaxQuant Output.rar" file).

### Publication Abstract
Adult zebrafish, in contrast to mammals, are able to regenerate their hearts in response to injury or experimental amputation. Our understanding of the cellular and molecular bases that underlie this process, although fragmentary, has increased significantly over the last years. However, the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during zebrafish heart regeneration has been comparatively rarely explored. Here, we set out to characterize the ECM protein composition in adult zebrafish hearts, and whether it changed during the regenerative response. For this purpose, we first established a decellularization protocol of adult zebrafish ventricles that significantly enriched the yield of ECM proteins. We then performed proteomic analyses of decellularized control hearts and at different times of regeneration. Our results show a dynamic change in ECM protein composition, most evident at the earliest (7 days postamputation) time point analyzed. Regeneration associated with sharp increases in specific ECM proteins, and with an overall decrease in collagens and cytoskeletal proteins. We finally tested by atomic force microscopy that the changes in ECM composition translated to decreased ECM stiffness. Our cumulative results identify changes in the protein composition and mechanical properties of the zebrafish heart ECM during regeneration.

### Keywords
Heart regeneration, Extracellular matrix, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona (CMRB) 3rd Floor Hospital Duran i Reynals Avinguda de la Gran Via, 199-203 08908 Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain
Posdoctoral Investigator -Proteomics Unit

Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL)
Hospital Duran i Reynals
Avinguda de la Granvia, 199 (3th Floor)
08908 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat
Barcelona - Spain

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Angel Raya
Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona (CMRB) 3rd Floor Hospital Duran i Reynals Avinguda de la Gran Via, 199-203 08908 Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain


