### Accession
PXD016708

### Title
Native mass spectrometry of peptide-free and partially loaded MHC class I molecules

### Description
A disulfide-stabilized MHC class I molecule (HLA-A*02:01(Y84C/A139C), short dsA2) was characterized by native mass spectrometry. dsA2 was shown to be structurally intact in absence of any peptide whereas its wild type form was not. Furthermore, it was observed that the mutation did not disrupt the binding of cognate peptides.

### Sample Protocol
MHC class I heavy chains and β2m were produced and purified as described in Mol Immunol. 2013 Jul;54(3-4):386-96. Peptides were purchased from Bachem and Genecust.  In advance of native mass spectrometry measurements, Vivaspin® 500 centrifugal filter units (molecular weight cut-off 10 kDa; Sartorius) were used at 13,000 x g and 4 °C to exchange purified protein samples to 250 mM to 1 M ammonium acetate (99.99% purity; Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.0 as buffer surrogate. For native MS experiments, the final concentration of the dsA2 protein as well as the wild type A2 complex was 10 μM. Native MS analysis was implemented on high-mass Q-Tof II and LCT mass spectrometers (Waters, MS Vision) in positive electrospray ionization mode.

### Data Protocol
A spectrum of cesium iodide was recorded on the same day of the particular measurement to calibrate the data. All spectra were evaluated via MassLynx (Waters). By means of this software, peaks were assigned and the respective masses determined. The values of the shown averaged masses of the different species as well as the corresponding standard deviation result from at least three independent measurements. Also given are the average full width at half maximum (FWHM) of each species. Narrow peak widths indicate rather homogenous samples.

### Publication Abstract
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I molecules selectively bind peptides for presentation to cytotoxic T cells. The peptide-free state of these molecules is not well understood. Here, we characterize a disulfide-stabilized version of the human class I molecule HLA-A*02:01 that is stable in the absence of peptide and can readily exchange cognate peptides. We present X-ray crystal structures of the peptide-free state of HLA-A*02:01, together with structures that have dipeptides bound in the A and F pockets. These structural snapshots reveal that the amino acid side chains lining the binding pockets switch in a coordinated fashion between a peptide-free unlocked state and a peptide-bound locked state. Molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the opening and closing of the F pocket affects peptide ligand conformations in adjacent binding pockets. We propose that peptide binding is co-determined by synergy between the binding pockets of the MHC molecule.

### Keywords
Human, Mhc class i, Native ms, Hla-a, Peptide-binding

### Affiliations
CSSB Centre for Structural Systems Biology
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Germany; European XFEL GmbH, Germany

### Submitter
Janine-Denise Kopicki

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Germany; European XFEL GmbH, Germany


