### Accession
PXD038816

### Title
HDAC6 interacting proteins under different stresses

### Description
we treated MFE cell (WT and HDAC6 KO) with different stresses, incluing MG132, CytoD and IAV infection, then use home-made HDAC6 antibody to capture HDAC6 and coimmunoprecipitate its interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cells are treated accordingly, and then lysed by Cytoskeleton buffer. Same amount of proteins and antibodies are applied in each pull-down experiment. Dyna-beads Protein G are used. After 3 times wash, proteins on beads are digested by Trypsin and Lys-C. 1uL of 20% TFA and sonication are applied to digested peptides before Mass Spec analysis

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was done with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and label free quantification (LFQ. Cox et al., 2014) as described in Hubner et al. The mouse subset of the UniProt data base from Jan 2015 combined with the contaminant DB from MaxQuant and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. The LFQ values were analyzed with Perseus v.1.6.2.2 as follows: entries identified only by site or reverse and potential contaminants were removed, values were Log2 transformed, entries identified in less than 2 replicates in any group were removed, and missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of each replicate with a width of 0.25 and a down-shift of 1.8. Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17. Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mg132, Cytod, Hdac6, Iav

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Longlong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Matthias
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


