### Accession
PXD023005

### Title
Metabolic control of inflammation by selenium

### Description
Trace element selenium (Se) is incorporated as the 21st amino acid, selenocysteine (Sec), into selenoproteins through tRNA[Ser]Sec. Selenoproteins act as gatekeepers of redox homeostasis and modulate immune function to effect anti-inflammation and resolution. However, mechanistic underpinnings involving metabolic reprogramming during inflammation and resolution remain poorly understood. Endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activation of murine bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) cultured in the presence or absence of Se (as selenite) was used to examine temporal changes in the proteome and metabolome by multiplexed tandem mass tag-quantitative proteomics, metabolomics, and machine-learning approaches. Se-dependent modulation of glycolytic, TCA and PPP pathways predisposed BMDMs to preferentially increase OXPHOS to efficiently regulate inflammation and its timely resolution. Use of macrophages lacking selenoproteins, indicated that all three metabolic nodes were sensitive to selenoproteome expression. Furthermore, inhibition of SDH with dimethylmalonate affected the pro-resolving effects of Se by increasing the resolution interval in a murine peritonitis model.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome was extracted in Ripa buffer and protein concentration was determined BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein was diluted with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer and reduced with dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The proteome was digested with proteomic grade trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The peptide digest was labelled with TMT and fractionated (Lot number SH253273). The proteomic dataset was acquired using a RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral datasets were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) and searched against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database (Reviewed 17,424 proteins) using the following parameters: peptide and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively, with two miscleavages. The oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.984 Da) were considered as variable modifications. TMT labeling of the N-termini of peptides, as well as lysine (229.163 Da) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da) were considered as static modifications. Relative quantitation using TMT reporter ions was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra. A percolator algorithm was used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and only peptides with an FDR ≤ 0.01 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Succinate dehydrogenase', 'Proteomics', 'Selenium', 'Macrophages']

### Affiliations
['Penn State University', 'Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA']

### Submitter
['K. Sandeep Prabhu']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA', 'email': 'ksp4@psu.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'K. Sandeep Prabhu', 'id': '2187995'}]

