### Accession
PXD006618

### Title
Comparison of targeted mass spectrometry techniques with an immunoassay: a case study for HSP90 alpha, part 1

### Description
We developed 2D-LC-MS/MS-based SRM and PRM assays to measure HSP90 alpha in serum and compared the results to a commercially available immunoassay (ELISA). Serum samples were trypsin-digested and fractionated by SCX chromatography prior to SRM and PRM measurements. PRM data obtained by high-resolution mass spectrometry correlated better with ELISA measurements than SRM data measured on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. While all three methods (SRM, PRM, ELISA) were able to quantify HSP90 alpha in serum at the ng/mL level, the use of PRM on a high-resolution mass spectrometer reduced variation. To rule out that the observed differences in SRM and PRM are due to different mass spectrometry systems, the SCX fractions were measured on the same high-resolution instrument (Orbitrap) in the ion trap mode (IT-PRM); such measurements showed that intense co-eluting signals were present in the SRM method, but these interfering peaks were eliminated in the high-resolution PRM mode. Thus, this report shows that it is possible to measure ng/mL levels of HSP90 alpha in a reproducible, selective and sensitive way using PRM. This opens up the possibility to quantify low levels of multiple proteins in complex samples based on a fractionation strategy on tryptic peptides followed by SRM and PRM.

### Sample Protocol
Forty-three serum samples from healthy subjects were analyzed and a sample of pooled serum from a separate set of healthy volunteers containing approximately 100 ng/mL HSP90 alpha was used as quality control (QC). All serum samples were diluted 47-times in 0.01% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8, reduced using 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IA) and subsequently digested by adding 30 μL trypsin (100 μg/mL 3 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8) (Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37ºC overnight. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding 50% aq. FA to reach a final concentration of 0.5-1.0% FA. Digested sera were spiked with 40 fmol of two SIL (stable isotope-labeled) proteotypic peptides YIDQEELNK (13C615N2) and DQVANSAFVER (13C615N4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany; purity of > 97% as stated by the manufacturer (Ultimate-grade)). Subsequently the digested samples were desalted using a macroporous reversed phase mRP-C18 column (Agilent, Palo Alto, California, USA; 4.6 mm × 50 mm) at a flow rate of 750 µL/min and off-line fractionated on a Luna 5 μm, 150 × 2 mm SCX column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) under the following conditions: buffer A (14 mM KH2PO4, 24 mM H3PO4, pH 2.5, adjusted with 37% (w/w) HCl) in 25% (v/v) acetonitrile (HPLC grade; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, the Netherlands) in Milli-Q water; buffer B (buffer A containing 350 mM KCl); linear gradient from 100% buffer A to 40% buffer B in 40 min followed by a wash with 100% buffer B until 45 min at a flow rate of 200 µL/min and equilibration of the column in buffer A for 17 min. All chemicals used for SCX fractionation were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Fifty µL fractions were collected in 384-well plates (VWR, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) and sealed with an adhesive aluminum foil (VWR, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Fractions were dried down in SpeedVac concentrator (RVT4104, Scientific Savant, San Jose, CA) and subsequently stored at - 20ºC until further analysis. The 43 SCX-fractionated serum digests were measured by PRM based on a single measurement. These measurements were carried out on a nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, US). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 µm ID × 5 mm length, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed and desalted for 5 min using 0.1% TFA/water as loading solvent. Next, the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID × 250 mm, 2 μm particle and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient starting with 12% solvent B for 4 min and then from 12% to 25% solvent B in 14.7 min, where solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% FA. The column flow rate was set to 250 nL/min and the oven temperature to 40°C. All LC solvents were from identical UHPLC grade as mentioned above in the previous paragraph. For electrospray ionization, nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA) were used and a spray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied. For PRM of the doubly-charged precursor ions of YIDQEELNK and DQVANSAVER (endogenous and SIL), we used the targeted MS/MS mode set up as follows: isolation width of 1.4 Da, HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 24%, ion injection time of 502 ms (by setting the AGC target to 500,000 ions), Orbitrap resolution of 240,000. Selection of precursor ions was time scheduled and each duty cycle consisted of two targeted MS/MS scans (endogenous and SIL form of a peptide) yielding a scan rate of approximately 0.9 Hz. Fluoranthene (202.0777 Da) was infused as lock mass (Easy IC option active).

### Data Protocol
The PRM signals were integrated using Skyline software (version 3.5.0.9321) tool and HSP90 alpha concentration of 43 serum samples were determined by peak area ratio of endogenous:SIL peptide (calculated by the software). To determine the variability (CV%) of the y-transitions (endogenous and SIL) relating to YIDQEELNK and DQVANSAFVER in each serum sample, the percentage of each y-ion transition was calculated by the ratio of its peak area to the total peak area for all 43 sera measured. Considering that the intensities of the relevant transitions differ, the weighted CV (expressed in percentages) was calculated from the CV for each y-transition by multiplying the CV with the averaged ratio transition/total peak area measured in 43 serum samples. Additionally, the statistical significance (unpaired t-test) was determined of the weighted CVs between YIDQEELNK and DQVANSAFVER (endogenous and SIL).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Scx, Serum, Prm, Srm, Elisa

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics Erasmus MC the Netherlands

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics Erasmus MC the Netherlands


