### Accession
PXD009220

### Title
Integrative proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of testis from Wip1-knockout mice: insights into mechanisms of reduced fertility

### Description
Spermatogenesis plays an important role in the mammalian testis, involving in the complex processes of mitosis, meiosis, and spermiogenesis. Spermatogenesis may also be disrupted in the absence of the immunological and ‘fence’ functions of the BTB, resulting in male subfertility or infertility. Mice lacking wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) display male reproductive organ defects, but the molecular mechanisms underlying these abnormalities remain unclear. We explored the function of Wip1 in spermatogenesis and fertility by examining differences in the expressed testis proteome and phosphoproteome between Wip1-deficient and wild-type mice using a proteomics approach. Among a total of 6872 proteins and 4280 phosphorylation sites on 1614 proteins identified in our analysis, 58 proteins and 159 phosphorylation sites on 141 proteins were differentially regulated between these two groups of mice. These results suggested that proinflammatory cytokines may impair the blood–testis barrier dynamics by decreasing the expression of junction-associated proteins, which effect could be partially responsible for the subfertility and spermatogenesis defects in Wip1-knockout mice.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen testis samples were ground and lysed in 10 ml buffer (2 M thiourea, 8 M urea, 0.1% CHAPS, with one tablet of protease inhibitors (cOmplete Mini EDTA-free mixture, Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA) and one tablet of phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche Applied Science)), and subsequently homogenized by TissueLyser LT (QIAGEN) (settings: 3×60s; 50 oscillation/s) with a steel ball. The homogenate was cleared using centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was quantified by the Bradford assay with BCA protein as standard. In detail, the proteins in lysis buffer were reduced in 50 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C and subsequently alkylated in the dark with 5mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. For subsequent digestion with trypsin, the solution was diluted with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (PH 8.5) and trypsin was added (1:50, w/w) and digestion was performed for 6h and the second trypsin digestion was performed at 37°C overnight. After trypsin digestion, 5% of peptides were used for whole-proteome analysis, and the remaining 95% were used for phosphopeptide enrichment and further phosphoproteome analysis. For proteome analysis, peptides were labeled with each component of the 8-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) reagent kit (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In detail, two iTRAQ labels, 119 and 121 (pooled extracts from three KO and three WT testis tissues), were chosen as reference mixture, and labels 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, and 118, was used for the relative abundance of three KO and three WT testis tissues included in two technical replicate experiments, label 119/121, was used for assessing the systematic error. Labels 119 and 121 were technique replicates of the pooled extracts from all testis tissues. Therefore, their theoretical log2 transformed ratio (log2 (label 119/121)) should be 0. Experimentally, the average log2 transformed ratio is 0, and the standard deviation (SD) is 0.126. Eventually, mean+2SD (1.283) and mean-2SD (0.779) was used to decide the fold change cut off. Additionally, to identify more proteins, reverse-phase chromatography was applied using a RIGOL L-3000 system (Beijing RIGOL Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) to separate the mixed peptides. Peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 100 µl of mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile in ddH2O, pH 10) and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min prior to loading onto the column (Durashell-C18, 4.6 ×250 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, Agela). After loading, the peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 700 µl/min by stepwise injection of mobile phase B (2% acetonitrile in ddH2O, pH 10). Ten fractions were collected by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm. Each fraction was desalted with a C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and vacuum-dried prior to liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out using a Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the dried peptides from each sample were dissolved in 150 µl of binding buffer. TiO2 beads were washed twice with washing buffer, and a total of 1 mg of tryptic peptides solution was incubated with an appropriate amount (tryptic peptide: TiO2 = 1:1, w/w) of TiO2 beads by end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 30 min. The phosphopeptide-bound beads were collected by brief centrifugation, washed twice with 500 μl washing buffer, and transferred to a C18 StageTip (Thermo Fisher Scientific) placed on the top of a 1.5-ml centrifuge tube. The StageTip was centrifuged to remove the wash buffer completely and phosphopeptides were collected from the resin with elution buffer. The eluents were dried and stored at −80°C until further LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixtures were analyzed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried peptides and phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid, loaded on an EASY-Spray column (12 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) interfaced with a Q-Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide and phosphopeptide mixtures were eluted using 100% ddH2O, 0.1% formic acid (buffer A), and 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) under a 113 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min (8%–30% buffer B for 77min, 30%–50% buffer B for 10min, 50%–95% buffer B for 15min, and finally 5% buffer B for 11min). The eluted peptides and phosphopeptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with MS survey scan (m/z range 400-1800) (70,000 resolution, 3×106 AGC target, and 20 ms maximal ion time) and MS/MS spectra (17,500 resolution, high-energy collision dissociation, 2m/z isolation window, 27 normalized collision energy, 2×105 AGC, 100 ms maximal ion time, 30 s dynamic exclusion, and top number 20).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed using Maxquant software (version 1.5.2), based on Andromeda as a search engine against the UniProt mouse protein database (UniProt 2016_05_28; 16,793 sequences) combined with the target-decoy and contaminants database searching strategy. For proteome analysis, the parameters for database searching were set as follows: fully tryptic enzyme specificity; two maximum missed cleavages; iTRAQ 8-plex labels at the N-terminal and lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (Cys) residues were specified as a fixed modification; ion mass tolerances was set by Andromeda (20 p.p.m. first search, 4.5 p.p.m. main search); oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. For the phosphoproteome, spectra were searched with an initial maximal mass deviation of 6 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, static mass shift for Cys, dynamic mass shift for oxidation (Met), N-acetylation and phospho-S (serine) T (threonine) Y (tyrosine), two maximal missed cleavages, three maximal modification sites, and the assignment of a, b, and y ions. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids were selected. The minimum Maxquant score for phosphorylation sites was 40. The false discovery rate was evaluated by searching against the databases with the reversed amino acid sequences. We required a maximum FDR of 1% for identification of protein, peptide, and phosphorylation sites. The quantitative analysis was carried out on the log2-values of the measured intensities and the data were normalized based on the median using perseus software (version 1.5.5). For proteome analysis, only proteins with at least one peptide uniquely assigned to the respective sequence were considered. Proteins with P-values <0.05 and fold-change ratios ≥1.283 or ≤0.779 were considered as differentially expressed proteins. For phosphoproteome analysis, class I phosphorylation sites referred to sites where the phosphorylation could be assigned with a localization prob of ＞0.75 and a score diff ＞5. The phosphosites exhibiting more than 1.5-fold changes were considered as differentially regulated for further bioinformatic analysis. Western-blotting was used to measure the phosphorylation status of β-catenin to validate the phosphoproteome regulation.

### Publication Abstract
Mice lacking wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) display male reproductive defects including smaller testes, subfertility and spermatogenesis defects at the round- and elongating-spermatid stages. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these abnormalities remain unclear. Here we examined the proteome and phosphoproteome of testes from <i>Wip1</i>-knockout mice using a quantitative proteomic approach. From a total of 6872 proteins and 4280 phosphorylation sites identified, 58 proteins and 159 phosphorylation sites were found to be differentially regulated compared with wild type mice. Pathway enrichment analyses revealed that these regulated proteins and phosphosites were mainly involved in adherens/tight junctions, apoptosis, inflammatory response, spermatogenesis, sperm motility, and cytoskeletal assembly and depolymerization. <i>Wip1</i>-knockout mice showed decreased expression of junction-associated proteins (occludin, ZO-1, and N-cadherin) and impaired integrity of the blood-testis barrier. In addition, Wip1 deficiency was associated with elevated levels of cytokines and germ cell apoptosis in the testis. These results suggest that proinflammatory cytokines may impair the blood-testis barrier dynamics by decreasing the expression of junction-associated proteins, which could lead to subfertility and spermatogenesis defects. Collectively, these findings help to explain the low reproductive function caused by <i>Wip1</i> deletion and provide novel insights into our understanding of causes of male infertility.

### Keywords
Testis, Knockout mice, Fertility, Proteomic, Wip1, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
yinghui wei

### Lab Head
Dr Kui Li
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


