### Accession
PXD036706

### Title
Metadata Entered in Submitting Proteomic Data to PRIDE

### Description
For the identification of potential pathways and their interactions that underlie a complex change in cellular state, such as neurite outgrowth, we stimulated the neuroblastoma cell line N2A with HU210, a potent activator of the cannabinoid receptor type I, followed by transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. Differentially expressed genes and proteins obtained at multiple timepoints were subjected to standard and dynamic enrichment analysis using the Molecular Biology of the Cell Ontology. Many of the identified pathways described constitutive cellular functions. Involvement of predicted pathways in neurite outgrowth was confirmed by siRNA knock-down of pathway representative genes in primary rat cortical neurons. Dynamic modeling of pathway activities suggested that the identified increase in vesicle membrane back-transported from the growth cone to the cell body ensures recycling of components needed by forward moving vesicle.

### Sample Protocol
N2A cells were stimulated with HU210 or DMSO as a control for 5h, 10h and 18h. Cells were harvested and cell pellets shock frozen. Shock frozen cell pellets were lysed in extraction buffer (8 M Urea, 1% N-octyl glucoside, 100 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate), 1X Protease inhibitor, 1X Phosphatase Inhibitors). One hundred microgram of proteins from each sample was reduced with tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), followed by alkylation with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) and tryptic digestion. Resulted peptides from each sample were labeled with iTRAQ reagents as per tables below <br><p>Table 1</p><table><thead><tr><th>Sample</th><th>iTRAQ Tag</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Sample CTR 0 Hrs I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 113</td></tr><tr><td>Sample CTR 0 Hrs II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 114</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 10 Hrs-DMSO I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 115</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 10 Hrs-DMSO II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 116</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 10 Hrs- HU-210 I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 117</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 10 Hrs- HU-210 II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 118</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 5 Hrs-DMSO I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 119</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 5 Hrs-DMSO II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 121</td></tr></tbody></table><p>Table 2</p><table><thead><tr><th>Sample</th><th>iTRAQ Tag</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Sample CTR 0 Hrs I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 113</td></tr><tr><td>Sample CTR 0 Hrs II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 114</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 18 Hrs-DMSO I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 115</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 18 Hrs-DMSO II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 116</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 18 Hrs- HU-210 I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 117</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 18 Hrs- HU-210 II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 118</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 5 Hrs- HU-210 I</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 119</td></tr><tr><td>Sample 5 Hrs- HU-210 II</td><td>iTRAQ Tag 121</td></tr></tbody></table><br> The labeled samples were then mixed together and fractionated via strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). The fractions were collected and pooled into 11 fractions. Desalted peptides were separated on a C18 nano column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å, C18 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an UltiMate 3000 LC system (Dionex) using a 3 h gradient of solvent A (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA) and solvent B (85% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA). UltiMate 3000 LC system was on line coupled to Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer via Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The eluted peptides were ionized at 2.1 kV. The capillary temperature was 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode selecting the fragmentation (MS2) events based on the precursor abundance in the survey scan (MS1). Survey scans (m/z 300–2000) were acquired through Orbitrap analyzer (AGC target of 1.00e6 at a resolution of 60,000 at an m/z of 400, with the lock mass option enabled. The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5.0e4 and fragmented through Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). The normalized collision energy was set to 39.  Fragments were detected in Orbitrap analyzer (AGC target of 5.00e4 at a resolution of 7,500). Minimum signal threshold to trigger MS2 was set at 1,000, isolation width was 2.0 Da; dynamic exclusion time was 90 s (±5 ppm relative to the precursor ion m/z).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against mouse UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (Release 2011_01, 31,050 entries) using Mascot (v.2.3) and Sequest search engines via the Proteome Discoverer platform (v 1.3; Thermo Scientific). Following search parameters were used: (i) fixed modifications were set as iTRAQ 8plex (K), iTRAQ 8plex (N-terminal), and methylthio (C); (ii) variable modifications were set as iTRAQ 8plex (Y) and oxidation (M); (iii) trypsin was selected as the digestive enzyme; (iv) a maximum of one missed cleavage site was allowed; (v) precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm; and (vi) Fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da. Scaffold (v.3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identification. Proteins were identified and quantified with 0.8% false discovery rate (FDR) at protein level and 0.1% FDR at peptide level. Each of proteins is identified with at least 1 unique peptide having ≥95% identification probability. Relative quantification of proteins was determined with Scaffold Q+ module in a normalized log2-based relative iTRAQ ratio format, with iTRAQ 113 tag as the reference denominator.

### Publication Abstract
Neurite outgrowth is an integrated whole cell response triggered by the cannabinoid-1 receptor. We sought to identify the many different biochemical pathways that contribute to this whole cell response. To understand underlying mechanisms, we identified subcellular processes (SCPs) composed of one or more biochemical pathways and their interactions required for this response. Differentially expressed genes and proteins were obtained from bulk transcriptomics and proteomic analysis of extracts from cells stimulated with a cannabinoid-1 receptor agonist. We used these differentially expressed genes and proteins to build networks of interacting SCPs by combining the expression data with prior pathway knowledge. From these SCP networks, we identified additional genes that when ablated, experimentally validated the SCP involvement in neurite outgrowth. Our experiments and informatics modeling allowed us to identify diverse SCPs such as those involved in pyrimidine metabolism, lipid biosynthesis, and mRNA splicing and stability, along with more predictable SCPs such as membrane vesicle transport and microtubule dynamics. We find that SCPs required for neurite outgrowth are widely distributed among many biochemical pathways required for constitutive cellular functions, several of which are termed 'deep', since they are distal to signaling pathways and the key SCPs directly involved in extension of the neurite. In contrast, 'proximal' SCPs are involved in microtubule growth and membrane vesicle transport dynamics required for neurite outgrowth. From these bioinformatics and dynamical models based on experimental data, we conclude that receptor-mediated regulation of subcellular functions for neurite outgrowth is both distributed, that is, involves many different biochemical pathways, and deep.

### Keywords
Subcellular pathways; transcriptomics; bioinformatics; dynamical modeling; neurite outgrowth; systems biology

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Yuguang Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Ravi Iyengar
Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


