### Accession
PXD014913

### Title
Automated identification of the Cowpox virus (Brighton Red) strain in HEp-2 cells using nLC-MS/MS spectra

### Description
Accompanying benchmarking sample for "TaxIt: An iterative computational pipeline for untargeted strain-level identification using MS/MS spectra from pathogenic single-organism samples":  Untargeted accurate strain-level classification of a priori unidentified organisms using tandem mass spectrometry is a challenging task. Reference databases often lack taxonomic depth, limiting peptide assignments to the species level. However, the extension with detailed strain information increases runtime and decreases statistical power. In addition, larger databases contain a higher number of similar proteomes. We present TaxIt, an iterative workflow to address the increasing search space required for MS/MS-based strain-level classification of samples with unknown taxonomic origin. TaxIt first applies reference sequence data for initial identification of species candidates, followed by automated acquisition of relevant strain sequences for low level classification. Furthermore, proteome similarities resulting in ambiguous taxonomic assignments are addressed with an abundance weighting strategy to increase the confidence in candidate taxa. For benchmarking the performance of our method, we apply our iterative workflow on several samples of bacterial and viral origin. In comparison to non-iterative approaches using unique peptides or advanced abundance correction, TaxIt identifies microbial strains correctly in all examples presented (with one tie), thereby demonstrating the potential for untargeted and deeper taxonomic classification. TaxIt makes extensive use of public, unrestricted and continuously growing sequence resources such as the NCBI databases and is available under open-source BSD license at https://gitlab.com/rki_bioinformatics/TaxIt.

### Sample Protocol
CPXV-infection: One day prior infection, 5x105 HEp-2 cells were seeded into 6 well plates with 4 mL cell culture medium (DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS and 2 mM L–Glutamine) each and kept in an incubator at 37°C for 16 h. The medium was removed and cells were infected with CPXV Brighton Red (BR) (ATCC® VR-302™) using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 in 1 mL cell culture medium per well for 1 h. Again, the medium was removed and cells were washed once with 5 mL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) before they were further incubated in 4 mL cell culture medium for 24h. Supernatant was removed and mixed 1:1 with  4 % SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at 99°C for 5 min. DNA was sheared by sonication for 3 x 1 min on ice using a 2” Sonifier™ Cup Horn in a Cell Disruptor (Branson Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, CT, USA) and lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min.  Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP): Samples were prepared using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 µg of each sample were processed using Vivacon 500 Centrifugal Ultra Filter (Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany) with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 30 kDa. SDS was depleted 4 x with 200 µL 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, before the urea concentration was reduced using 3 x 100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. The proteins were digested for 16 h at 37°C in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 using Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 100:1. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and two washing steps with 40 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. The peptides were desalted using 200 µL StageTips packed with four Empore™ SPE Disks C18 (3M Purification, Inc., Lexington, USA) and concentrated using a vacuum concentrator but not dried completely. Samples were filled up to 16 µL with 0.1% formic acid and peptides were quantified by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using a Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).  nLC-MS/MS: Single-run bottom-up proteome analysis was performed on an Easy-nanoLC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). 2 µg peptides were loaded directly on a Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 300 mm x 75 µm fused silica capillary column (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), which was kept at 60°C using a butterfly heater (Phoenix S&T, Chester, PA, USA). Peptides were separated using a linear 240 min gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % DMSO from 0 to 29 % at 200nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent manner in the m/z range of 400 – 1,400 with a resolution of 30,000 in the orbitrap. Up to the seven most intense 2+ and 3+ charged ions were selected for low-energy CID type fragmentation in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35 % using an activation time of 10 ms. The m/z isolation width for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 Th. Once fragmented, up to 500 isolated peaks were dynamically excluded from precursor selection for 90 s within a 20 ppm window. The ion selection threshold for MS² spectra was 1,000 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 500 ms for full scans and 100 ms for MS² spectra. Automatic gain control was set to a target value of 1e6 for full scans and 5e3 for MS². Peptides were ionized using electrospray with a stainless steel emitter, I.D. 30 µm, (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) at a spray voltage of 2.1 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275°C. The background ion signal intensities were reduced using an ABIRD device (ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed with the TaxIt pipeline including X!Tandem as database search engine. In addition to pipeline and search engine defaults, spectra were analyzed applying a tryptic search with parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da) as well as an additional variable modification methionine oxidation (+16 Da).  We used all viral NCBI RefSeq proteins (314156 entries, via Entrez on July 10, 2017) in the iterative TaxIt workflow and additionally all viral non-RefSeq proteins (1987275 entries in total, via Entrez on July 11, 2017) for the unique-PSMs- and Pipasic-based strategies. Spectra were filtered beforehand using corresponding host proteomes (all isoforms) including the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome (93588 entries, UP000005640, May 23, 2017). The cRAP database was used to exclude contaminant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Untargeted accurate strain-level classification of a priori unidentified organisms using tandem mass spectrometry is a challenging task. Reference databases often lack taxonomic depth, limiting peptide assignments to the species level. However, the extension with detailed strain information increases runtime and decreases statistical power. In addition, larger databases contain a higher number of similar proteomes. We present TaxIt, an iterative workflow to address the increasing search space required for MS/MS-based strain-level classification of samples with unknown taxonomic origin. TaxIt first applies reference sequence data for initial identification of species candidates, followed by automated acquisition of relevant strain sequences for low level classification. Furthermore, proteome similarities resulting in ambiguous taxonomic assignments are addressed with an abundance weighting strategy to increase the confidence in candidate taxa. For benchmarking the performance of our method, we apply our iterative workflow on several samples of bacterial and viral origin. In comparison to noniterative approaches using unique peptides or advanced abundance correction, TaxIt identifies microbial strains correctly in all examples presented (with one tie), thereby demonstrating the potential for untargeted and deeper taxonomic classification. TaxIt makes extensive use of public, unrestricted, and continuously growing sequence resources such as the NCBI databases and is available under open-source BSD license at https://gitlab.com/rki_bioinformatics/TaxIt.

### Keywords
Human, Cowpox virus (brighton red), Nlc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Unit (MF 1), Department for Methods Development and Research Infrastructure, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany
Robert Koch Institute

### Submitter
Mathias Kuhring

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Y. Renard
Bioinformatics Unit (MF 1), Department for Methods Development and Research Infrastructure, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany


