### Accession
PXD025685

### Title
Protein composition of cobweb spiders gumfoot glue droplets

### Description
Orb weavers place aggregate glue on a stretchy capture spiral, whereas cobweb weavers add it to the ends of strong, stiff fibers, called gumfoot lines. We describe the quantitative proteomics of the aggregate glues of two cobweb weaving species, the Western black widow, Latrodectus hesperus, and the common house spider, Parasteatoda tepidariorum. For each species respectively, we identified 48 and 33 proteins that were significantly more abundant in the portion of the gumfoot line with glue than in its fibers. These proteins were highly enriched for glycosylation and phosphorylation relative to proteins found in silk fibers. Most enriched proteins were of anterior aggregate gland origin, supporting the hypothesis that cobweb weavers’ posterior aggregate glue is specialized for another function..

### Sample Protocol
Gumfoot lines of 24 L. hesperus individuals were combined as were For gumfoot lines of 20 P. tepidariorum individuals.). The gumfoot lines were cut away from the E-shaped cardboard collector such that the axial fiber with glue droplets (hereafter “Glue+Fiber”) was separated from the axial fiber without glue droplets (hereafter “Fiber”). To prepare silk samples for tryptic digests and mass spectrometry, we resuspended dried silks in 60 ul 8 M GdnHCl, 3.2 ul 100 mM dithiothriotol (DTT, Invitrogen), and denatured at 95C for 20 minutes. Denatured proteins were moved to ice then to the bench and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). We diluted the GdnHCl concentration to 1 M with the addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 mM CaCl2. Assuming 8 times as much protein in the stock sample as the 10% aliquot used for BCA, we digested 5-10 ug protein with 2.5-5 ug trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37C. Peptides were then desalted by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Fisher) to digested peptides to achieve a pH < 3 and passing through a C18 ZipTip (Millipore), washing with 0.1% TFA, and eluting with 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile. Cleaned peptides were dried with a speed vacuum and shipped on ice to the University of Arizona Proteomics Core (Phoenix, AZ).  LC-MS/MS analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the University of Arizona Proteomics Core. Peptides were eluted from an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (both from Thermo Fisher). Chromatography was performed using a 5-20% gradient of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 20-50% solvent B for 10 min, 50-95% solvent B for 10 min, 95% solvent B for 10 min, and return to 5% solvent B for 10 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Flow rates were 300 nL/min using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific), and peptides were ionized with an EasySpray nanoESI source. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur software (Andon et al. 2002) using a survey scan at 70,000 resolution scanning mass/charge (353 – 1550) followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry at 27nce (normalized collision energy) of the 10 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected mass/charge on an exclusion list for 30 seconds after a single MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Initial searches for proteins and post-translational modifications (Ser/Thr/Asn glycosylation and  Ser/Thr/Tyr phoshorylation) were performed by the University of Arizona Proteomics Core with Thermo Proteome Discoverer  from Thermo Fisher Scientific). We supplied databases of protein sequences based on a transcriptome for L. hesperus  from Clarke et al. 2015)and the genome for P. tepidariorum (Schwager et al. 2017) with gene predictions that incorporated silk gland expression information (Haney et al. 2019). We added sequences based on cDNA clones for MaSp1 (MH367500.1), MaSp2 (MH367501.1), MiSp (KX584055.1, KX584022.1), and AgSF2 (JZ979955.1, JZ979956.1) to the P. tepidariorum protein set because the encoding sequences were not well represented in the genome. For further searches with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008), we generated a reduced database of proteins based on a combination of all proteins identified by the Proteomics Core (combined run 1, run 2, no modifications, modifications) for each species. These reduced protein databases included 188 protein sequences for L. hesperus and 279 for P. tepidariorum. We completed label-free quantitation (LFQ) with MaxQuant on the two MS runs separately. Default settings were used for the LFQ runs, and proteins were only included in our results with a maximum score over 50 (across all samples). We searched for PTMs (both Ser/Thr/Asn glycosylation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation) using raw files from both runs simultaneously for each species. We only searched for variable modifications to allow detection of both unmodified and modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The origin of aggregate silk glands and their production of wet adhesive silks is considered a key innovation of the Araneoidea, a superfamily of spiders that build orb-webs and cobwebs. Orb-web weavers place aggregate glue on an extensible capture spiral, whereas cobweb weavers add it to the ends of strong, stiff fibers, called gumfoot lines. Here we describe the material behavior and quantitative proteomics of the aggregate glues of two cobweb weaving species, the western black widow, Latrodectus hesperus, and the common house spider, Parasteatoda tepidariorum. For each species, respectively, we identified 48 and 33 proteins that were significantly more abundant in the portion of the gumfoot line with glue than in its fibers. These proteins were more highly glycosylated and phosphorylated than proteins found in silk fibers without glue, which likely explains aggregate glue stickiness. Most glue-enriched proteins were of anterior aggregate gland origin, supporting the hypothesis that cobweb weavers' posterior aggregate glue is specialized for another function. We found that cobweb weaver glue droplets are stiffer and tougher than the adhesive of most orb-web weaving species. Attributes of gumfoot glue protein composition that likely contribute to this stiffness include the presence of multiple protein families with conserved cysteine residues, a bimodal distribution of isoelectric points, and families with conserved functions in protein aggregation, all of which should contribute to cohesive protein-protein interactions. House spider aggregate droplets were more responsive to humidity changes than black widow droplets, which could be mediated by differences in protein sequence, post-translational modifications, the non-protein components of the glue droplets, and/or the larger amount of aqueous material that surrounds the adhesive cores of their glue droplets.

### Keywords
Glue, Spider, Theridiaadae

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University
Washington and Lee

### Submitter
Thomas Clarke

### Lab Head
Dr Nadia Ayoub
Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University


