### Accession
PXD005819

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human anterior pituitary gland

### Description
The regulation of pituitary function via the hypothalamus and via intra-pituitary connections represents a complex system. Though hormones secreted from the pituitary glands have been well studied, overall information of proteins expressed in the pituitary glands is very limited. Protein expression profiling of normal pituitary tissue may lead to discovery of novel proteins playing an important role in the physiology of pituitary glands and can lead to better understanding of pituitary gland diseases. We aimed to carry out systematic proteomic profiling of adenohypophysis from human pituitary glands using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometer. A total of 2,175 proteins were identified in this study of which, 105 proteins were identified for the first time as compared to high throughput proteomic-based studies from human pituitary glands. The comprehensive list of proteins identified in this study will facilitate the better understanding the role of this important gland in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Adenohypophysis tissues were collected from the Human Brain Tissue Repository (National Research Facility), NIMHANS, Bangalore, India. The tissues(n=3)were acquired from male victims who met with road traffic accidents. The tissues were individually subjected to homogenization in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted using urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) and subjected to centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C.Five hundred microgram of protein was pooled from each of 3adenohypophysis tissue lysates to obtain a final protein pool of 1.5 mg. Approximately, 300 μg aliquot from the protein pool was subjected to in-gel digestion while a 1 mg protein aliquot was subjected to in-solution digestion using trypsin protease. Peptides from gel bands were extracted and subjected to C18 stage tip clean up. bRPLC fractionation of 1 mg in-solution digested peptides were carried out separately on XBridge (C18, 5 μm 250 × 4.6 mm column) (Waters Corporation) that was coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system. A total of 96 fractions collected from 1 mg of in-solution digested peptides were further pooled to obtain a total of 12 fractions. The 12 bRPLC fractions and 21 in-gel peptide fractions were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer separately.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was searched against NCBI Human RefSeq 81 database containing 110,386protein sequences. The data was analyzed on Proteome Discoverer platform, version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) that is interfaced with SequestHT and Mascot (Version 2.4) search algorithms. The search was carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications. Acetylation of protein N-terminus was also enabled as dynamic modification to capture N-terminal peptides. Other search parameters included two missed cleavage by trypsin protease and 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
The pituitary function is regulated by a complex system involving the hypothalamus and biological networks within the pituitary. Although the hormones secreted from the pituitary have been well studied, comprehensive analyses of the pituitary proteome are limited. Pituitary proteomics is a field of postgenomic research that is crucial to understand human health and pituitary diseases. In this context, we report here a systematic proteomic profiling of human anterior pituitary gland (adenohypophysis) using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. A total of 2164 proteins were identified in this study, of which 105 proteins were identified for the first time compared with high-throughput proteomic-based studies from human pituitary glands. In addition, we identified 480 proteins with secretory potential and 187&#x2009;N-terminally acetylated proteins. These are the first region-specific data that could serve as a vital resource for further investigations on the physiological role of the human anterior pituitary glands and the proteins secreted by them. We anticipate that the identification of previously unknown proteins in the present study will accelerate biomedical research to decipher their role in functioning of the human anterior pituitary gland and associated human diseases.

### Keywords
['Adenohypophysis', 'Proteomics', 'Anterior pituitary gland']

### Affiliations
['Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.', 'Institue of Bioinformatics Discoverer Building, 7th Floor  International Tech Park  Whitefield, Bangalore - 560 066  Karnataka, India.']

### Submitter
['Keshava Prasad T. S.']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institue of Bioinformatics Discoverer Building, 7th Floor  International Tech Park  Whitefield, Bangalore - 560 066  Karnataka, India.', 'email': 'keshav@ibioinformatics.org', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'T. S. Keshava Prasad', 'id': '115230100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['adenohypophysis']
Characteristics[disease]: ['normal']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample;AC=1002038']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos;AC=MS:1001742']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation; AC=UNIMOD:35;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Variable']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Variable']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;PP=Anywhere;MT=Fixed']
Factor value[disease]: ['normal']

