### Accession
PXD019288

### Title
COPPER INDUCES PROTEIN AGGREGATION, A TOXIC PROCESS COMPENSATED BY MOLECULAR CHAPERONES.

### Description
Copper is a powerful antimicrobial and antiviral agent, which has  interest through several biomedical applications. Nevertheless, how copper induces the cellular damage is not fully understood. Two main mechanisms are claimed to be involved, i.e. Cu catalyzed reactive oxygen species production (ROS) and replacements of other essential metal ions, such as Fe in Fe-S clusters by Cu. In the present work, we cumulate strong evidence for the importance of a third mechanism, which proposes that Cu damaging effects are due to its ability to cause massive protein aggregation in a ROS independent mechanism. We further show that Hsp33, a redox-regulated molecular chaperone in Escherichia coli, can prevent Cu-induced protein aggregation, suggesting an important role of the chaperoning system in defense against Cu-toxicity. A closer inspection of the mechanism of how Cu can activate Hsp33 revealed two intriguing features, i) a redox-state specificity of Cu+ vs Cu2+, and ii) an unprecedented mechanism of Hsp33-activation via a non-redox trans-metalation. Indeed, our data suggest that two Cu+ bind to the Zn-Cys4-finger site in Hsp33, which lead to a replacement of one Zn2+ by two Cu+ without Cys oxidation. In contrast, Cu2+ oxidizes the Cys in the Zn-finger, analogue to other oxidative stress effectors of Hsp33. Hence, the present results give several new insights in the antimicrobial mechanism of Cu and how bacteria defend against it.

### Sample Protocol
The protein pellets were resuspended in 100 l of 6 M urea, 5 0mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 3 mM DTT, and incubated for 2 h at 37C. After cooling and centrifugation, the thiol groups were alkylated by incubation with 0.1 M iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h, 350 rpm, 25°C. Then, the urea buffer was diluted with the digestion buffer (50 mM Tris buffer pH 8+ 10% ACN) to 1 M and the digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C, 350 rpm using 1.5 g of Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega). The peptides concentration was determined, after which the peptides were loaded onto C18, in-house made, stage tips in equal amounts as described in (70).

### Data Protocol
The peptides (1.5 g) of each sample were injected and washed at 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 45 min at flow 300 nl/min and separated on a C18 reverse-phase column coupled to the Nano electrospray, EASY-spray (PepMap, 75 mm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) at flow 150-300 nl/min using an Dionex Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to Orbitrap Mass spectrometer, Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific). To separate the peptides, the column was applied with a linear gradient with a flow rate of 150 nl/min at 45°C: from 1 to 28 % in 90 min, from 28 to 50 % in 17 min, from 50 to 80 % in 10 min, and held at 80 % for an additional 13 min, and then equilibrated at 1 % for 20 min (solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid, and solvent B is 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Additional column wash with 80 % ACN for 40 min was carried out between each sample run to avoid potential carryover of the peptides. The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scan range was set to 300 to 1650 m/z, with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z. Up to the 15 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge of ≥2 were subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a resolution of 15,000 at m/z. To limit repeated sequencing, dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 20 s. Thresholds for ion injection time and ion target value were set to 20 ms and 3×106 for the survey scans and to 25 ms and 105 for the MS/MS scans. Only ions with “peptide preferable” profile were analyzed for MS/MS. Data was acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregation, Escherichia coli, Hsp33, Copper, Molecular chaperone

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, room 1-637 The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
Rosi Fassler

### Lab Head
Dr Dana Reichmann
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, room 1-637 The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem


