### Accession
PXD024813

### Title
Nasal septum deviation as the consequence of BMP-controlled changes to cartilage properties

### Description
Nasal septum deviation (NSD) is a common abnormality of the septal cartilage often associated with disordered breathing. The etiology of NSD is unknown. BMP7 neural crest-knockout mice, a well-characterized model for midfacial hypoplasia and nasal airway obstruction, develops a deviated septum by 4 weeks of age. Using comparative gene expression, quantitative proteomics, and immunofluorescence analysis we investigated the septum prior, immediately preceding, and with established deviation. We provide a detailed description of cellular and molecular changes leading to septum deviation, including changes to extracellular matrix organization, cell metabolism, and chondrocyte differentiation. Loss of BMP7 was associated with acquisition of elastic cartilage properties, a switch to glucose metabolism, and molecular characteristics commonly associated with osteoarthritis (OA). Many alterations preceded the deviation establishing that molecular changes to chondrocyte properties predispose to the deviation. Interestingly, NSD was associated with a persistent increase in BMP2. Genetic reduction of BMP2 in BMP7ncko mice restores WNT signalling, energy metabolism, and rescues NSD, showing the importance of balanced BMP signaling for normal cartilage. Many of the cellular and molecular changes have been described for knee osteoarthritis, suggesting that these two pathologies might have a similar underlying etiology.

### Sample Protocol
Nasal septum of P14 and P30 BMP7ctrl and BMP7ncko mice (n=4/genotype) were isolated and frozen until processing for proteomics experiments. Protein lysates were obtained by tissue lysis in buffer containing 1% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (MilliporeSigma, Oakville, ON, Canada). Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 55 °C. Once cooled at room temperature (RT), cysteine alkylation was achieved by incubation with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide for 25 min in the dark at RT. Next, samples were precipitated in acetone/methanol, washed three times in methanol, and trypsinized (Trypsin Gold from Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The pH was adjusted to 6.0 with HCl. To label peptide α- and ε-amines, samples were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C with isotopically heavy [40 mM 13CD2O + 20 mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] or light labels [40 mM light formaldehyde (CH2O) + 20 mM NaBH3CN]. Next, samples were combined and subjected to C18 chromatography before being run on liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the murine UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1, at a peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.01. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log(2) transformation by box-and-whisker analysis using the BoxPlotR tool. A minimum of two distinct peptides per protein for the quantification was used. Following an interquartile boxplot analysis, proteins with a quantification ratio of under 0.65 and above 1.5 were considered for the analysis. Raw data is publicly available under accession number.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Bmp, Septum

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology 
University of Calgary, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology

### Submitter
Antoine Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
University of Calgary, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology


