### Accession
PXD046804

### Title
Facile metabolic reprogramming distinguishes mycobacterial adaptation to hypoxia and starvation:  The role of ketosis in starvation-induced persistence

### Description
Mycobacteria have the ability to adapt to stressful infection conditions by entering a reversible state of non-replicating persistence (NRP) characterized by slow or no cell growth and increased tolerance to various antimicrobial agents. While hypoxia and nutrient deprivation are commonly used to study this NRP state, there is limited understanding of the molecular distinctions in how mycobacteria adapt to these different stresses to achieve a similar NRP outcome.  In this study, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of Mycobacterium bovis BCG's response to starvation, shedding light on a coordinated metabolic shift away from glycolysis during nutrient-rich growth to the depletion of lipid stores, lipolysis, and fatty acid ß-oxidation during NRP. Interestingly, this response differs from BCG's NRP state under hypoxia, where it shifts towards cholesterol metabolism and triglyceride storage. Our investigation also unveiled hidden metabolic vulnerabilities in the NRP state induced by starvation, notably an increased sensitivity to H2O2.  These findings open up possibilities for the development of precise therapeutic approaches against these otherwise challenging-to-treat pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
In the quantitative analysis of the starved BCG proteome, proteins were extracted from biological triplicate cultures of BCG collected during logarithmic growth in 7H9 medium. Additional samples were obtained from cultures washed, resuspended in PBS, and incubated for 4, 10, and 20 days (S4, S10, S20), followed by resuspension in 7H9 medium for 6 days (S-R6). Extracted proteins were precipitated, quantified, and subjected to trypsin digestion. Aliquots of the digested protein were labeled using TMT 6-plex reagents. Labeled peptides from biological replicates were combined, and median total ion intensities were calculated to normalize mixing. The resulting 6-plex mixture was desalted, dried, and reconstituted in IPD buffer without glycerol. Isoelectric focusing was performed across a pH range of 3 to 10, and 24 fractions were collected. Each fraction was then analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS after resuspension in 0.1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
The study utilized TMT-labeled samples from a starvation time course, which were analyzed using an Agilent 1200 nano-LC-Chip/MS interfaced to an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF LC-MS system. The LC system included a capillary pump for sample loading, a nanoflow pump, and a microwell-plate autosampler. A specific HPLC-Chip configuration was employed, consisting of an enrichment column and an analytical column. Mass-spectrometry grade mobile phases were used, and a 130-minute linear gradient LC separation was performed. LC-Q-TOF was operated in positive ion mode with specific source conditions. Data were acquired in MS and MS/MS modes, with a peptide isotope model used for detection. LC-MS data was processed and evaluated for quality using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis software. Test injections were used to optimize injection volumes, and spectral acquisition was excluded for specific ions in subsequent replicates. Technical reproducibility was analyzed using Mass Profiler Professional, and mass spectra were processed and quantified using Spectrum Mill and Scaffold Q+. The resulting protein associations were manually analyzed in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium bcg starvation proteomics

### Affiliations
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Reseach and Technology
Singapore Professor of Biological Engineering Professor of Biological Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Biological Engineering, 56-731 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139

### Submitter
Fabian Hia

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Dedon
Singapore Professor of Biological Engineering Professor of Biological Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Biological Engineering, 56-731 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139


