### Accession
PXD039489

### Title
Thrombin activation of the factor XI dimer is a multi-staged process for each subunit

### Description
Factor XI (FXI) is a protein in the intrinsic coagulation pathway that can be activated by two enzymes. In hemostasis, FXI is activated by thrombin, while FXIIa-mediated activation of FXI is thought to be prothrombotic. The interactions of these enzymes with FXI are poorly understood due to their transient nature which is difficult to study. Here, we applied crosslinking mass spectrometry (XLMS) and molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the binding interface between thrombin and FXI as well as the dynamics underlying the activation of FXI. From the experimental data we were able to construct the FXI homodimer as well as locate the binding interface of thrombin on the light chain of FXI. As this placed thrombin distal from both the activation site as well as the apple 1 domain that thrombin is known to interact with, we applied molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the chain of events after binding. From the resulting model, we hypothesize that the activation of FXI is a multi-staged procedure where thrombin first binds to Pro520 on FXI, after which it migrates towards the activation site by first engaging the apple 1 domain and finally Arg378. We validated the results with known mutation sites on FXI and additionally found that Pro520 is conserved in PK and enables binding of thrombin to this enzyme even though it cannot be activated by it. This interaction points a way for future interventions for bleeding and thrombosis.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking and sample preparation – FXI (58 µg, 3.46 µM, 0.28 mg/mL, monomer) and thrombin (26.6 µg, 3.45 µM, 0.13 mg/mL) were diluted in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, with 100 mM, 125 mM, or 150 mM NaCl. Four replicates were prepared for each salt concentration, which were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Freshly dissolved PhoX (0.3 mM final concentration) was added and the crosslinking reaction was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Hereafter, crosslinking was stopped by the addition of Tris·HCl (100 mM, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 5 mM. Crosslinked proteins were denatured with urea (final concentration of 3 M) and sonicated 10 min in a bath sonicator (4 °C, on/off cycles of 30 sec). The resulting samples were simultaneously reduced with TCEP (final concentration of 10 mM) and alkylated with CAA (final concentration of 40 mM) for 1h at 37 °C. After dilution, the sample was digested by incubation with trypsin/LysC (1:25 enzyme to protein) overnight at 37 °C, which was quenched by addition of TFA (pH < 2). The peptides were desalted by C18 using the Bravo AssayMAP platform (Agilent) and then deglycosylated and dephosphorylated with the protein deglycosylation mix II (NEBB) overnight at 37 °C. Samples were acidified with TFA to a pH < 2 and desalted by C18 using the Bravo AssayMAP platform (Agilent) before enrichment for crosslinked peptides with Fe(III)-NTA cartridges in the Bravo AssayMAP platform as previously described[23].  Liquid Chromatography with Mass Spectrometry and Data Analysis – The final enriched peptide mixture was resuspended in 20 µL 2% (v/v) formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Mass Spectrometry data were acquired using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped in a pre-column (Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) prior to separation on the analytical column packed in-house (Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm), both columns were kept at 40 ˚C in the built-in oven for samples run on the Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system. Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water), and the elution gradient profile was as follows: 0 – 10% solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v ACN) over 5 min, 12 - 37% solvent B over 55 min, 40-100% solvent B over 3 min, and finally 100% B for 4 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra were collected in a mass range of m/z 350 – 1300 Th in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z=200 Th after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. In-source fragmentation was activated and set to 15 eV. The cycle time for the acquisition of MS/MS fragmentation scans was set to 3 s. Charge states accepted for MS/MS fragmentation were set to 3 - 8. Dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1 and to an exclusion duration of 15 s. Stepped HCD fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed with increasing normalized collision energy (19, 27, 35 %) and the mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z=200 Th after accumulation to an AGC target value of 1e5 with an isolation window of m/z = 1.4 Th and maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 3.0.0.400) with the integrated third-party XlinkX/PD nodes[27]. Normal peptide search was performed using the Mascot node against the full Homo Sapiens UniProtKB database (20401 entries on 29/09/2022) in silico digested with Trypsin/P with a minimal peptide length of six and two miss cleaved sites allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. For the search of mono-linked peptides, water-quenched (C8H5O6P) and Tris-quenched (C12H14O8PN) were set as dynamic modifications on lysine residues. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the Percolator node. For crosslinked peptides, a database search was performed using XlinkX/PD nodes against a database the most abundant 100 proteins identified from the normal peptide search in the Mascot node, with the same protease and dynamic modifications allowed but an increased number of missed cleavages of 3. Identified crosslinks were only accepted through the Validator node at 1% FDR with a minimal score of 39 and a minimal delta score of 4. The crosslinks were mapped and visualized onto the structure using XMAS[28] within ChimeraX[29].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Factor xi, Phox, Molecular dynamics, Thrombin, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Utrecht University


