### Accession
PXD022915

### Title
Proteomics analysis of gastric cancer patients with diabetes mellitus

### Description
Proteomics is a powerful approach to study the molecular mechanisms of cancer. In this study, we aim to characterize the proteomic profile of gastric cancer (GC) in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2. Forty GC tissue samples including 19 cases from diabetic patients and 21 cases from individuals without diabetes (control group) were selected for the proteomics analysis. Gastric tissues were processed following the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation approach—SP3 and enzymatic digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS Liquid Chromatography—Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS). The comparison of protein expression levels between GC samples from diabetic and non-diabetic patients was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ). A total of 6599 protein groups were identified in the 40 samples. Thirty-seven proteins were differentially expressed among the two groups, with 16 upregulated and 21 downregulated in the diabetic cohort. Statistical overresentation tests were considered for different annotation sets including the Gene Ontology(GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Reactome, and Disease functional databases. Upregulated proteins in the GC samples from diabetic patients were particularly enriched in respiratory electron transport and alcohol metabolic biological processes, while downregulated proteins were associated with epithelial cancers, intestinal diseases, and cell–cell junction cellular components. Taken together, these results support the data already obtained by previous studies that associate diabetes with metabolic disorders and diabetes-associated diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, and also provide valuable insights into seven GC-associated protein targets, claudin-3, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor protein, cadherin-17, villin-1, transglutaminase-2, desmoglein-2, and mucin-13, which warrant further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen GC samples in Optimal Cutting Fluid (OCT) from each patient were independently processed in 2 mL tubes containing lysing matrix A (MP Biomedicals) and lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and protease inhibitors. Protein homogenization was performed at the FastPrep-24 equipment (MP Biomedicals) at 6.0 m/s in 3 cycles of 30 seconds each with intervals of 5 minutes on ice. Then, the protein extracts were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 13,400 r.p.m. using a benchtop centrifuge and transferred into 1.5mL low protein binding tubes. Further, the extracts were incubated for 10 minutes at 95ºC at 1000 r.p.m. (Thermomixer, Eppendorf, Germany), sonicated (Bioruptor, Diagenode) for ten cycles, 30-s on and 30-s off at 4ºC followed by a new centrifugation. The clarified lysate was transferred into a new 1.5 mL vial and the protein concentration was measured. 100 micrograms of protein from each sample was processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. Enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) overnight at 37ºC at 1000 rpm. The resulting peptide concentration was measured by fluorescence. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS. This equipment is composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five hundred ng peptide of each sample were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Protein identification analysis was performed with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_05 with 75,069 entries and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). Two protein search algorithms were considered: (i) the mass spectrum library search software MSPepSearch, with the NIST human HCD Spectrum Library (1,127,970 spectra and (ii) the Sequest HT tandem mass spectrometry peptide database search program. Both search nodes considered an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set as 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus Gln->pyro-Glut, protein N terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate—FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ion quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: Peptides: unique plus razor; precursor abundance was based on intensity; normalization mode was based on the total peptide amount; the minimum amount of replicate files that a feature must be detected in to be used was set to 50% in the sample group; the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on a t-test (background based). The Feature Mapper node from the Proteome Discoverer software was used to createfeatures from unique peptide-specific peaks within a small retention-time and mass range. This was achieved by applying a chromatographic retention time alignment with a maximum shift of 10 min and 10 ppm of mass tolerance allowed for mapping features from different sample files. For feature linking and mapping, the minimum DM vs. control signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set at 5.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics is a powerful approach to study the molecular mechanisms of cancer. In this study, we aim to characterize the proteomic profile of gastric cancer (GC) in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2. Forty GC tissue samples including 19 cases from diabetic patients and 21 cases from individuals without diabetes (control group) were selected for the proteomics analysis. Gastric tissues were processed following the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation approach-SP3 and enzymatic digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS). The comparison of protein expression levels between GC samples from diabetic and non-diabetic patients was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ). A total of 6599 protein groups were identified in the 40 samples. Thirty-seven proteins were differentially expressed among the two groups, with 16 upregulated and 21 downregulated in the diabetic cohort. Statistical overrepresentation tests were considered for different annotation sets including the Gene Ontology(GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Reactome, and Disease functional databases. Upregulated proteins in the GC samples from diabetic patients were particularly enriched in respiratory electron transport and alcohol metabolic biological processes, while downregulated proteins were associated with epithelial cancers, intestinal diseases, and cell-cell junction cellular components. Taken together, these results support the data already obtained by previous studies that associate diabetes with metabolic disorders and diabetes-associated diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, and also provide valuable insights into seven GC-associated protein targets, claudin-3, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor protein, cadherin-17, villin-1, transglutaminase-2, desmoglein-2, and mucin-13, which warrant further investigation.

### Keywords
Gastric cancer (gc); diabetes mellitus (dm); proteomics; label free quantification (lfq)

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Osorio
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Portugal


