### Accession
PXD021212

### Title
Structure of TFIIH/Rad4-Rad23-Rad33 in damaged DNA opening in Nucleotide Excision Repair

### Description
TFIIH is a 10-protein complex that is conserved throughout eukaryotes. TFIIH has two primary cellular functions: transcription initiation and nucleotide excision repair (NER). NER in eukaryotes begins by recognition of a bulky lesion by the obligate dimer Rad4-Rad23. This is followed closely by the recruitment of TFIIH which is a structural scaffold, opens a bubble around damaged DNA and scans the damaged strand for bulky lesions. This facilitates the recruitment of two exonucleases which excise the damages strand before an undamaged complement is synthesize. In yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), TFIIH is composed of the two helicases Ssl2 and Rad3, the scaffolding subunits Tfb1, Tfb2, Tfb4 and Ssl1 and the kinase subunits Kin28, Ccl1 and Tfb3, though these later 3 are dispensable for NER.

### Sample Protocol
In this experiment, we purified the endogenous TFIIH lacking the kinase module from S. cerevisiae using a large-scale TAP (tandem affinity purification) preparation. We then reconstituted the Rad4-Rad23/TFIIH complex on damaged DNA using a gradient sedimentation technique. We then purified and performed crosslinking using disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU).

### Data Protocol
MeroX is utilized with default setting coupled with in-house script to prioritize K-K pair when K miscleavage presents and localization scores are tie.

### Publication Abstract
The versatile nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway initiates as the XPC-RAD23B-CETN2 complex first recognizes DNA lesions from the genomic DNA and recruits the general transcription factor complex, TFIIH, for subsequent lesion verification. Here, we present a cryo-EM structure of an NER initiation complex containing Rad4-Rad23-Rad33 (yeast homologue of XPC-RAD23B-CETN2) and 7-subunit coreTFIIH assembled on a carcinogen-DNA adduct lesion at 3.9-9.2&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. A ~30-bp DNA duplex could be mapped as it straddles between Rad4 and the Ssl2 (XPB) subunit of TFIIH on the 3' and 5' side of the lesion, respectively. The simultaneous binding with Rad4 and TFIIH was permitted by an unwinding of DNA at the lesion. Translocation coupled with torque generation by Ssl2 and Rad4 would extend the DNA unwinding at the lesion and deliver the damaged strand to Rad3 (XPD) in an open form suitable for subsequent lesion scanning and verification.

### Keywords
Rad33, Rad23, Dna repair, Tfiih, Rad4, Dna damage, Nucleotide excision repair

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Hee Jong Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Aaron Garcia
University of Pennsylvania


