### Accession
PXD024449

### Title
Characterisation of cancer stem cells and the renin-angiotensin system in colon adenocarcinoma

### Description
LC-MS/MS Proteomics was performed to determine proteomic differences between colon adenocarcinoma (CA) tissues and patient-matched normal colon tissues, CA-derived primary cell lines and NC-derived primary cells, and between LGCA tissues and cell lines and HGCA tissues and cell lines. Biological processes which may link the renin-angiotensin system and CA were investigated, revealing enrichment of various signalling pathways that may play roles in CA onset and progression directly or via the renin-angiotensin system.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues and cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 4% CHAPS plus inhibitor cocktail with a 1 mL glass Dounce homogeniser on ice followed by agitation for 45 min in the cold room at 4°C. After the extraction steps, the samples were centrifuged at 13,300 RPM for 20 min at 4°C. The protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). The samples were stored at -20 °C until further being processed.  Extracted proteins were precipitated using a Calbiochem ProteoExtract® Protein Precipitation Kit. The protein pellet was dissolved in a digestion buffer of 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. A second Bradford assay was performed to measure the protein concentration after precipitation, and 20 µg of protein was taken from each sample and the volume brought to 25 µL using digestion buffer. To reduce the proteins, DTT was added to a final concentration 50 of 5 mM and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The tube was then briefly centrifuged and iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 40 min to alkylate the proteins. The sample was then diluted 3-fold using 100 mM Tris-HCl to bring the urea concentration to 2 M. To digest the proteins, CaCl2 to a final concentration of 1 mM and 0.67 µg trypsin were added and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The reaction was quenched with formic acid to a final concentration of 4%. The resulting tryptic peptides were then purified by zip tipping to remove salts, using a pre-wet buffer of 0.4% TFA and 100% ACN at 1:1, a rinse buffer of 0.4% TFA and 100% ACN at 1:1, and elution buffers of 0.1% formic acid with 70% ACN (elution A) and 50% ACN (elution B) at 1:1. Zip tip eluates were pooled and dried down to 2-3 µL using a vacuum centrifuge, then brought to 100 µL using 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water (so the final constitution of the sample solution was 0.1% FA and ~ 2% ACN). Proteomic analysis of the prepared samples was performed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The LC-MS/MS included an UlitMate 3000 RSLCnano system and an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer that are coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). The sample vials containing tryptic peptides in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN were placed in the autosampler of the HPLC unit for injection, maintained at 10°C. Xcalibur™ software (Version 2.1.0, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to define the method and acquire LC-MS/MS data. Peptides were first loaded onto an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 5 m 0.3 x 5 mm trap column (cat # 160454, ThermoFisher Scientific) with the loading pump at a flow rate of 8.0 µL/min of 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA and then separated on an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 2 µm, 100 A, 75 µm x 15 cm analytical column (cat # 164941, ThermoFisher Scientific) with the Nano/Cap pump running at 0.3 µL/min with an organic solvent gradient constructed from buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The gradient was programmed as follows: 3% from 0 to 5 min, 30% from 5 – 70 min, 50% from 70 – 82 min, 95% from 82 – 88 min, and finally 3% from 88 – 99 min. Elution was based on reverse-phase liquid chromatography, whereby the more hydrophobic the peptide is the slower it will pass through the column. Peptide mass also affects transit time; larger peptides tend to retain for longer. 51 The peptides eluted in solution were ionised by nanoelectrospray ionisation (Nanospray Flex, ThermoFisher Scientific) with the 25 µM Ion Transfer capillary tube set to 275°C and voltage set at 1.8 kV. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (OT) with the following settings: detector type OT, resolution 120,000, scan range 375 - 1500 m/z, AGC target 5.0e3, Maximum Injection Time 50 ms, charge state 2 – 7, and data type Profile. Data-dependent MS/MS (ddMS/MS) scans were acquired in Ion trap (IT) having the following settings: detector type IT, scan range mode Auto: m/z Normal, IT scan rate Rapid, AGC target 5.0e3, Maximum Injection Time 300 ms, and data type Centroid. For MS/MS, high-energy collisioninduced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed in the linear Quadrupole ion trap (isolation window 1.6 m/z, HCD collision energy 30%). The “Top 20” highest-intensity ions from each MS scan were selected for the subsequent MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was included having the following settings: mass tolerance 10 ppm, exclusion duration 60 s. Each sample was run with LC-MS/MS at least 3 times.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were exported as .raw files and searched against SwissProt human protein sequence database (TaxID=9606 and Subtaxonomies, version 2017-10-25, downloaded on 24-10-2019, 42,253 sequences) using the SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein identification settings were as follows: a peptide length range of 6-144 and allowing for 2 missed trypsin cleavages, with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; the carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification (+57.021); dynamic modifications included: oxidation (+15.995 Da) at M, carbamylation (+43.066 Da) at K, acetylation (+42.011 Da) at K, deamidation (+0.984 Da) at N and Q, and peptide terminus modification of carbamylation (+43.066 Da) at the N-terminus. The files were searched against the protein sequence database and the decoy database (Percolator node) with the false discovery rate (FDR) filter set to 0.01, plus a relaxed FDR of 0.05. Proteins were identified with high peptide confidence and a minimum peptide number of 1. Proteins identified sharing the common peptides were grouped into protein groups for export.  Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Study factors were defined as “patients”, “grade” and “technical replicates”. The .raw files were imported, and each file was assigned to one category from each study factor. Before running the analysis, comparisons are defined manually. The 3 comparisons were LGCA/NC, HGCA/LGCA and HGCA/NC. Protein quantitation data is displayed as a grouped abundance, the average of normalised spectral counts from all technical and biological replicates for each grade. Proteome Discoverer used a t-test to determine the statistical significance for each comparison. Grouped abundances are used to calculate the abundance ratio for any given comparison. The selection criteria for significantly differentially expressed proteins were set at a fold change of 2 or greater (log2 fold change ≥1), and a p-value of 0.05 or smaller (-log10 p-value ≥1.30103). The output from the LFQ analysis was visualised as volcano plots and heat maps in Proteome Discoverer. Volcano plots showed fold change on the x-axis and the p-value on the y-axis. When comparing the abundance of all proteins in two conditions (e.g. HG/LG), the distance which a protein fell from the origin (x=0, y=0) was related to the abundance fold change and the p-value for that change. Therefore, the selection criteria selected proteins which were further from the origin. These proteins were exported as the significantly differentially expressed proteins. The most highly differentially expressed proteins from the volcano plots and the clusters from the heat maps which saw significant differences between each condition were exported to elucidate protein function.  The protein interaction database STRING (string-db.org; Szklarczyk et al., 2019) was used to identify the pathways that are enriched amongst the proteins significantly upregulated or downregulated in one condition (NC, LGCA, HGCA) compared to another. A network map was created based on the input list of accession numbers using a database of known protein interactions in STRING. Each node in the network represents an individual protein, and the connections between them indicated both functional and physical protein interactions. The thickness of the connection was relative to the strength of the interaction based on evidence from the database. The minimum interaction score required for an interaction was set to medium. Nodes with no connections to other nodes under these criteria were removed from the map. Furthermore, the optional setting of adding in an additional shell of proteins, which were not present in the input list but are known to have strong interactions with other members, was not selected. Once these settings had been defined, the functional enrichments from the network were displayed, which included the Gene Ontology (GO) categories and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways that were enriched within the input list of proteins. For a category or pathway to be considered significant, at least 2 protein members were required to be present within the network map, with a false discovery rate (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value) for the category/pathway of less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colon adenocarcinoma, Crc, Lc-ms/ms, Primary cell lines

### Affiliations
Centre for Biodiscovery
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Danyl Mclauchlan

### Lab Head
Dr Lifeng Peng
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington


