### Accession
PXD039787

### Title
Antibody N-linked glycosylation profiling with PEAKS GlycanFinder

### Description
We conducted a new mass spectrometry experiment for antibody N-linked glycosylation profiling that could distinguish isomeric peptides and glycans in four immunoglobulin G subclasses.

### Sample Protocol
IgG purification and desalting
IgG was isolated using Protein G column by affinity chromatography, and desalted using Hitrap Desalting column according to the molecular weight of substances. Serum (20 µL) was diluted in loading buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.4) followed by filtered through a 0.22-µm filtrate with 96-well-plate. Equilibrium buffer and binding buffer are the same as the loading buffer, and 0.1 M formic acid (FA, pH 2.5) was used as the elution buffer. Sample solution was injected into the loop valve and processed following the certain method template of step elution for monoclonal antibody contained in the instructions of AKTA plus. The detailed procedures can be found in the template description of User Manual (AKTAprime plus). Notably, the neutralizing buffer (1 M Tris-Hcl, pH 9.0) was suggested to be initially added into the collection tube to maintain the purified IgG fractions stable. According to the principle of molecular sieve, the collected IgG protein solution was further desalted using the desalting column by the application template. IgG desalting was conducted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) solution due to labile property. Desalting IgG protein solution was automatically collected, and evaporated under a vacuum concentrator at 60℃. Finally, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was conducted to test the purity of IgG fractions. Tryptic digestion and glycopeptides enrichment All the IgG samples were subjected to proteolytic cleavage using trypsin. IgG were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by a 10-min incubation at 95 ℃. After cooling to room temperature, trypsin was added by enzyme to substrate ratio at 1:50. The digestion was stopped after an overnight incubation at 37℃ by boiling at 95 ℃ for 5 min. Prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, the enrichment of IgG glycopeptides was performed with MCC-SPE. Briefly, the column was pre-washed with 3 mL of ultra-water, and equilibrium with 3 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The sample was diluted with equilibrium buffer to five times volume of tryptic digestion solution, subsequently loaded onto the SPE column. After washing with 3 mL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, IgG glycopeptides were effectively collected.  LC-MS/MS experiment Subclass-specific IgG glycosylation was analyzed with a nanoElute UHPLC system coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer equipped with CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics). Solvent A and B were 0.1% FA in ultra-water and 0.1% FA in ACN, respectively. Tryptic IgG glycopeptides was dissolved in solvent A and randomly selected for MS analysis. 800 ng of sample was injected and the analytes were separated using a 60 min binary gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Glycopeptides were trapped on a C18 column (µ-Precolumn TM PepMap 100, 300 µm×5 mm, 5 um, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an IonOpticks column (Aurora series). The LC gradient used was as follows: 0-45 min, 2-22% B; 45-50 min, 22-35% B; 50-55 min, 35-80% B; 55-60 min, 80% B.  For the timsTOF Pro settings, the following parameters were adapted, starting from the PASEF method for standard proteomics. The values for mobility-dependent collision energy ramping were set to 75 eV at an inversed reduced mobility (1/k0) of 2.0 V s/cm2 and 20 eV at 0.60 V s/cm2. Collision energies were linearly interpolated between these two 1/k0 values and kept constant above or below. For efficient glycopeptide dissociation, TIMS stepping was applied with two collision energies: 35-131.25 eV was utilized following 20-75 eV. 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were triggered per cycle (2.23 s). Target intensity per individual PASEF precursor was set to 100000. The scan range was set between 0.70 and 1.78 V s/cm2 with a ramp time of 200 ms. Precursor ions in an m/z range between 100 and 40000 with charge states 0-5 were selected for fragmentation. MS was operated in the positive-ion mode, and MS/MS was acquired under the Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Active exclusion was enabled for 0.4 min (mass width 0.015 Th, 1/k0 width 0.015 V s/cm2).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was imported into GlycanFinder for N-linked glycopeptide analysis. The data was searched against an IgG protein database of 9 entries and an IgG N-linked glycan database  of 247 entries. The following search parameters were used for all three search engines: HCD fragmentation, trypsin digestion, C(Carbamidomethylation) as fixed modification, M(Oxidation) and NQ(Deamidation) as variable modifications, precursor error tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment error tolerance of 0.02 Da, glycan fragment error tolerance of 20 ppm. The peptide and glycan FDR filters were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantification, Glycopeptide, Glycosylation, Lc/ms/ms, Glycan

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
BSI

### Submitter
Weiping Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Ma
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada


