### Accession
PXD027403

### Title
Structural mapping of the surfaces of fibrillar 1N3R and 1N4R human tau

### Description
The structural characterization of pathogenic tau filaments that accumulate in tauopathies, including Alzheimer disease, is key for understanding their pathogenic function and identify the structural determinants of distinct tau filaments involved in distinct tauopathies. Fibrillar tau surfaces play a crucial role in tau fibrils interaction with various protein partners and binding to neurons, a key step for their prion-like propagation propensity. In order to identify the amino acid residues stretches that are exposed and those that are not exposed to the solvent within tau fibrils, we used structural proteomic approaches: proteolysis and molecular covalent surface painting using NHS-Biotin followed by MS-based analysis of the proteolytic products. We compared the solvent accessible amino acid residues on the surface of htau proteins upon assembly of 1N3R and 1N4R human htau monomers into fibrils in vitro. We mapped the amino acid segments exposed or unexposed on the surface of htau fibrils by determining the accessibility GluC enzyme and NHS-biotin followed by proteolysis. The proteolytic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MSMS and processed using Mascot for their identification and PeakView for intensity extraction of labeled and unlabeled proteolytic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Full-length human 1N3R and 1N4R htau was expressed, purified and assembled into fibrils in presence of heparin as previously described (Tardivel, M., et al, 2016, Acta Neuropathol. Commun .4, 117-130).  Chemical surface labelling of monomeric and fibrillar htau was performed in PBS buffer with N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide biotin (EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-Biotin, Thermo Scientific) at [Lysines/NHS-Biotine] ratio of 5/2 during 10 min at room temperature. Labelling was stopped by addition of Tris pH7.5 (50mM final concentration). Fibrillar htau samples were sedimented and recovered in 50mM Tris pH7.5. For in-solution digestion under native conditions, monomeric and fibrillar 1N3R and 1N4R htau (10µM), labelled or not, were digested using endoprotease GluC for 15 hours at 37°C (1/50 w/w E/S ratio). Digestions were stopped by flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis. For in-gel digestion under denaturing conditions of control and labeled monomeric and fibrillar htau 1N3R and 1N4R (4µg ,100pmol). Laemmli buffer was added and denatured samples were loaded on a 12% SDS-PAGE. The htau bands were excised, reduced with 10mM DTT, alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide and digested with GluC or AspN (1/20 w/w Enzyme-to-Substrate ratios) during 15h at 37°C. Proteolytic peptides were extracted by addition 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and further vacuum dried and stored at -20°C for further analysis. For each condition, three replicate experiments were performed on fibrils assembled independently.  Proteolytic peptides, resulting from in-solution and in-gel digestions, were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS, using a Triple-TOF 4600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) as previously described (Shrivastava, A.N., et al., 2019, EMBO J. 38: e99871). The gradient was 5 to 35% solvent B in 40 min. Charge states from 1 to 5, above an intensity threshold of 1000, were selected for CID fragmentation using a data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into “mgf” data files using the MS Data Converter software (version 1.3) included in the PeakView software (version 1.2, AB Sciex). Peptides were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) against the 1N3R and 1N4R htau amino acid sequences, with the following search parameters: specific digestion with GluC (C-terminus of E or D) or AspN (N-terminus of D); up to 5 missed cleavage; oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) and biotinylation of N-ter, Lys and Cys, Ser, Thr, Tyr (+226.08 Da) as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.02 Da) as constant modification for in-gel digestion; 40 ppm and 0.05 Da for precursor and fragment mass tolerances, respectively. Ion intensity of peptides identified in the MASCOT search with a peptide score above 20 and at least two identifications were extracted using the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) manager of the PeakView® Software (version 1.2 , AB SCIEX). For each extracted intensity, accordance between MASCOT peptide identification and the MS2 spectrum was checked. For each experiment, peptide ion intensity values were normalized to the total amount of htau, using reference peptides (A106-E117 or D421-D429 for GluC or AspN digestion, respectively), as performed previously (Barthélemy, N. R., et al, 2016, J. Alzheimers Dis. 51, 1033-1043). For each peptide, fold change between fibrillar and monomeric htau was calculated as the ratio of the averaged normalized peptide intensity for the fibrils to the averaged normalized peptide intensity for the monomers.

### Publication Abstract
The rigid core of intracellular tau filaments from Alzheimer's disease (AD), Pick's disease (PiD), and Corticobasal disease (CBD) brains has been shown to differ in their cryo-EM atomic structure. Despite providing critical information on the intimate arrangement of a fraction of htau molecule within the fibrillar scaffold, the cryo-EM studies neither yield a complete picture of tau fibrillar assemblies structure nor contribute insights into the surfaces that define their interactions with numerous cellular components. Here, using proteomic approaches such as proteolysis and molecular covalent painting, we mapped the exposed amino acid stretches at the surface and those constituting the fibrillar core of in&#xa0;vitro-assembled fibrils of human htau containing one N-terminal domain and three (1N3R) or four (1N4R) C-terminal microtubule-binding repeat domains as a result of alternative splicing. Using limited proteolysis, we identified the proteolytic fragments composing the molecular "bar-code" for each type of fibril. Our results are in agreement with structural data reported for filamentous tau from AD, PiD, and CBD cases predigested with the protease pronase. Finally, we report two amino acid stretches, exposed to the solvent in 1N4R not in 1N3R htau, which distinguish the surfaces of these two kinds of fibrils. Our findings open new perspectives for the design of highly specific ligands with diagnostic and therapeutic potential.

### Keywords
Tau fibrils, Structural proteomics; proteolysis; chemical surface modification; nhs-biotin; nanolc-msms

### Affiliations
CNRS
MIRCen, CNRS UMR 9199, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France

### Submitter
Virginie Redeker

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie REDEKER
MIRCen, CNRS UMR 9199, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France


