### Accession
PXD022271

### Title
Ubiquitin Ligase Enzyme FANCL Inhibits Peste des petits ruminants Virus Replication by Inducing Type I Interferon Production through Promoting Phosphorylation of TBK1

### Description
Peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV) infection causes highly contagious and severe disease in domestic and wild ruminants. It is widely reported that PRRV infection causes considerable innate immunosuppression in its host and promotes viral replication. However, how does the host rescue the innate immune response to counteract this immunosuppression during viral replication is poorly understood. The goat fetal fibroblasts (GFFs) have been commonly used as host-original cells to investigate the pathogenesis of PPRV. To explore the mechanisms of how host counteracts PPRV-mediated innate immunosuppression, a high-throughput quantitation proteomic approach (iTRAQ in conjunction with LC-MS/MS) was used to investigate the proteome landscape of GFFs in response to PPRV infection. Eventually, the proteomic analysis gained 497 up-regulated proteins and 358 down-regulated proteins (PPRV-infected cells versus mock-infected cells). The complement and coagulation cascades, protein digestion and absorption, and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathways were significantly regulated in response to PPRV infection. ErmineJ analysis of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) identified the significantly enriched GO categories for response to interferon-gamma and positive regulation of ERK1 and ERK2 cascade. In addition, many immune related proteins, such as interferon gamma, 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthase-like protein, toll-like receptor 9, toll-like receptor 6, NOD1, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, and Wnt-5a were significantly upregulated. This suggested that the innate immune response was triggered during PPRV infection in GFFs. We subsequently identified that the E3 ubiquitin ligase FANCL was critically involved in regulation of the innate immune response during PPRV infection. FANCL inhibited PPRV infection by enhancing type I interferon (IFN) and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) expression. Further study indicated that FANCL induced type I IFN production by promoting TBK1 phosphorylation, and therefore impairing PPRV-mediated immunosuppression and revealing an antiviral function against PPRV.

### Sample Protocol
GFFs were mock infected (control samples ) or infected (experimental samples) with PPRV Nigeria 75/1 at an MOI of 1.0. The cells were then collected for quantitative proteomic analysis at 48hpi. For tryptic digestion and iTRAQ Labeling, 100μg protein of each sample were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Then the three control samples, which were mock infected with PPRV, were respectively labeled with iTRAQ 113, 114 and 115 tags. Another three experimental samples were labelled with iTRAQ 116, 119 and 121. Labeled peptide mixtures were pooled and dried via vacuum centrifugation. In this study, we set PPRV1/Mock1, PPRV1/Mock2, PPRV1/Mock3, PPRV2/Mock1, PPRV2/Mock2, PPRV2/Mock3, PPRV3/Mock1, PPRV3/Mock2, PPRV3/Mock3, PPRV3/PPRV2, PPRV3/PPRV1, PPRV2/PPRV1, Mock3/Mock2, Mock3/Mock1, Mock2/Mock1 as comparison group. The finally repeat experiment differentially expressed proteins were defined with 1.2 fold change (mean value of all comparison groups) and P-value (t-test of all comparision groups) less than 0.05. Significantly changed proteins were screened by volcano plot analysis which is detected by Student’s t-test. We used coefficient of variation (CV), which is defined as the ratio of the standard deviation (SD) to the mean, to evaluate reproducibility. The lower the CV, the better the reproducibility. The cells were harvested at 48 hpi (three mock-infected samples and three PPRV-infected samples were prepared respectively), and the samples were lysed in a cold lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl or TEAB, pH 8.5) containing 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM EDTA (final concentration) for 5 min on ice. The whole cell lysates were sonicated at 200 W for 1 min and then centrifuged at 4 °C, 25,000 g for 20 min. The concentration of the protein was quantified through the Bradford method. For protein digestion, the protein solution (100 ug) with 8 M urea was diluted 4 times with 100 mM of TEAB. Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was used to digest the proteins with the ratio of protein : trypsin =40 : 1 at 37°C overnight. Then, the peptides were desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. The prepared peptides were dissolved in 30 ul of 0.5 M TEAB with vortexing, and then labeled with different iTRAQ reagents (113, 114, 115 for control group; 116, 119, 121 for experimental group ) for 2 h at room temperature. The labeled peptides were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column, and the mixtures were dried through vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system in coordination with a high pH RP column. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides mixtures were reconstituted with buffer A (5% ACN,95% H2O, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) to 2 ml and loaded onto a column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were separated at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 mins, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and decreased to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. The elution was constantly monitored through measuring the absorbance at 214 nm. About 80 eluted peptides were finally pooled as 20 fractions which were subjected to vacuum-freeze-drying. Then each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a C18 trap column 5 μL/min for 8 min using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler. The peptides were then eluted from the trap column and separated by an analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm, 3.6 μm column diameter, 15 cm column length) packed in-house.  The peptides separated from the nano HPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The parameters for MS analysis were listed as following: electrospray voltage: 1.6 kV; precursor scan range: 350-1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range: >100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting: 27%; dynamic Exclusion time: 15 s; Automatic gain control (AGC) for full MS target and MS2 target: 3e6 and 1e5, respectively; The number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan: 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20,000. The raw MS/MS data was converted into MGF format by thermo scientific tool Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 (http://www.matrixscience.com/) against the selected database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/?term=Capra+hircus+%28goat%29, 35751 sequences, download September, 2020). At least one unique peptide was necessary for the identified protein. The Mascot parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance at ±20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance at 0.05 Da; number of missed cleavage up to 2; fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); variable modifications of oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y). The decoy database pattern was set as the reverse of the target database. All reported data were based on 99% confidence for protein and peptide identifications as determined by a false discovery rate (FDR) of no N1%, using N(decoy) ∗ 2 / [N(decoy) + N(target)] to compute the FDR, in which the decoy is the reversed database and the target is the target database (Sandberg et al., 2012). Peptide identifications by IQuant (version 2.2.1) were pre-filtered at a PSM-level FDR of 1%, then grouped into a set of confident proteins based on the parsimony principle (Nesvizhskii and Aebersold, 2005; Wen et al., 2014). To control the rate of false-positive at protein level, an protein FDR at 1%, which is based on Picked protein FDR strategy, will also be estimated after protein inference (Protein-level FDR <= 0.01) (Savitski et al., 2015). In detailed, the main IQuant quantitation parameters were set as: Quant-peptide, use all unique peptide; Quant-number, at least one unique spetra; Normalization, VSN; Protein-Ratio, weighted average; Statistical Analysis, permutation tests.

### Publication Abstract
Peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV) infection causes considerable innate immunosuppression in its host, which promotes viral replication. However, how the host rescues the innate immune response to counteract this immunosuppression during viral replication remains largely unknown. To explore the mechanisms of how a host counteracts PPRV-mediated innate immunosuppression, a high-throughput quantitation proteomic approach (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation in conjunction with LC-MS/MS) was used to investigate the proteome landscape of goat fetal fibroblasts (GFFs) in response to PPRV infection. Eventually, 497 upregulated proteins and 358 downregulated proteins were identified. Many of the differentially expressed proteins were enriched in immune-related pathways. Blocking the activation of the innate immune response with a specific inhibitor BX795 in GFFs remarkably promoted PPRV replication, suggesting the significant antiviral role of the enriched immune-related pathways. The GO enrichment analysis showed that the host protein FANCL revealed a similar expression pattern to these innate immune-related proteins. In addition, the analysis of protein-protein interaction networks reveals a potential relationship between FANCL and the innate immune pathway. We determined that FANCL inhibited PPRV infection by enhancing type I interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated gene expression. Further investigation determined that FANCL induced type I IFN production by promoting TBK1 phosphorylation, thus impairing PPRV-mediated immunosuppression.

### Keywords
Peste des petits ruminants virus; quantitative proteomics; fancl; innate immune response; tbk1

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu, PR China
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 

### Submitter
Shuying Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Haixue Zheng
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu, PR China


