### Accession
PXD014311

### Title
Region-specific proteome changes of the intestinal epithelium during aging and dietary restriction

### Description
The small intestine is responsible for nutrient absorption and it is one of the most important interfaces between the environment and our body. During aging, changes in the structure of the epithelium lead to food malabsorption and reduced barrier function thus increasing disease risk in aging. The molecular drivers of these alterations remain poorly understood. Here, we compared the proteomes of small intestinal crypts from mice across different anatomical regions and age groups. We found that aging alters epithelial immune responses, metabolic networks and stem cell proliferation, and it is accompanied by a region-dependent skewing in the cellular composition of the intestinal epithelium. Of note, a short period of dietary restriction followed by re-feeding partially restores the epithelium to a youthful state by promoting the differentiation of intestinal stem cells (ISCs) towards the secretory lineage. Using in vitro and in vivo studies, we identify Hmgcs2 (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthetase 2) – the rate limiting enzyme in the synthesis of ketone bodies – as a modulator of ISCs differentiation, which responds to dietary changes. This study provides an atlas of age-dependent proteome changes in defined regions of the intestinal epithelium and characterizes how young and old mice adapt to drastic changes of diet, such as dietary restriction and re-feeding.

### Sample Protocol
Crypts were resuspended in 0.4%RapiGestTM SF Surfactant(Waters in 5mM AmBic) and heated (95°C, 5m). 10M urea/250mM AmBic was added to a conc. of 4M urea, lysates were sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus(Diagenode) 10x1m on, 30s off, high intensity, 20°C, cleared at 20800xg(5m), incubated at 37°C for 30m with 10mM DTT, treated with 15mM iodacetamide(IAA), 30m. Proteins were digested 4h at 37°C with 1:100(w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH). Samples were diluted to 1.5M Urea, digested with 1:100(w/w) trypsin (Promega) for 16h, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid(TFA), desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm; eluates were dried, dissolved in 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA). 20μL were put in a vial with 0.25μL of HRM peptides(Biognosys). Organoids and ISCs were lysed in 2% SDS(w/v), 100mM Hepes, 10mM DTT and lysed as above. Samples were treated with 8vol acetone(Biosolve) O/N, -20°C, centrifuged at 20800xg, 1h, 4°C. Pellets were washed 2x with 80% acetone dried, dissolved at 0.25-0.5µg/µL in 3M urea/100mM HEPES, digested and desalted as above. Library: 1µg peptide was analysed by DDA and nanoAcquity UPLC system(Waters) fitted with a trapping(nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A: water, 0.1% (v/v) FA; solvent B: ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA. Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 0% to 40% B in 120m. Total runtime: 145m. RF lens was set to 30%. For crypt library generation, 12 samples and 4 pools were measured in DDA mode. DDA conditions:  Full scan MS spectra with 350-1650m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with res. of 60k FWHM. Filling time: max. 50ms with limit of 2x105 ions. “Top Speed” method was used to take the max. number of precursor ions (PI, intensity threshold 5x104) from the MS for fragmentation(HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation(1.4Da window) and measure in the Orbitrap(res. 15k FWHM, fixed first mass 120 m/z), cycle time 3s. MIPS with relaxed restrictions when few PI met the criteria was used. Fragmentation was done after accumulation of 2x105 ions or filling time of 22ms for each PI. MS/MS data acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged(2+-7+) PI were used. Dynamic exclusion was employed with max. retention time of 15s and rel. window of 10ppm (except isotopes). For DIA 1µg of peptide and same gradient was used as for DDA. MS conditions: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with res. of 120k FWHM. Filling time: max. 20ms with limitation of 5x105 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with 3s cycle time. HCD fragmentation(30% collision energy) was done and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at res. 30k FWHM over mass range 200-2000m/z after accumulation of 2x105 ions or after filling time of 70ms (whichever occurred first). Ions were injected for all parallelizable time. Organoids and KO: For library generation, 1µg of peptide was analysed by DDA and the UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher) fitted with a trapping (Waters nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180µm x 20mm) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). Outlet was coupled to a Q exactive HF (ThermoFisher) using a Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A: 0.1 % FA, solvent B: 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.08% FA. Peptides were eluted via non-linear gradient from 1% to 62.5% B in 131m. Total runtime 150m. RF lens was set to 60. DDA conditions: Full scan MS spectra (mass range 350-1650m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with res. 60k FWHM. Filling time: max. 20ms and AGC target 3x106ions. Top15 method was selected PI from MS for fragmentation (min. AGC target of 1x103 ions, norm. collision energy of 27%), quadrupole isolation (1.6m/z) and measurement in the Orbitrap (res. 15kFWHM, fixed first mass 120m/z). Fragmentation was done after accumulation of 2x105 ions or filling time of 25ms for each PI. Multiply charged (2+-7+) PI were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was done with max. retention period of 20s. Isotopes were excluded. For the DIA data acquisition, 1µg peptides were loaded using the same setup as DDA. MS conditions were modified as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with res. of 120,000FWHM.  The filling time was set at max. 60ms with AGC target of 3x106 ions.  DIA were acquired with 40 windows of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Default charge state: 3+. HCD fragmentation (stepped norm. collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS res. was 30k FWHM with fixed first mass of 200m/z after accumulation of 3x106 ions or after filling time of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition (profile mode) and processing was done with Tune v2.1, 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1. For intestinal crypt and ISCs dataset, the DIA spectral library was generated using DDA data searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The data were searched against a species specific Uniprot database (Mus musculus, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The library search was set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. The spectral library for crypt DIA analysis was generated using Spectronaut v9 (Biognosys AG) using the MaxQuant output. The library contained 98394 precursors, corresponding to 5759 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. The spectral library for ISC DIA analysis was generated using Spectronaut v10 using the corresponding MaxQuant output. The library contained 59328 precursors, corresponding to 4814 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference.  For organoids and Hmgcs2-KO samples, the spectral libraries were generated using Pulsar in Spectronaut Professional+ v11 searching both DDA and DIA data. The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database database (Mus musculus, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed), and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. The organoid library contained 111625precursors, corresponding to 6272 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. The Hmgcs2-KO library contained 113620 precursors, corresponding to 6281 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference.   DIA data were analysed and searched against the specific spectral libraries using Spectronaut v9/10/11/13. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data reports were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed using R. Proteins with q<0.05 and absolute log2 fold change > 0.58 were considered as significantly affected, unless otherwise stated.

### Publication Abstract
The small intestine is responsible for nutrient absorption and one of the most important interfaces between the environment and the body. During aging, changes of the epithelium lead to food malabsorption and reduced barrier function, thus increasing disease risk. The drivers of these alterations remain poorly understood. Here, we compare the proteomes of intestinal crypts from mice across different anatomical regions and ages. We find that aging alters epithelial immunity, metabolism, and cell proliferation and is accompanied by region-dependent skewing in the cellular composition of the epithelium. Of note, short-term dietary restriction followed by refeeding partially restores the epithelium by promoting stem cell differentiation toward the secretory lineage. We identify Hmgcs2 (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A [CoA] synthetase 2), the rate-limiting enzyme for ketogenesis, as a modulator of stem cell differentiation that responds to dietary changes, and we provide an atlas of region- and age-dependent proteome changes of the small intestine.

### Keywords
Diet, Stem cell, Crypts, Aging, Small intestine

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany


