### Accession
PXD043019

### Title
Mapping of bone marrow sample proteome of Pinch1/2 knockout mice

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are used to treat infectious and immune diseases and disorders; however, its mechanism(s) remain incompletely defined.  Here we find that MSCs lacking Pinch1/2 proteins display dramatically reduced ability to suppress lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury and dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced inflammatory bowel disease in mice. Mice with Pinch loss in MSCs have severe defects in both immune and hematopoietic functions, resulting in premature death, which can be restored by intravenous injection of wild-type but not Pinch-deficient MSCs.

### Sample Protocol
Six Pinch1f/f; Pinch2-/- mice (Control group) and six Prx1-Cre; Pinch1f/f; Pinch2-/- mice (dKO group) were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane. Bone marrow cells and bone marrow supernatants were obtained respectively from the femurs of the mice. After the proteins were extracted and digested, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for identification and quantitation analysis. The differentially expressed peptides were subsequently filtered for fold-change >1.5. The mass spectrometry proteomics data will be deposited to the public repository after the acceptance.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are used to treat infectious and immune diseases and disorders; however, its mechanism(s) remain incompletely defined. Here we find that bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) lacking Pinch1/2 proteins display dramatically reduced ability to suppress lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury and dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced inflammatory bowel disease in mice. Prx1-Cre; Pinch1<sup>f/f</sup>; Pinch2<sup>-/-</sup> transgenic mice have severe defects in both immune and hematopoietic functions, resulting in premature death, which can be restored by intravenous injection of wild-type BMSCs. Single cell sequencing analyses reveal dramatic alterations in subpopulations of the BMSCs in Pinch mutant mice. Pinch loss in Prx1<sup>+</sup> cells blocks differentiation and maturation of hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow and increases production of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; in monocytes. We find that Pinch is critical for expression of Cxcl12 in BMSCs; reduced production of Cxcl12 protein from Pinch-deficient BMSCs reduces expression of the Mbl2 complement in hepatocytes, thus impairing the innate immunity and thereby contributing to infection and death. Administration of recombinant Mbl2 protein restores the lethality induced by Pinch loss in mice. Collectively, we demonstrate that the novel Pinch-Cxcl12-Mbl2 signaling pathway promotes the interactions between bone and liver to modulate immunity and hematopoiesis and may provide a useful therapeutic target for immune and infectious diseases.

### Keywords
Pinch, Focal adhesion, Inflammation, Complement

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Tailin He

### Lab Head
Mr Tailin He
Southern University of Science and Technology


