### Accession
PXD001962

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of Human ACHN cells by estrogen

### Description
To find out the potential targets in response to estrogen treatment on ACHN cell, a human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell line. Since estrogen can repress ACHN growth in a partly estrogen receptor-dependent manner, it is possible that phosphorylation state in ACHN cells is regulated.

### Sample Protocol
ACHN cells treated with estrogen or DMSO. The total lysates were acetone precipitated and resuspended in 100 mM TEABC and 8 M urea. After reduction/alkylation, Lys-C/trypsin digestion, and dimethyl labeling, the combined peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS were processed by Maxquant ver. 1.3.0.5 with dedault setting. The peak lists were searched with Andromeda against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (ver. 2012_11 with 20,226 human sequence entries). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-acetylation of proteins, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Parent masses and fragment ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%. For each phosphorylation site identified, a localization probability was assigned a posttranslational modification scoring algorithm. To show the identification confidence, the phosphorylation sites were categorized into Class I (localization probability > 0.75) or Class II (0.5 < localization probability < 0.75) sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rcc, Phosphoproteomics, Estrogen

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan
Fu Jen Catholic University

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Chi Ku
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan


