### Accession
PXD005478

### Title
Clinical "in vivo" samples Beijing B0/W148 LC-MS/MS

### Description
The main project purpose is to investigate the fundamental physiological state of Mycobacterium tuberculosis during the infection and the mycobacterial response within the infected host tissue, human lung. High-throughput proteomic analysis of M. tuberculosis cells will be involved to solve this problem. The description of pattern of proteins expressed in M. tuberculosis cells extracted directly from clinical material of patients with tuberculosis defines the main novelty of the given project. Undoubtedly, the intermediate project results describing the features of M. tuberculosis strains proteome in vitro will also be essential for the global scientific community.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial cells were suspended in 50 μL lysozyme and 100 μL 100mМ TrisHСl pH 7.6 with 3 µL of Protease inhibitor Mix (GE Healthcare).  Cells disrupted on a bead-beating homogenizer (MPBio, FastPrep-24) with 0.5-mm silica-zirconium beads, time at 4 min followed by 5 min on ice. To reduce disulfide bonds and to block cysteine residues the collected suspension was added by SDS to a final concentration of 10 % and DTT (BioRad) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min.  The sample was by centrifugation at 13,000 g, 4 °С for 5 min. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad). Proteins were then separated on a 7.5% 1D SDS-PAGE on a PROTEAN II (Bio-Rad) at 20 mA for 20 min and 40 mA overnight. The gel was stained with Colloidal blue. Proteins were sliced on six pieces and each in 1x1 mm pieces that were destained in 10mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56oC, followed by a second wash in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) ACN (1-2 h, 50oC). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in a 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w) ratio at 37 °C overnight (approx 16 h). The cleavage was stopped by adding 5% TFA and peptides were extracted in a solution containing 50% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v) followed by extraction in 75% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v). Peptides were concentrated by speedvac and dissolved in 20 μL 1% acetic acid. The supernatant peptides were removed and used for LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were converted to Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using msconvert with parameters: peakPicking true 2, msLevel 2, zeroSample removeExtra, mgf. The identification of proteins was carried out using Mascot Search Engine version 2.5.1.The Mascot searches were performed with the following parameters: Trypsin, max. missed cleavages 2, Peptide charge +1, +2, +3, Peptide tol. 20 ppm, MS/MS tol. 0.5 DA, Instrument ESI-TRAP. Oxidation(M), Carbamidomethylation(C) and Deamidated(NQ) was selected as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency

### Submitter
Alexander Smolyakov

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Ilina
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency


