### Accession
PXD025911

### Title
Proteomic analysis of laser-microdissected murine fetal glomeruli

### Description
Alteration of fetal kidney morphogenesis in diabetic pregnancies is poorly described, especially changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and glomerular basement membrane (GBM) during glomerulogenesis. Addressing the ECM proteome, or matrisome, in mouse fetal glomeruli in a healthy and diabetic environment will improve understanding about the association between ECM and GBM changes in the glomerulus as potential reprogramming mechanisms for glomerular dysfunction in infants of mothers with diabetes. This project aimed to define the matrisome and BM composition in the maturing murine fetal  glomeruli collected from normal and diabetic mothers. For this, we used laser microdissection microscopy to isolate maturing glomeruli from cryosections, and analyse by label-free tandem mass spectrometry to test the hypothesis that maternal diabetes influences ECM and GBM composition, assembly and function.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse model and sample acquisition: Swiss female mice (2 months old) were used to induce type 1 diabetes as previously described (Favaro ett al. 2013), using alloxan (40 mg/kg). Diabetic and normoglycemic females were mated with normoglycemic males, and fetuses were obtained at the embryonic day 19 (E19). Fetal kidney samples (n=4 control, 4 hyperglycemic) were embedded in OCT for cryosectioning. 10-m-thick cryosections were acquired, fixed with 70% ethanol and hydrated to be stained with haematoxylin and eosin, and after prepared for laser microdissection microscopy. Maturing mouse glomeruli were identified based on histological assessment using a 40x/0.5 FL N objective and laser dissected around the Bowman’s capsule using an Olympus IX83 Inverted fluorescence snapshot microscopy equipped with MMI CellCut Microdissection system and the MMI CellTools software v.5.0 (Molecular Machines and Industries). A total of 150 glomerular sections per fetus were collected and processed for MS-based proteomics.  Sample preparation for MS analysis: Samples collected by laser microdissection microscopy were suspended in S-trap lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5) and sonicated using a Covaris LE220+ Focused Ultrasonicator (Covaris). Extracted proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 10 min under agitation (at 800 rpm), then alkylated with 15 mM IA for 10 min at RT in the dark and had 5 mM DTT added to a 10 mM final concentration to quench the residual alkylation reaction. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 1400 x g, then acidified with 1.2% formic acid and transferred to S-Trap Micro Spin columns (Protifi) equipped with collecting 2.0 ml plastic microtubes to retain the flowthrough. Detergents and salt contaminants were removed by centrifugation (4000 x g for 2 min) and proteins trapped in the S-trap resin were digested for 1h at 47°C with 0.12 g/l trypsin prepared in 50 mM TEAB buffer. Peptides were washed with 50 mM TEAB, centrifuged, washed with 0.1% formic acid, centrifuged again, and finally eluted from the S-trap columns with 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid solution. Peptide samples were incubated for 5 min at RT with 5.0 mg OligoTM R3 reverse-phase beads (1133903, Applied Biosystems) prepared in 50% ACN, in a 96-well plate equipped with 0.2 m polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane filter (3504, Corning). After centrifuging, the bead-bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% formic acid, centrifuged again, and eluted from the filter using 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Retrieved peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, then resuspended in 5% ACN in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Raw data were obtained and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS spectra were searched against SwissProt and TrEMBL databases (v. 2018_01) using SEQUEST HT and Mascot search tools. Tryptic peptides with up to 1 missed cleavage, mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions were considered for the search; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, and protein validation was performed using Target/Decoy strategy. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification based on precursor ion intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Mouse, Glomerulus, Laser microdissection microscopy, Extracellular matrix, Glomerular basement membrane

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.

### Submitter
Louise Hopkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.


