### Accession
PXD017235

### Title
ChromID identifies the protein interactome at chromatin marks

### Description
Chromatin modifications instruct genome function through spatiotemporal recruitment of regulatory factors to the genome. However, how these modifications define the proteome composition at distinct chromatin states remains to be fully characterized. Here, we made use of natural protein domains as modular building blocks to develop engineered chromatin readers (eCRs) selective for histone and DNA modifications. By stably expressing eCRs in mouse embryonic stem cells and measuring their subnuclear localisation, genomic distribution and histone-PTM-binding preference, we first demonstrate their applicability as selective chromatin binders in living cells. Finally, we exploit the binding specificity of eCRs to establish ChromID, a new method for chromatin-dependent proteome identification based on proximity biotinylation. We use ChromID to reveal the proteome at distinct chromatin states in mouse stem cells, and by using a synthetic dual-modification reader, we furthermore uncover the protein composition at bivalent promoters marked by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3. These results highlight the applicability of ChromID as novel method to obtain a detailed view of the protein interaction network determined by the chemical language on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were processed as described in Feller et al. 2015 and Feller et al. 2020 with modifications as described below. De-crosslinked histones were separated by SDS-PAGE on 16 % Novex Tris-Glycine gels (Invitrogen, XP00165BOX), stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon, ISB1L) and bands corresponding to core histones were excised. Gel pieces were washed twice with water and twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Gel pieces were destained by incubating three times for each 10 minutes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile at 37 °C with shaking at 800 rpm in a Thermomixer. Gel pieces were successively dehydrated by incubating with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, once 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and three times with acetonitrile. Histones were twice derivatized by chemical acetylation by reacting 5 µL of d6-acetic anhydride ((CD3CO)2O, Sigma-Aldrich), 15 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffered with 1:2 diluted ammonium hydroxide solution to keep the pH at 8. The reactions were performed for 45 minutes at 37 °C with shaking at 800 rpm in a Thermomixer. After the derivatization reactions, histones were washed four times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, two times with water, and three times with acetonitrile. Histone gel pieces were rehydrated with a 25 ng/ul trypsin solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (sequencing-grade trypsin from Promega) and digested overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 70% acetonitrile/0.25% TFA and twice with acetonitrile, vacuum concentrated in a speed vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Free peptide N-termini were derivatized twice by reacting 5 µL of d6-acetic anhydride, 30 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and 10-15 µL of 1:2 diluted ammonium hydroxide solution to keep the pH at 8. After the reaction mixture was vortexed and incubated at 37 °C for 45 minutes with shaking at 800 rpm in a Thermomixer, it was quenched with 35 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, the solution volume was reduced to 15 µL in a speed vacuum centrifuge and the derivatization procedure was repeated. After derivatization, peptides were evaporated in a speed vacuum centrifuge at 37 °C to near dryness, resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the pH was adjusted with 50% TFA solution to pH 2 and the peptides were purified by a StageTip protocol using two discs of C18 followed by one disc of activated carbon (3 M Empore). After StageTip purification, the samples were evaporated in a speed vacuum centrifuge to near dryness and stored until mass spectrometry acquisition. Before MS analysis, the histone peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% TFA and diluted 1:10 in 0.1% TFA supplemented with iRT reference peptides (Biognosis).

### Data Protocol
The MS-ready histone solution was separated on a reverse phase liquid chromatography column (Waters Acquity HSS T3, C18, 1.8 µM). The column was connected to a nanoflow UPLC (Waters M-Class) and peptides were electrosprayed in a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL per minute, starting at 1% B and ramping to 35% in 55 min, followed by an increase to 45% B in 5 min, followed by an increase to 65% in 3 min followed by an increase to 98% in 5 min and then holding at 98% B for another 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, ion chromatograms were extracted with Skyline and data summarization and statistical analysis was performed in R and Excel (Feller and Aebersold, manuscript in preparation). In brief, a spectral-chromatogram library was constructed using isotopically-labelled reference synthetic peptides and manually curated spectra from cellular histone preparations. To identify and quantify histone modifications, Thermo raw files were imported into the Skyline histone template and peak identification and ion chromatogram extraction was performed using the spectral-chromatogram library. All peak integrations were manually validated. Relative abundances of acetylated peptidoforms were calculated using the extracted ion chromatograms for all peptides that share the same sequence, including the unmodified peptide, according to the formulas described previously (Feller et al. 2015).   References: Feller et al. 2015 PMID: 25578876  Feller et al. 2020 PMID: 31773240

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin modifications regulate genome function by recruiting proteins to the genome. However, the protein composition at distinct chromatin modifications has yet to be fully characterized. In this study, we used natural protein domains as modular building blocks to develop engineered chromatin readers (eCRs) selective for DNA methylation and histone tri-methylation at H3K4, H3K9 and H3K27 residues. We first demonstrated their utility as selective chromatin binders in living cells by stably expressing eCRs in mouse embryonic stem cells and measuring their subnuclear localization, genomic distribution and histone-modification-binding preference. By fusing eCRs to the biotin ligase BASU, we established ChromID, a method for identifying the chromatin-dependent protein interactome on the basis of proximity biotinylation, and applied it to distinct chromatin modifications in mouse stem cells. Using a synthetic dual-modification reader, we also uncovered the protein composition at bivalently modified promoters marked by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3. These results highlight the ability of ChromID to obtain a detailed view of protein interaction networks on chromatin.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Systems biology, Epigenetics, Chromatin proteomics, Synthetic biology

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Christian Feller

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich


