### Accession
PXD024176

### Title
Interactome of menin in triple negative breast cancer cell line

### Description
The tumor suppressor menin has dual functions, acting either as a tumor suppressor or as an oncogene/oncoprotein, depending on the oncological context. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by lack of expression of the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2  and is often a basal-like breast cancer. TNBC is associated with a dismal prognosis and an insufficient response to chemotherapies. Previously, menin was shown to play a proliferative role in ER-positive breast cancer; however, functions of menin in TNBC remains unknown. We have demonstrated that menin is expressed in various TNBC subtypes with the strongest menin expression in the TNBC Hs 578T cells. Depletion of menin by antisense oligonucleotide inhibited cell proliferation, enhanced apoptosis, and induced cell cycle arrest in Hs 578T cells, highlighting oncogenic functions of menin in this TNBC model. To better understand the menin function, we performed AP-MS (Affinity Purification-Mass Spectrometry) using specific antibody against menin. Analysis of menin interactome suggested that menin could drive TNBC tumorigenesis through regulation of the MLL/KMT2A-driven transcriptional activity, mRNA 3’ end processing and apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for Mass spectrometry  Two milligrams protein extracts obtained from Hs 578 cells at the concentration of 4mg/ml was pre-cleaned with 40 μl of the protein A Sepharose (nProtein A Sepharose® 4 Fast Flow, REF.17-5280-01, GE Healthcare, MERCK), and incubated with (IP) or without (Control) 5μg of the rabbit anti-menin polyclonal antibody (Bethyl, INC) overnight at 4 °C. Subsequently, the immunoprecipitated complexes were captured by incubating with 40 μl of protein A Sepharose beads for 1 hour, 4 °C, which was followed by 3 times of washing using the lysis buffer (1% v/v Triton X-100, 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 μM ZnCl2, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate). Ultimately, the resulting beads were suspended with 20 μl Laemmli sample buffer 2x, heated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. To evaluate the efficiency of the IP, 10% of the samples were run on the SDS-PAGE gel for silver staining. IP experiments were performed thrice and subjected to MS analysis with three technical replications.   Mass spectrometry analysis The immunoprecipitated samples were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). Running of samples was stopped as soon as proteins stacked as a single band. Protein containing bands were stained with Thermo Scientific Imperial Blue, cut from the gel, and following reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation, digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Extracted peptides were concentrated before mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 25 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.2.1. Each cell lines were analyzed separately. For each cell line, IP against DDX5 protein was compared to control IP consisting of similar workflow excepted that no antibody was added to the lysate (Control beads). Analysis was done on biological triplicates, each injected three times on mass spectrometers. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the Human database extracted from UniProt on the 15th of May 2019 and containing 20421 entries (reviewed). The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.1.3) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in above 70% of samples in one condition or more. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential, a two-sample t-test was done using permutation-based FDR-controlled at 1 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor menin has dual functions, acting either as a tumor suppressor or as an oncogene/oncoprotein, depending on the oncological context. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by the lack of expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (ERBB2/HER2) and is often a basal-like breast cancer. TNBC is associated with a dismal prognosis and an insufficient response to chemotherapies. Previously, menin was shown to play a proliferative role in ER-positive breast cancer; however, the functions of menin in TNBC remain unknown. Here, we have demonstrated that menin is expressed in various TNBC subtypes with the strongest expression in the TNBC Hs 578T cells. The depletion of menin by an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) inhibits cell proliferation, enhances apoptosis in Hs 578T cells, highlighting the oncogenic functions of menin in this TNBC model. ASO-based menin silencing also delays the tumor progression of TNBC xenografts. Analysis of the menin interactome suggests that menin could drive TNBC tumorigenesis through the regulation of MLL/KMT2A-driven transcriptional activity, mRNA 3'-end processing and apoptosis. The study provides a rationale behind the use of ASO-based therapy, targeting menin in monotherapy or in combination with chemo or PARP inhibitors for menin-positive TNBC treatments.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-msms, Interactome, Menin, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Rocchi Palma
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


