### Accession
PXD000862

### Title
Metaproteomics: Optimization and evaluation of protein extraction from activated sludge

### Description
Metaproteomic studies of full-scale activated sludge systems require reproducible protein extraction methods.  A systematic evaluation of three different extractions protocols, each in combination with three different methods of cell lysis, and a commercial kit were evaluated. Criteria used for comparison of each method included the extracted protein concentration and the number of identified proteins and peptides as well as their phylogenetic, cell localization and functional distribution and quantitative reproducibility. Furthermore, the advantage of using specific metagenomes and a 2-step database approach was illustrated. The results recommend a protocol for protein extraction from activated sludge based on the protein extraction reagent B-Per and bead beating.

### Sample Protocol
Different protein extraction methods were compared. Afterwards a common GeLC-MS/MS approach was chosen.

### Data Protocol
A two-step database approach was chosen for identification. The first search was performed with Thermo's Proteome Discoverer and Mascot. The resulting database was used in MaxQuant v. 1.4.1.2

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomic studies of full-scale activated sludge systems require reproducible protein extraction methods. A systematic evaluation of three different extractions protocols, each in combination with three different methods of cell lysis, and a commercial kit were evaluated. Criteria used for comparison of each method included the extracted protein concentration and the number of identified proteins and peptides as well as their phylogenetic, cell localization and functional distribution and quantitative reproducibility. Furthermore, the advantage of using specific metagenomes and a 2-step database approach was illustrated. The results recommend a protocol for protein extraction from activated sludge based on the protein extraction reagent B-Per and bead beating. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000862 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000862).

### Keywords
Activated sludge, Sewage, Nitrification, Denitrification, Wastewater

### Affiliations
Aalborg University
Head of Center for Microbial Communities Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering Aalborg University | Sohngaardsholmsvej 49 | 9000 Aalborg | Denmark

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per Halkjær Nielsen
Head of Center for Microbial Communities Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering Aalborg University | Sohngaardsholmsvej 49 | 9000 Aalborg | Denmark


