### Accession
PXD023489

### Title
Proteomic profile of saliva in Parkinson’s disease patients.

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Lewy pathology involves numerous organs. Submandibular glands are affected in about 75% of in vivo cases, with higher rates of positive findings in post-mortem histopathological studies. Salivary microbiome composi-tion in PD patients is also different than in healthy patients. Therefore, we hypothesize that saliva may serve as a potential source of biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease. To evaluate and compare the salivary proteome of PD patients and healthy controls (HC). Salivary samples from 39 subjects (24 PD patients mean age 61.6 8.2 and 15 HC mean age 60.96.7) were used. Saliva was collected 30 minutes after rinsing mouth with tap water, in the morning hours, using RNA-Pro-Sal kits. Samples were immediately frozen at -80oC after collection. Label-free LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry was performed to comprehensively characterize the proteome of the saliva. IPA analysis of upstream inhibitors was performed. A total of 530 proteins and peptides were identified. We observed significantly lower concentrations of S100-A16, ARP2/3 and VPS4B in PD group vs controls. Additional IPA analysis indicated PD98059 to be most significantly activated and beta-estradiol most significantly inhibited upstream regulators.  Conclusions: Very limited data on the salivary proteome of PD subjects is available. The results of our analysis indicate that the salivary proteome of PD patients might be different than that of healthy controls. We observed significantly lower concentrations of proteins involved in inflammatory processes, exosome formation and adipose tissue formation among others. Upstream regulator analysis indicated several proteins previously associated with neurodegeneration to drive the differential protein expression in saliva. The main limitations of the study are variability of expression of proteins between subjects in the two groups and variations caused by external factors.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly prepared urea buffer (9 M urea, 200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 in MS-grade water) was aliquoted into 85 l volumes and fully dried in SpeedVac. Urea was redissolved in 50 l of saliva, to obtain 85 l of protein sample in urea buffer. Protein concentration was measured with BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo). Protein eluates were processed using single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample prepara-tion (SP3) with some modifications (Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology). 40 g of protein from each sample was transferred to a new tube and filled up to 100 l with urea buffer. Cysteine bridges were reduced by 1-hour incubation with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 37oC followed by 30 min incubation at room temperature with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). A magnetic beads mix was prepared by combining equal parts of Sera-Mag Carboxyl hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles (09-981-121 and 09-981-123, GE Healthcare). The beads mix was washed three times with MS-grade water and resuspended in a working con-centration of 10 g/l. 250 μg of the prepared bead mix, along with 5 l of 10% formic acid and 800 l of acetonitrile were added to each sample. Proteins bound to beads were washed with 75% eth-anol, isopropanol and acetonitrile, followed by overnight digestion with 2 g of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega). After digestion, peptides were washed with acetonitrile and eluted from the beads by subsequent incubation with MS-grade water and 2% DMSO with sonication during each step. Pulled aliquots were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 40 l 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  2 ug of each saliva sample was analyzed using nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) directly coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on C18 precolumn (180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) with 0.1% FA in water as a mobile phase and transferred to a nanoAcquity BEH C18 column (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Measurements were performed in the data-dependent mode with top 12 precursors selected for MS2. Full MS scans covering the range of 300–1650 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target value of 1e6. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target value of 5e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Obtained data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (Matrixscience) and protein iden-tification was performed using Mascot Server 2.5 (Matrixscience) against the Homo sapiens protein sequences (20490 sequences) deposited in the Swiss-Prot database (201903, 559,634 sequences; 201129965 residues). The parameters were set as follows: enzyme – Trypsin, missed cleavages – 2, fixed modifications – Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications – Oxidation (M), instrument – HCD. To reduce mass errors, peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established sepa-rately for each file after an off-line mass recalibration (Malinowska et al., 2012). The assessment of confidence was based on a target/decoy database search strategy as described by Elias et al., which provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (Elias and Gygi, 2007; 2010). All que-ries with q-value > 0.01, subset proteins and proteins identified with one peptide were discarded from further analysis. The mass recalibration, FDR computations and data filtering were done with Mscan software, developed in-house (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). The lists of identified peptides were merged into one common list and overlayed onto 2-D heatmaps generated from LC-MS spectra and the volumes were obtained from the assigned peaks (a more detailed description of data extraction procedures can be found in Bakun et al.(Bakun et al., 2009)). The abundance of each peptide was determined as the height of a 2-D fit to the monoi-sotopic peak of the tagged isotopic envelope. Quantitative values were then exported into text files for statistical analysis with Diffprot software for non-parametric statistical analysis of differen-tial proteomics data(Malinowska et al., 2012). Diffprot was run with the following parameters: number of random peptide sets = 106; clustering of peptide sets – only when 90% identical; normal-ization by LOWESS, min-pep 4, quantification base on unique peptides. Proteins with at least 1.5 fold change between groups were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway analysis (IPA, QIAGEN) soft-ware to identify relevant biological pathways and upstream regulators.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. It affects many organs. Lewy bodies-a histopathological "hallmark" of PD-are detected in about 75% of PD submandibular gland samples. We hypothesize that saliva can be a source of biomarkers of PD. The aim of the study was to evaluate and compare the salivary proteome of PD patients and healthy controls (HC). Salivary samples from 39 subjects (24 PD patients, mean age 61.6 &#xb1; 8.2; 15 HC, mean age 60.9 &#xb1; 6.7) were collected. Saliva was collected using RNA-Pro-Sal kits. Label-free LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry was performed to characterize the proteome of the saliva. IPA analysis of upstream inhibitors was performed. A total of 530 proteins and peptides were identified. We observed lower concentrations of S100-A16, ARP2/3, and VPS4B in PD group when compared to HC. We conclude that the salivary proteome composition of PD patients is different than that of healthy controls. We observed a lower concentration of proteins involved in inflammatory processes, exosome formation, and adipose tissue formation. The variability of expression of proteins between the two groups needs to be considered.

### Keywords
Lc-ms-ms, Salivary proteom, Parkinson disease

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAN, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-109, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Ewa Sitkiewicz

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAN, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-109, Warsaw, Poland


