### Accession
PXD000425

### Title
MS identification of the Cry proteins in Bacillus thuringiensis CT-43

### Description
In Bacillus thuringiensis CT-43, five insecticidal crystal proteins (ICPs, Cry protein) are encoded. We extracted the Cry proteins, ran the SDS PAGE (two Cry protein bands were observed), and tried to identify the composition of the two Cry protein bands in the SDS PAGE. The bioinformatics pipeline is described as follows: First, we converted the original mass spectrum files to the mgf file (peaks file), then the mgf files were searched against the Bacillusthuringiensis CT-43 protein database using Mascot (version 2.3.02). The search parameters were: i) trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed; ii) the fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation were set as Cys, and variable modifications of oxidation as Met; iii) peptide tolerance was set as 0.05 Da, and MS/MS tolerance was set as 0.1 Da. The peptide charge was set as Mr, and monoisotopic mass was chosen. An automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The FDR was calculated as the false positive matches divided by the total matches. In the final search results, the FDR was less than 1.5%.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicate cell samples of the B. thuringiensis strain CT-43 were collected at 7, 9, 13, and 22 h. Each sample was divided into two parts for whole-genome transcriptomics and proteomics analyses. For RNA-seq, detailed information could be found in the paper associated with this dataset. For iTRAQ-LC−MS/MS, total proteins were extracted from each sample and tryptically digested. The resulted peptides were labeled individually with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) at room temperature for 2 h as follows: 7 h-1, 113; 7 h-2, 114; 9 h-1, 115; 9 h-2, 116; 13 h-1, 117; 13 h-2, 118; 22 h-1, 119; and 22 h-2, 121. The labeled samples were pooled and then resolved into 12 fractions using an Ultremex SCX column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). After desalting using a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and drying under vacuum, the labeled samples were subjected to LC−MS/ MS analysis using a splitless nanoACQuity (Waters, Milford, MA) system coupled to a Triple TOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON).

### Data Protocol
The data processing process referring to RNA-seq could be found in the paper. For iTRAQ, spectra from the 12 fractions were combined into one MGF (Mascot generic format) file and searched against the B. thuringiensis CT-43 protein database (6266 sequences, including 5529 proteins of the chromosome and 737 proteins of the plasmids) combined with the reversed version of all pro- tein sequences using the Mascot search engine (2.3.02 version, Matrix Science). In the final search results, the false discovery rate (FDR) was <1.5%. The iTRAQ 8-plex was chosen for quantifica- tion during the search. A protein with ≥1.5-fold difference in the expression level and a p value ≤0.05 was regarded as being differentially expressed in our data.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus thuringiensis, a Gram-positive endospore-forming bacterium, is characterized by the formation of parasporal crystals consisting of insecticidal crystal proteins (ICPs) during sporulation. We reveal gene expression profiles and regulatory mechanisms associated with spore and parasporal crystal formation based on transcriptomics and proteomics data of B. thuringiensis strain CT-43. During sporulation, five ICP genes encoded by CT-43 were specifically transcribed; moreover, most of the spore structure-, assembly-, and maturation-associated genes were specifically expressed or significantly up-regulated, with significant characteristics of temporal regulation. These findings suggest that it is essential for the cell to maintain efficient operation of transcriptional and translational machinery during sporulation. Our results indicate that the RNA polymerase complex &#x3b4; and &#x3c9; subunits, cold shock proteins, sigma factors, and transcriptional factors as well as the E2 subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex could cooperatively participate in transcriptional regulation via different mechanisms. In particular, differences in processing and modification of ribosomal proteins, rRNA, and tRNA combined with derepression of translational inhibition could boost the rate of ribosome recycling and assembly as well as translation initiation, elongation, and termination efficiency, thereby compensating for the reduction in ribosomal levels. The efficient operation of translational machineries and powerful protein-quality controlling systems would thus ensure biosyntheses of a large quantity of proteins with normal biological functions during sporulation.

### Keywords
Bacillus thuringiensis, Ms, Cry

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University , No. 1 Shizishan Street, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China

### Submitter
Jieping Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin He
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University , No. 1 Shizishan Street, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China


