### Accession
PXD025878

### Title
Phosphorylation of Hsp90 on serine residues in the charged linker modulates binding to interacting proteins and has implications for overall Hsp90β conformation (limited proteolysis experiment)

### Description
The charged linker region in Hsp90 has been shown to be important for Hsp90 function and global conformation. In humans, two serines located in the charged linker region are constitutively phosphorylated in vivo. In order to gain knowledge on the possible effect of these phosphorylation sites on Hsp90 global conformation, we purified a human Hsp90β mutant where both serines are mutated to alanines, and used limited proteolysis to study the “proteolytic” fingerprint of our mutant and the wild-type, phosphorylated Hsp90β. We observed that serine to alanine mutation resulted in increased tryptic cleavage in the C-domain of Hsp90β.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T-Hsp90β-KO19 cells from Didier Picard’s lab were grown in DMEM (Life Technologies 41966-029) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS (Pan Biotech P40-37500), 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies 15140-122), at 37°C under 5% CO2. Cells were not tested for mycoplasma contamination before experiments. Cells were transfected using the calcium phosphate method (Chen et al. 1987). Plasmids were added to one volume of 250 mM CaCl2 (Fluka 21097), the solution was then added drop by drop to another volume of HBS 2x buffer (50 mM HEPES (Sigma H4034), 280 mM NaCl (Merck 1.06404, 1.5mM Na2HPO4 (Merck 1.06580)) while gently shaking. The mixture is incubated at room temperature for 1 minute and is then added drop by drop to the cells. 0.1 ug plasmid DNA was used per square centimeter of cell culture. After 12 hours, cells are washed once with warm PBS and put into fresh medium at 37°C under 5% CO2 for 24 more hours. Transfected cells were harvested 36 hours post-transfection using trypsin-EDTA, washed twice with cold PBS, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The obtained cell pellets are lyzed in 2.5 volumes NP40 lysis buffer (1% NP40, 20mM HEPES pH7.5, 50mM MgCl2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors added) with 30 minutes incubation on ice with periodic vortexing. Extracts are centrifuged at 16’000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants are collected, total protein content quantified by Pierce protein assay. 500 ug of total protein extract was mixed with 10 ug anti-HA antibody and diluted to 150ul total with NP40 lysis buffer and incubated at 4°C overnight. Antibody-protein complexes are purified next morning by adding of a 50% proteinG coupled agarose beads slurry formely washed thrice with cold PBS. Beads are washed twice with 500 uL “NP40 wash buffer”, and then 3 times with 500 uL “NP40 wash buffer” supplemented with 500mM NaCl but without protease inhibitors. During the last wash, the beads are equally split in 3 fractions. Then, 40 ul ice cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with either 0, 7, or 14 ng/uL trypsin are added to the beads and incubated for 6 minutes on ice. The reaction is stopped by adding 15 uL Laemmli 5x and heating at 95°C for 5 minutes. For SDS-PAGE, 20 uL of sample was run on a 6% SDS-PAGE at 130V, and the lanes cut in 8 gel pieces from 100kDa to 40 kDa. Digestion of the samples was done as described previously by Shevchenko et al. 2007. For LC-MS analysis, samples were injected on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, controlled by Xcalibur software. Masses are isolated with a window of 1.5m/z, and fragments analyzed in an orbitrap with 17’500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification is then carried out with Mascot Daemon, with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST) Peptide mass tolerance: 10ppm Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da Max. missed cleavages: 6 Database: UNIPROT Homo sapiens reference proteome 2017 Peptide quantification is done manually in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Phosphorylation, Limited proteolysis, Charged linker

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


