### Accession
PXD019140

### Title
Comparison between the proteome of Escherichia coli single colony and during liquid culture

### Description
Most of the proteomic studies done so far uses bacterial cells harvested from liquid culture media. However it is widely accepted that many important determinants associated with virulence and host cell adhesion are exclusively expressed during growth on solid media. As an attempt to complement previous studies, in this study we compare the proteome coverage of Escherichia coli K12 from a single colony on solid media with those at different growth phases in liquid culture; i.e. early log, mid log, early - and late stationary growth phases. A total of 2044 protein groups covering approximately 47% of the total proteome were identified across all studied conditions; 1650 number of proteins identified from single colonies and 1679 proteins from liquid cultured cells. Label-free quantitative analysis revealed that single colony proteome in a solid agar differs largely from that in liquid culture. The presence of the Suf-operon, involved in iron mobilisation and swarming motility were associated exclusively with single colony profiles. Whereas proteins involved in motility such as MotA, MotB, fliH, flip, fliD and fliJ were associated exclusively to cells grown in liquid culture. The data presented here provide a valuable resource for understanding the role of key proteins within microenvironments surrounding E.coli single colonies.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial culture: E. coli K12 cultures were maintained in Luria Broth (LB) and on LB agar plates. For growth curves, a single colony of bacteria was used to prepare an overnight culture that was incubated at 400 rpm at 37oC. The following day 1 in 100 dilution of the overnight culture was used to inoculate three 250 mL flasks containing 50 mL of fresh LB media. These cultures were further incubated under the same conditions described earlier. During the course of incubation, 1 mL aliquots of each culture were obtained, cell density measured at OD600, and cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation and frozen at -80oC until protein extractions.  These aliquots were obtained at the following time points the early log (1 hour); mid log (2 hours); early stationary (3 hours); stationary (5 hours); and late stationary (48 hours). For the proteomic characterisation of bacterial cells grown on solid media, E. coli K12 was streaked onto LB agar plates and incubated at 37oC overnight. Six single colonies were picked from solid LB agar media using a sterile glass pipette. Cells were further washed in sterile water by brief vortexing and cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation and stored at -80oC until protein extraction.   Protein extraction: Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in Lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, Protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche, Mannheim Germany and lysozyme 5 µg/ml( pH 6.8)) and incubated on ice for 30 mins with gentle shaking. Proteins were then precipitated with equal volume of sample with methanol:chloroform (1v:0.75v) and collected precipitates that were resuspended in denaturation buffer (10 mM Tris, 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea (pH 8)). Precipitated proteins were quantified with the modified Bradford protein quantification method (17).  Tryptic Digestion: In-solution digestion was carried out on 20 ug total protein. Briefly, proteins were denatured with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature with gentle agitation and alkylated for 1 hour in the dark with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). The diluted sample was then digested overnight with Trypsin (1:100 ratio) and digestion quenched with Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, USA). Peptides preparations are then desalted using C18 stage tips (14) and dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN).   LC-MS/MS analysis: Liquid chromatography separation was done with an inhouse-packed 100 μM ID × 20 mm precolumn connected to a 75 μM × 500 mm analytical column packed with C18 Luna beads (5 μm diameter, 100 Å pore size; Phenomenex 04A-5452). The columns were connected to an Ultimate 3500 RS nano UPLC system (Dionex). One μg of desalted peptides was loaded onto the column with starting mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with the following gradient of 10 min at 2% ACN, increase to 25% ACN for 115 min, to 35% ACN over 5 min, to 80% ACN over 5 min, followed by a column wash of 85% for 20 min. The flow rate was constant at 300 μL/min. Typical backpressure values during separation were <350 bar. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions or a maximum integration time of 250 ms. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1750 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 28 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1.3 e4 with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 5. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17 500, with a target value of 3 × 105 ions or a maximum integration time of 250 ms and the isolation window was set at 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: We further analysed the MaxQuant version 1.5.3.12 output data with the Perseus module. RAW files were analysed using the MaxQuant suite together with Perseus to determine significantly regulated proteins. Unique proteins identified in only a single growth phase (i.e. absent in the other  growth phases; present in two or more technical replicates in the growth phase based on LFQ intensity values; & identified based on ≥two peptides per protein group) were analysed separately. Mean values of technical replicates were calculated, log transformed, and used in further analyses. Principal component analysis (PCA) was done by Perseus. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple hypothesis testing (p-value cut-off 0.01) was used to compare protein LFQ intensities of all growth conditions in this study. Comparative analysis between strains was performed using a paired Student's t-test with p-values of 0.01. p-values were used to identify significantly up/down-regulated proteins and pathways.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Escherichia coli</i> proteome is the most extensively characterized and studied of all prokaryotic proteomes. Despite this, large scale bacterial proteomics experiments performed on <i>E. coli</i> cells grown in liquid cultures have failed to identify key virulence factors thought to be important determinants in establishing bacterial infections. It seems likely that many important determinants associated with virulence and host cell adhesion are exclusively expressed during growth in biofilms, which can be crudely mimicked on solid media. This method describes a simple workflow to characterize the unique proteome signature of individual, isolated single colonies, using <i>E. coli</i> K12 strain grown on solid media as a model system. The workflow thus provides a means to explore the proteomes of minimally passaged clinical isolates of bacteria grown on primary culture plates and to identify both unique and differentially expressed proteins contained therein. Value of the method: - Simple mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflow to characterise the proteome of single colony forming units - Enables exploration of the proteomes of minimally passaged clinical isolates from primary culture plates - Identification of virulence factors expressed in true or mimicked biofilms that may be missed in liquid cultures Method name: <i>E. coli</i> single colony proteome analysis.

### Keywords
Ecoli, Proteomics, Protein extraction, Single-colony, Mass spectrometry, Bacterial proteome

### Affiliations
Department:Intergrated biomedical sciences,Division:Chemical biology,Institute of infectious diseases and Molecular medicine(IDM),Faculty of health science, University of Cape Town, South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
john Iradukunda

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Department:Intergrated biomedical sciences,Division:Chemical biology,Institute of infectious diseases and Molecular medicine(IDM),Faculty of health science, University of Cape Town, South Africa


