### Accession
PXD010745

### Title
A Gene Expression-based Strategy Identifies the Anthelminthic Drug Niclosamide for High-risk Neuroblastoma Therapy

### Description
Neuroblastoma is a pediatric tumor of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system with diverse clinical behaviors. Even with multimodal therapies, high-risk neuroblastoma has an unfavorable outcome irrespective of MYCN amplification, a well-established oncogenic driver in neuroblastoma pathogenesis, and its genetic heterogeneity has largely impeded efforts to correlate molecular targets with biological consequences for more effective treatment strategies. Here, using a gene expression-based approach, we identified the FDA-approved anthelmintic niclosamide as a potential anti-neuroblastoma drug. By combining the gene expression signature associated with high-risk neuroblastoma and the recurrent drug−transcript relationships inferred from up to one million perturbational gene expression profiles, our algorithm predicted effective therapeutic candidates by evaluating the extent to which a given compound or their combinations could ‘reverse’ the high-risk signature. Furthermore, we performed quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to validate top five candidate reverse genes which are involved in DNA replication, including cyclin A2 (CCNA2), minichromosome maintenance 10 replication initiation factor (MCM10), ERCC excision repair 6 like, spindle assembly checkpoint helicase (ERCC6L), kinesin family member 20A (KIF20A), and RuvB like AAA ATPase 1 (RUVBL1). Indeed, those five genes were downregulated in niclosamide-treated cells, indicating niclosamide suppressed DNA replication and then inhibited cell proliferation. Using cell proliferation and clonogenic assays as well as flow cytometry, we determined the cytotoxic effects of niclosamide in MYCN-amplified SK-N-DZ and non-amplified SK-N-AS cells. The results showed that niclosamide could effectively reduce not only cell proliferation and colony formation but also trigger cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Moreover, we conducted human tumor xenografts in a nude mice model to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of niclosamide and found that it significantly suppressed tumor growth and prolonged survival rate, but doesn’t cause organ damage and change body weight. To explore the molecular mechanism of niclosamide, stable-isotope dimethyl labeling strategy for quantitative proteomics was performed on both cell-based or xenograft-based MYCN-amplified SK-N-DZ and MYCN-nonamplified SK-N-AS models. We confirmed niclosamide not only mediated the function of mitochondrial electron transport chain but also the other functions in high risk neuroblastoma cell lines and xenografts. The results suggest that our developed expression-based strategy is useful for drug discovery and provides the possibility of repurposing the anthelminthic drug niclosamide for treating high-risk neuroblastoma therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Human high-risk neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-DZ and SK-N-AS were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Xenograft tumor tissues were grinded into a fine powder using mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. Cell lysate and tumor tissue samples were lysed by lysis buffer containing 1% (v/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol and protease inhibitor, and then homogenized on ice using a sonicator with 60% amplitude and 0.6 cycle duration for 2 minutes. Next, the protein samples were centrifuged at 16000 ×g for 30 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants were collected to new eppendorfs. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit.      500 μg of each sample was adjusted to the same concentration with lysis buffer, and 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC) was added to make each sample containing 50 mM TEABC (pH was about 8.5). Proteins were reduced by 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) in a dry bath at 37°C for 30 minutes, and then were alkylated by 2 mM S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes.      Subsequently, we applied the gel-assisted digestion for the alkylated proteins. 30% Acrylamide/bisacrylamide (37.5:1, v/v), 10% APS (w/v) and TEMED were mixed gently with the prepared protein solution (protein solution: Acrylamide/bisacrylamide: APS: TEMED = 12.467:6.533:0.3:0.3, v/v) to make it polymerize as a gel. The gel was cut into small pieces, washed by 25 mM TEABC and 25 mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and then we vortexed the solution alternately several times. The gel was further dehydrated with 100% ACN and dried completely with a centrifugal evaporator. Next, 25 mM TEABC was added to rehydrate the gel, followed by adding trypsin (protein: trypsin = 10:1, w/w) to the rehydrated gel. After ensuring the gel was fully covered by 25 mM TEABC, sample was digested with trypsin at 37°C water bath overnight (at least 16 hours). Peptides were later extracted from the gel with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, and 100% ACN sequentially. Like the step of washing the gel, buffer was added to the gel and then we vortexed the gel solution. The extracted peptide was combined and dried with a concentrator.     After desalt samples by SDB-XC StageTips, 100 μg of tryptic peptide samples were dried with a centrifugal evaporator and re-dissolved in 400 μl of 100 mM TEAB solution. The control samples were labeled with 16 μl of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-H2 while the treatment samples were labeled with 16 μl of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-D2 for light and heavy dimethyl, respectively, followed by adding 16 μl of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride to each sample immediately. Each mixture was vortexed vigorously for 1 minute and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. After the dimethyl labeling reaction, samples were added 64 μl of 1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide on ice to stop the labeling reaction, and added 32 μl of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) to acidify the sample to pH < 3. The light and heavy dimethyl-labeled peptides samples were combined at 1:1 ratio, followed by desalting using SDB-XC StageTips, and dried with a centrifugal evaporator.     Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was performed after dimethyl labeling. The custom-made 200 μl C8 StageTips were first washed and equilibrated with 20 μl methanol, buffer B (0.1% TFA, 80% ACN), and buffer A (0.1% TFA, 5% ACN) by centrifuging at 1000 ×g until all solutions were filtered. C8 tips were then stayed for 10 minutes with 500 mM ammonium acetate (NH4OAc) before centrifuged at 1000 ×g to make the tips dry. In the SCX chromatography peptide fractionation procedure, the labeled peptides were re-dissolved in 250 μl buffer A (0.1% TFA, 5% ACN), and the peptides were eluted sequentially with solutions containing 0.1% TFA, 15% ACN and 0, 10, 20, 35, 50, 75, 100, 300, or 500 mM NH4OAc, respectively. The eluent of each fraction was collected, acidified immediately with 10% TFA to PH < 3, and then desalted, followed by dried with a sample concentrator. After tryptic digestion, dimethyl-labeling and SCX fractionation, the peptides were required to further desalt by SDB-XC StageTips with different capacities. The SDB-XC Empore disc membrane were used to pack the SDB-XC StageTips. The desalting procedures were that the SDB-XC StageTips were preconditioned with buffer B, equilibrated with buffer A by centrifugation at 1000 ×g until all solutions were filtered. Applicable samples were loaded into the tips that below the membrane capacity by centrifugation at 500 ×g until all solutions were filtered. The tips were washed with buffer A by centrifugation at 1000 ×g until all solutions were filtered. Next, change the new collection tube and the peptides were then eluted with buffer B by centrifugation at 1000 ×g until all the solutions were eluted.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 μm BEH C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN. A linear gradient of 10% to 40% B in 90 minutes and 40% to 85% B in minutes was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350-1500). The resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1 × 106 ion. The m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 seconds. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000).     Raw MS/MS spectra files were processed for peak detection and quantitation by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was based on the Andromeda search engine against the Swiss-Prot human database version canonical (Published on February 14, 2016). Search parameters of peptides in this study were specificity of trypsin digestion, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), and permitted for the maximum number of up to two missed cleavages in a peptide. The minimum seven amino acids in the peptide length were necessary to map the dataset. In group-specific parameters, the type was selected with Standard, multiplicity of 2 and labels of Dimethyl Lys0 and Dimethyl Nter0 in Light, and DIMETHYL LYS6 and DIMETHYL NTER6 in Heavy. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was respectively 3 ppm and 0.5 Dalton. Using a decoy database search strategy, peptide identification was achieved depended on the posterior error probability (PEP) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The precursor masses of already identified peptide were subsequently searched and recalculated with the “match between runs” service enabled in MaxQuant. Only peptides with ion scores higher than the MaxQuant identity score were confidently assigned.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroblastoma; mycn; recurrent drug−transcript relationships; niclosamide; lc-ms/ms; metabolism

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Wen-Chi  Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University


