### Accession
PXD037262

### Title
Targeting phosphorylation of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 13 at serine 33 to treat nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

### Description
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-13 (17β-HSD13) is a liver-rich lipid droplet associated protein, encoding by gene HSD17B13, that acted as an important regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism. Increased expression of 17β-HSD13 promotes hepatic lipid accumulation in rodents, and a common loss-of-function variant of HSD17B13 (rs72613567: TA) is related to better outcome in patients with various chronic liver diseases. To understand the role of 17β-HSD13 in liver lipid metabolism under normal and high-fat feeding conditions, we characterized the effect of protein phosphorylation of 17β-HSD13 on hepatic lipid homeostasis. We identify Ser33 as an important protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation site of 17β-HSD13 that physically interact with ATGL and facilitates its translocation to lipid droplets to enhance lipolysis. Mutation of Ser33 to Ala (S33A) in 17β-HSD13  reduces ATGL-dependent lipolysis and increases lipid droplet size in cultured hepatocytes by reducing CGI-58-mediated ATGL activation. Consistently, a transgenic knock-in mouse strain carrying HSD17B13 S33A mutation (HSD17B1333A/A) spontaneously develops liver steatosis with reduced lipolysis. Moreover, HSD17B1333A/A mice are more prone to high fat-induced hepatic steatosis and inflammation. Finally, we found Reproterol, a potential HSD17B13 modulator and FDA-approved drug, confers a protection against liver steatosis possibly through phosphorylation of 17β-HSD13 at Ser33 in a PKA-dependent manner. In summary, we demonstrate a critical role and the underlying mechanism of hepatic 17β-HSD13 phosphorylation in the pathogenesis of NAFLD. Our findings highlight the potential of targeting 17β-HSD13 phosphorylation as a novel therapeutic approach for NAFLD.

### Sample Protocol
A GFP tagged full-length 17β-HSD13 was transiently expressed in 293T cells by transfection. After incubation with Foskolin for 30 min, 293T cells were harvested, proteins were released with RIPA buffer, and then immunoprecipitated (IP) using GFP-beads (KTSM1301, Shenzhen Health Life Tec.). Proteins from IP were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomasie brilliant blue. The protein band containing GFP-17β-HSD13 was cut, washed 3 times with ddH2O, and destained. Proteins were then digested in the gel by Trypsin Gold (V5280, Promega Biotech Ltd.) for 8 h at 37 oC. Peptides were extracted from the gels with 70 % acetonitrile (0.02 % trifluoroacetic acid), lyophilized, and re-suspended in ddH2O (0.1% formic acid). 2 μL of the peptide mixture was loaded onto a nanoViper C18 (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm ×2 cm) trap column, and online chromatography separated on the Easy nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher, USA). Tandem mass spectra (MS) were acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) equipped with a Nano Flex ion source.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identiﬁcation using PEAKS Studio 8.5. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Phospho-peptides and phosphor-sites localization was carried out using the Mascot Server, where the neutral loss of phosphate (H3PO4, 98 Da, or HPO3, 80 Da) in intact peptide was a characteristic indicator for the identification of phosphorylated residues.

### Publication Abstract
17&#x3b2;-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-13 is a hepatocyte-specific, lipid droplet-associated protein. A common loss-of-function variant of HSD17B13 (rs72613567: TA) protects patients against non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with underlying mechanism incompletely understood. In the present study, we identify the serine 33 of 17&#x3b2;-HSD13 as an evolutionally conserved PKA target site and its phosphorylation facilitates lipolysis by promoting its interaction with ATGL on lipid droplets. Targeted mutation of Ser33 to Ala (S33A) decreases ATGL-dependent lipolysis in cultured hepatocytes by reducing CGI-58-mediated ATGL activation. Importantly, a transgenic knock-in mouse strain carrying the HSD17B13 S33A mutation (HSD17B13<sup>33A/A</sup>) spontaneously develops hepatic steatosis with reduced lipolysis and increased inflammation. Moreover, Hsd17B13<sup>33A/A</sup> mice are more susceptible to high-fat diet-induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Finally, we find reproterol, a potential 17&#x3b2;-HSD13 modulator and FDA-approved drug, confers a protection against nonalcoholic steatohepatitis via PKA-mediated Ser33 phosphorylation of 17&#x3b2;-HSD13. Therefore, targeting the Ser33 phosphorylation site could represent a potential approach to treat NASH.

### Keywords
Human, 17β-hsd13 protein gel band, Lc-msms, 293t cell

### Affiliations
Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Rongfeng Lan

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Su
Shenzhen University


