### Accession
PXD019403

### Title
PepS: a microfluidic device to process whole blood at bedside for plasma proteomic analyses

### Description
Immunoassays have been used for decades in clinical laboratories to quantify proteins in serum/plasma samples. However, different limitations hinder their use in some cases. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics analysis has recently appeared as a promising option to assess panels of protein biomarkers and provide protein profiles useful for health state monitoring. Nevertheless, translation of MS-based proteomics into the clinics is still hampered by the complexity, the substantial time and human workforce necessary for sample preparation. The processing of plasma matrix is especially tricky as it contains more than 3000 proteins spanning in an extreme dynamic range (10e10) of concentrations. To address this pre-analytical challenge, we have conceived a microfluidic device (PepS) to automate and accelerate blood sample preparation for bottom-up MS-based proteomic analysis. The microfluidic cartridge is operated through a dedicated compact instrument providing fully automated fluid processing and thermal control. In less than 2 hours, PepS device enables whole blood collection at the bedside, plasma separation and calibration, depletion of albumin, protein digestion with trypsin and stabilization of tryptic peptides on solid phase extraction sorbent. The performance of PepS device was assessed using discovery proteomics and targeted proteomics on a panel of three protein biomarkers routinely assayed in clinical laboratories. This innovative microfluidic device and associated instrumentation is expected to streamline and simplify clinical proteomic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was extracted from blood and processed for LC-MS/MS analyses either using manual preparation or using PepS, a single-use microfluidic cartridge made from Cyclo Olefin Copolymer and containing channels, reaction chambers and other structures formed by high-precision micromachining. Three replicates of manual and automated preparations were performed. The different preparation steps were: 1- plasma separation from whole blood, 2- depletion of albumin using Blue Sepharose 6 Fast Flow resin (GE HealthCare), 3- digestion of proteins using Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega), 4- purification of peptides via solid-phase extraction (StrataX resin, Phenomenex), and 5- elution of peptides from the solid phase using acetonitrile. Peptides were resolubilized in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by online nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 120-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and heated capillary was adjusted to 250°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, with AGC target set to 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 200 ms) and with lock mass option activated. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (nce = 30) with a resolution of 17,500, with AGC target set to 10e5 ions (maximum filling time 50 ms and minimum AGC target of 1 x 10e3 and intensity threshold of 2 x 10e4), and dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). Three analytical replicates were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6.0) through concomitant searches against Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, February 2020 version) and a homemade database of frequently observed contaminants. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Acetyl (Protein N-ter) and oxidation (M and C, variable) were chosen as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 25 ppm. The Proline software21 was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, peptide score ≥ 25, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Immunoassays have been used for decades in clinical laboratories to quantify proteins in serum and plasma samples. However, their limitations make them inappropriate in some cases. Recently, mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics analysis has emerged as a promising alternative method when seeking to assess panels of protein biomarkers with a view to providing protein profiles to monitor health status. Up to now, however, translation of MS-based proteomics to the clinic has been hampered by its complexity and the substantial time and human resources necessary for sample preparation. Plasma matrix is particularly tricky to process as it contains more than 3000 proteins with concentrations spanning an extreme dynamic range (10<sup>10</sup>). To address this preanalytical challenge, we designed a microfluidic device (PepS) automating and accelerating blood sample preparation for bottom-up MS-based proteomics analysis. The microfluidic cartridge is operated through a dedicated compact instrument providing fully automated fluid processing and thermal control. In less than 2 h, the PepS device allows bedside plasma separation from whole blood, volume metering, depletion of albumin, protein digestion with trypsin, and stabilization of tryptic peptides on solid-phase extraction sorbent. For this first presentation, the performance of the PepS device was assessed using discovery proteomics and targeted proteomics, detecting a panel of three protein biomarkers routinely assayed in clinical laboratories (alanine aminotransferase 1, C-reactive protein, and myoglobin). This innovative microfluidic device and its associated instrumentation should help to streamline and simplify clinical proteomics studies.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Plasma, Centrifugation, Microfluidic device

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


