### Accession
PXD006354

### Title
Proteomic signature of environmental oxygen tension modulation of human macrophage polarization and functions

### Description
Macrophages are innate immune cells characterized by their plasticity and their ability to react to various environmental stimuli. These cells are involved in a multiple number of tissular functions in homeostasis and pathological contexts.  According to their environment these cells could be polarized toward different states of activation which determine their functional orientation. A large part of the macrophage biology field is devoted to better define what polarizations are, from a molecular point of view. It is now accepted that a multidimensional model of polarization is needed to grasp the broad phenotype repertoire depending on various environmental signals. Oxygen tension is one of these tissular environmental parameters. We designed this study to obtain a proteomic signature of various polarizations in human monocytes derived macrophages. We also seek to explore how environmental oxygen tension varying from an atmospheric composition (18.6% O2) to a “tissular normoxia” (3% O2) could modify our classification of macrophages’ polarization. We have obtained various polarization specific proteins and oxygen sensors for human macrophages. One example is arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase (ALOX15) which is a IL4/IL13 polarization specific proteins up regulated under low oxygen exposure associated to an increase of the phagocytosis rate of apoptotic cells. These results illustrate the necessity to take into account physicochemical parameters like oxygen when macrophage polarization is studied to correctly assess their functions in tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Cell preparation and culture Human blood samples from healthy de-identified donors were obtained from EFS (Etablissement Français du Sang, National French hemapheresis and transfusion centers) under the authorization number (CODECOH DC-2015-2502) with signed consent for this exploratory study. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained from whole blood (buffy coat) by density gradient centrifugation (Histopaque 1077 from Sigma Aldrich). Monocytes were sorted with CD14 magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec) from PBMCs according to manufacturer instructions. Purity was assessed by flow cytometry for CD14hiCD45hi cells and was found > 98%. Monocytes were cultured in RPMI-Glutamax supplemented with 10% human serum AB (Sigma Aldrich) and differentiation was obtained by M-CSF at 25 ng/mL during five days. Polarization was secondarily obtained by changing media with the same concentration of M-CSF and adding specific stimulations during 60 hours: M(Ø) (no stimulation), M(IFNγ+LPS)  (IFNγ 10ng/mL +LPS 1ng/mL), M(IL-4+IL-13) (IL-4 20ng/mL + IL-13 20 ng/mL), M(IC+LPS) (IC + LPS 1 ng/mL) and M(IL-10 + DXM) (DXM 10 µM + IL10 25 ng/mL). We used the convention to describe the polarization according to the stimuli used instead of the M1/M2 classification as it is now recommended. Cell counting was performed with a Malassez chamber and blue trypan exclusion. All cytokines and growth factors were purchased from Miltenyi Biotec. Dexamethasone (DXM) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. LPS serogroup 0111 B4 was purchased from Calbiochem. Immune complexes (IC) were obtained by mixing BSA (Bovine serum Albumin from Sigma Aldrich) and antibodies directed against BSA (Invitrogen) in a molar ratio ¼ and incubated during 1 hour at 37°C before use. Cells were cultivated in “high oxygen” isobaric humidified incubator with 18.6% O2, 5% CO2 and in “low oxygen” isobaric humidified incubator with 3% O2, 5% CO2. Medium changes were performed for the low oxygen condition in a working station (under the same gas conditions) in order to avoid any modifications of the oxygen exposure to cells. Jurkat cells were cultured in RPMI with 10% FCS in isobaric humidified incubator with 18.6% O2, 5% CO2.  Proteomics Cell lysis was performed in Laemmli buffer (234 mM Tris-HCL (pH 6.8), 7.5% SDS, 37% glycerol, 33.3% β-Mercaptoethanol, pinch bromophenol Blue).  Protein amount corresponding to 300 000 cells of each samples were deposited on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% acrylamide Gels (Life Technologies SAS). Electrophoretic migration was performed in order to fractionate each protein sample into 6 gel bands. The gels were stained with R-250 Coomassie blue (Bio-Rad).  Protein bands were then excised. Gel slices were washed by three successive incubations of 20 min in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) at 37°C, followed by 25 mMammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile in 50%/50% (v/v) (Sigma Aldrich). Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at 56 °C and with 55 mM iodoacetamide (SIGMA) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 35 min in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by the addition of 10 mM DTT in 25 mm ammonium bicarbonate. Samples are then washed in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins are digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega) according to manufacturer instructions, overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from gel pieces in three sequential extraction steps (each 15 min) in 50 μl of 50% acetonitrile, 50 μl of 5% formic acid, and finally 50 μl of 100% acetonitrile. After extrusion, peptides were dried and stored at -80°C in ‘‘Mµlti’’ low-absorption tubes (Dutscher) following published recommendations. Nano-LC-MS/MS Analyses The dried extracted peptides were suspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (SIGMA) and analyzed via online nano-LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an impact IITM, an Hybrid Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (QTOF) instrument with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water and (B) 0.08% formic acid, 20% water in 79.92% ACN v/v/v. The sample was loaded onto a precolumn (300 µm ID, 5 mm long, 5µm particles, 100 Angströms pores Theremofisher) during a 5-min injection before the gradient was started onto a PepMap nano-column (75 µm ID, 50 cm long, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pores, Thermo Fisher). The gradient profile was: from 2 to 35 % B in 115 min; from 35 to 90% Bin 5 min; constant 90% B for 10 min and returned to 2% B in1 min. For a compromise deep proteome and a quantitative analysis we used a “dynamic method”, with a fixed cycle time of 3 s. The mass range of the MS scan was set to extend from m/z 150 to 2200. Dynamic exclusion duration was 0.5 min. The collision energy was adjusted between 23–65 eV as a function of the m/z value.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of Proteomic Data All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) using the Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. MaxQuant scored peptides for identification based on a search with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 0.07 Da after time-dependent recalibration of the precursor masses. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 40 ppm. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Uniprot human database (downloaded on Avril, 2015, containing 145,892 entries and 245 contaminants). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms. We required a minimum peptide ratio count of two and at least one “razor peptide” for quantification.  To perform relative quantification between proteins identified in different biological conditions, we used the LFQ metric, normalized protein intensities, from the MaxQuant “protein group.txt” output (reflecting a normalized protein quantity deduced from all peptides intensity values).Potential contaminants as well as reverse proteins were strictly excluded from further analysis. Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale We analyzed three analytical replicates from three independent biological samples (donors) for each polarization in both oxygen conditions and an additional donor at 18.6% O2. For each comparison between two polarizations, only proteins which were quantified in all biological samples in at least one polarization were considered for further processing and statistical analysis. The remaining missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3; down shift: 1.8) using the Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) post data acquisition package that is part of MaxQuant (all freely available at www.maxquant.org). Further analysis of data was performed using JMP v.13.0.0 software (SAS Institute Inc.). Criteria used to classify the proteins were the Welch t-test difference (difference between the two compared conditions of the mean value for triplicate MS/MS analyzes), and the median of fold change between the two compared conditions. All data are presented as mean +/- SEM. Flow cytometry, phagocytosis and qPCR data were analyzed by paired t-test when the differences were done between two groups or by Tuckey multiple comparison test when more than two groups were compared using GraphPad Prism 5.01 Software. p-value <0.05 were considered as statistically significant.  Bioinformatic analysis  Functional enrichment analysis was performed with FunRich. The Gene Ontology enrichment was obtained by the DAVID software (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).  Bibliographical analysis of published proteins or genes as specific of a polarization in humans as been done using the following keywords: ‘macrophages’, ‘polarization’, ‘Human’, ‘Protein name’ or ‘Gene name’ in Pubmed (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/) and GoogleScholar (https://scholar.google.fr/)

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are innate immune cells which can react to a large number of environmental stimuli thanks to a high degree of plasticity. These cells are involved in a variety of tissue functions in homeostasis, and they play essential roles in pathological contexts. Macrophages' activation state, which determines their functional orientation, is strongly influenced by the cellular environment. A large body of macrophage literature is devoted to better defining polarizations from a molecular viewpoint. It is now accepted that a multidimensional model of polarization is needed to grasp the broad phenotype repertoire controlled by environmental signals. The study presented here aimed, among other goals, to provide a molecular signature of various polarizations in human macrophages at the protein level to better define the different macrophage activation states. To study the proteome in human monocyte-derived macrophages as a function of their polarization state, we used a label-free quantification approach on in-gel fractionated and LysC/Trypsin digested proteins. In total, 5102 proteins were identified and quantified for all polarization states. New polarization-specific markers were identified and validated. Because oxygen tension is an important environmental parameter in tissues, we explored how environmental oxygen tension, at either atmospheric composition (18.6% O<sub>2</sub>) or "tissue normoxia" (3% O<sub>2</sub>), affected our classification of macrophage polarization. The comparative results revealed new polarization-specific makers which suggest that environmental oxygen levels should be taken into account when characterizing macrophage activation states. The proteomic screen revealed various polarization-specific proteins and oxygen sensors in human macrophages. One example is arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase (ALOX15), an IL4/IL13 polarization-specific protein, which was upregulated under low oxygen conditions and is associated with an increase in the rate of phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. These results illustrate the need to consider physicochemical parameters like oxygen level when studying macrophage polarization, so as to correctly assess their functions in tissue.

### Keywords
Polarization, Oxygen, Lc-ms/ms, Efferocytosis, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Inserm
U1205 Inserm

### Submitter
Arnaud Millet

### Lab Head
Dr Millet  
U1205 Inserm


