### Accession
PXD000501

### Title
In-depth proteomic analysis of secretome and whole cells of mouse astrocyte

### Description
In this study, 3 biological replicates with 3 technical replicates for the conditioned media (CM) and the whole cell lysates (WCL) of C8-D1A cell line were analyzed using 108 LC-MS/MS runs. Each peptide sample was separated into 6 fractions using stageTip based High-pH fractionation. The peptide samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisting of a Nanoflow Easy-nLC 1000 that was connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer through a nanoelectrospray ion source.    All raw files were processed in MaxQuant, version 1.3.0.5 and the Andromeda search engine against the IPI mouse database (version 3.87, 59 534 entries), containing both forward and reverse proteins sequences, and common contaminants. MS/MS searches for the secretome and the whole-cell proteome were performed with the following parameters: carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; a 20-ppm first-search tolerance; a 6-ppm main-search tolerance. Minimum peptide length was set to six residues. The false discovery rate for all peptides, PTM sites, and protein identifications was set to 0.01. 

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes are the most abundant cells in the CNS, but their function remains largely unknown. Characterization of the whole-cell proteome and secretome in astrocytes would facilitate the study of their functions in various neurodegenerative diseases and astrocyte-neuron communication. To build a reference proteome, we established a C8-D1A astrocyte proteome to a depth of 7265 unique protein groups using a novel strategy that combined two-step digestion, filter-aided sample preparation, StageTip-based high pH fractionation, and high-resolution MS. Nearly, 6000 unique protein groups were identified from conditioned media of astrocyte cultures, constituting the largest astrocyte secretome that has been reported. High-confidence whole-cell proteomes and secretomes are valuable resources in studying astrocyte function by label-free quantitation and bioinformatics analysis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000501 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000501).

### Keywords
Mouse, High-ph fractionation, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Astrocyte, Whole cell proteome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head


