### Accession
PXD033409

### Title
Xlink Mapping and AnalySis (XMAS) - Crosslinking study of commercial human Fibrinogen

### Description
Here, we introduce XMAS, a bundle that allows users to load results from several XL-MS search engines directly into ChimeraX and map the information onto protein structures. Besides automatically locating distance constraints on protein structures, XMAS offers the possibility to work with replicate experiments and/or different crosslinkers, and filter this data based on how many replicates for which a given distance constraint was detected, thereby increasing the data quality. Additionally, we introduce the concept of self-links, which allows easy modeling of homo-dimeric interactions. Core functionality is extended by the implementation of seamless connections to the HADDOCK suite to streamline otherwise time-consuming tasks in structural modeling pipelines. We then demonstrate these key elements of the XMAS bundle by modeling crosslinking data obtained from human fibrin clots. This software is freely available from the ChimeraX toolshed, with an extensive user manual and example datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial plasminogen-depleted fibrinogen, purified from human plasma (Merck), was dissolved in ice-cold crosslinking buffer at a concentration of 10 μM (1mg/mL, 100 μg per 1.5mL vial). The crosslinking buffer contained 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, and 2 mM CaCl2 (all Sigma-Aldrich). Fibrinogen clotting was activated by adding 1 U/mL human thrombin (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min in an Eppendorf Thermomixer C orbital shaker to allow further clotting. Two sets of three independently clotting reactions on 100 μg of fibrinogen each were crosslinked at room temperature for 30 min with two different crosslinking reagents: i 2 mM (3,5-bis(((2,5- dioxopyrrolidin-1-yl)oxy) carbonyl)phenyl)phosphonic acid (PhoX) or 1 mM disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) (Thermo Scientific). The crosslinking reaction was subsequently quenched with 50 mM Tris (Roche). Next, pre-digestion was performed by incubation with Lys- C (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 30 min, at a Lys-C/protein ratio of 1:70 (wt/wt). Proteins were denatured with 4 M urea (Merck) at 54°C for 1 h, prior to sonication in a Bioruptor bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 cycles of 30 s ON and 30 s OFF. Thereafter, samples were reduced with 8 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) at 54°C for 30 min in an Eppendorf Thermomixer C at 800 RPM, followed by alkylation with 200 mM IAA (GE Healthcare) at room temperature for 1 h while protected from light exposure. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM Tris at a sample/Tris ratio of 1:1.1 (vol/vol) to reduce the urea concentration to <2M. Trypsin and Lys-C ( Sigma-Aldrich) were added at a protease/protein ratio of 1:25 and 1:70 (wt/wt), respectively, for protein digestion overnight at 37°C ( 16h). Prior to peptide cleanup, samples were acidified to pH < 2 with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Honeywell) and desalted using an Oasis HLB μElution 30 μm plate (Waters).  For subsequent fractionation of crosslinked peptides, two different strategies were adopted, depending on the chemical crosslinker. For PhoX crosslinked samples the previously optimized enrichment protocol leveraging the IMAC enrichable phosphonate group was used (14). Briefly, crosslinked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA-5 μL using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). Cartridges were primed with 200 μL of 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with 200 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were dissolved in 200 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and loaded onto the cartridge. The columns were washed with 250 μL and the crosslinked peptides were eluted with 35 μL of 10% ammonia directly into 35 μL of 10% formic acid (FA) (98-100% purity; Merck). Samples crosslinked with DSS were enriched by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using the same AssayMAP Bravo Platform with a protocol specifically optimized for the purpose of micro-fractionation of crosslinked peptides pairs, as follows: dried samples were resuspended in 100 μL 20% ACN/0.1% TFA, using SCX cartridges in an AssayMAP Agilent Bravo robot (both Agilent Technologies). Fractions were retrieved by five consecutive elutions of 25 μL each with buffers containing increasing concentrations (50, 250, 450, 600, and 750 mM) of ammonium acetate (diluted from a 7.5 M stock; Sigma-Aldrich), in addition to 20% ACN, and TFA to acidify buffers to pH < 2. Next, the 250-, 450-, 600-, and 750- mM ammonium acetate SCX fractions were desalted on an Oasis HLB μElution 30 μm plate as described previously in this section. All fractions were evaporated again in a Savant SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator and stored at -20°C prior to MS analysis. For MS acquisition, samples were resuspended in 2% formic acid and peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Firstly, peptides were trapped in reverse-phase solvent A (0.1% FA), by applying a 5-μL/min column flow rate for 5 min on a 2-cm double-frit trap column (100-μm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch). Secondly, peptide separation was achieved by a 45-min gradient elution with 9-42% solvent B (80% ACN/0.1% FA), applying a 300-nL/min column flow rate on a 50-cm single-frit analytical column (75-μm inner diameter) packed in-house with InfinityLab Poroshell 120 EC-C18 2.7 μm beads (Agilent Technologies). Survey MS1 Orbitrap scans were acquired at 60,000 resolution, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 ions, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms, and scan range of 375-1500 m/z. Precursors with a 3-8 charge state were selected for fragmentation using a stepped HCD collision energy mode (normalized energies of 24- 27-30% for DSS and 19-27-35% for PhoX). Dynamic exclusion properties were set to sort by highest charge state. Full MS2 Orbitrap scans were acquired at 30,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 8e5 ions and dynamic maximum IT.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 software with incorporated XlinkX nodes, using DSS (32) or PhoX (14) specific settings. Crosslinks with a false discovery rate at 1% and score >40 were kept for further analysis. Unless otherwise specified, only crosslinks present in at least 3 out of 3 replicates were used for structural modeling(32).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phox, Dss, Xl-ms, Fibrinogen, Crosslinking, Dsso

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Pascal Albanese

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


