### Accession
PXD035500

### Title
Protein aggregation and calcium dysregulation are the earliest hallmarks of familial Parkinson’s disease in human midbrain dopaminergic neurons

### Description
Mutations in the SNCA gene cause autosomal dominant Parkinson’s disease (PD), with progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, and accumulation of aggregates of α-synuclein. However, the sequence of molecular events that proceed from the SNCA mutation during development, to its end stage pathology is unknown. Utilising human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) with SNCA mutations, we resolved the temporal sequence of pathophysiological events that occur during neuronal differentiation in order to discover the early, and likely causative, events in synucleinopathies. We adapted a small molecule-based protocol that generates highly enriched midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons (>80%). We characterised their molecular identity using single-cell RNA sequencing and their functional identity through the synthesis and secretion of dopamine, the ability to generate action potentials, and form functional synapses and networks. RNA velocity analyses confirmed the developmental transcriptomic trajectory of midbrain neural precursors into different mDA neuronal clusters. To characterise the synucleinopathy, we adopted super-resolution methods to determine the number, size, and structure of aggregates in SNCA-mutant mDA neurons. By day 27 of differentiation, prior to maturation to mDA neurons of molecular and functional identity, we demonstrate the formation of small aggregates; specifically, β-sheet rich oligomeric aggregates, in SNCA-mutant midbrain immature neurons. The aggregation progresses over time to accumulate phosphorylated and fibrillar aggregates. When the midbrain neurons were functional, we observed impaired intracellular calcium signalling, evidenced with an increased basal calcium level and impairments in both cytosolic and mitochondrial calcium rearrangements. Once midbrain identity fully developed, SNCA-mutant neurons exhibited mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, lysosomal swelling as well as an upregulation of mitophagy and autophagy. In addition, SNCA-mutant neurons displayed pathophysiological excitability, revealed as a depolarised resting membrane potential, an increased input resistance, and impaired firing properties. Ultimately these multiple cellular stresses lead to an increase in cell death by day 62 post-differentiation. Our differentiation paradigm generates an efficient model for studying disease mechanisms in PD, and highlights that protein misfolding to generate intraneuronal oligomers is one of the earliest critical events driving disease in human neurons, rather than a late-stage hallmark of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of the lysate was aliquoted for proteomic analysis and processed using S-Trap assisted digestion. Digested peptides sequentially were eluted by adding 80 µl of 50mM TEABC buffer, 0.15% (vol/vol) formic acid and 80% (vol/vol) Acetonitrile in 0.15% formic acid respectively by centrifuging at 1000 g for a minute at each elution step. The eluate was snap frozen on dry-ice and subjected to Speedvac to dryness. Peptides were further stored in -20 freezer until LC-MS/MS analysis. A 2µg of peptide digest from each sample (n=22) was pooled and subjected High-pH RPLC fractionation to generate a spectral library for Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) analysis. A total of 46 fractions were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in LC buffer (3% ACN (vol/vol) in 0.1% Formic acid (vol/vol). 2 µg of a peptide from each sample was transferred to LC vial for mass spectrometry analysis on Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer in line with Dionex 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatography system. The data was acquired in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Full MS is acquired at 120,000 resolution m/z 200 and measured using Orbitrap mass analyser. The MS2 precursor ions were fragmented using stepped higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) energies, 25, 28 and 32 and was acquired at 30,000 resolution at m/z 200 and measured using Orbitrap mass analyser. We employed a variable isolation window for MS2-DIA data, a total of 45 vDIA windows were enabled covering he mass range of 350 to 1500 m/z. The AGC target for MS1 and MS2 were set at 3000% and ion-injection times were set at 30ms and 70 ms respectively. The spectral library was generated by pooling all samples and generated 46 High-pH RPLC fractions and these were acquired in a Data dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode on Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. The peptides were separated on a 50cm analytical column by applying a non-linear gradient for 85 minutes with a total run time of 100min. Full MS is acquired at 60,000 resolution at m/z 200 and measured using Orbitrap analyzer in the mass range of 375 -1500 m/z. M/MS data was acquired by employing top speed for 2 sec in a data dependent mode at 15,000 resolution at m/z 200 and measured using Orbitrap mass analyser. The quadrupole mass filter isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z and precursor ions were fragmented using normalized HCD of 30%. The AGC target for MS was set at 300% and MS/MS was set as standard and maximum ion injection was set in auto mode. The dynamic exclusion duration was set for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
The DDA spectral library data was searched with Biognosys Spectronaut pulsar (version: 14.0. 46 bRPLC fractions were searched against Human Uniprot database (Downloaded: 2021/03/16). Default search parameters for spectral library generation was used including the data was filtered for 1% FDR. The DIA data was searched using Biognosys Spectronaut pulsar software suite (version: 16.0.220606.5300) against a spectral library generated from the DDA data and Human Uniprot database. Trypsin as a protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and Carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification and Protein N-ter Acetylation and Oxidation of Met were set as variable modifications. The data was filtered for 1% FDR and the protein group Output files were further processed using Perseus software suite and protein copy numbers were estimated using Proteomic ruler plugin within Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the SNCA gene cause autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), with loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, and aggregation of &#x3b1;-synuclein. The sequence of molecular events that proceed from an SNCA mutation during development, to end-stage pathology is unknown. Utilising human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), we resolved the temporal sequence of SNCA-induced pathophysiological events in order to discover early, and likely causative, events. Our small molecule-based protocol generates highly enriched midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons: molecular identity was confirmed using single-cell RNA sequencing and proteomics, and functional identity was established through dopamine synthesis, and measures of electrophysiological activity. At the earliest stage of differentiation, prior to maturation to mDA neurons, we demonstrate the formation of small &#x3b2;-sheet-rich oligomeric aggregates, in SNCA-mutant cultures. Aggregation persists and progresses, ultimately resulting in the accumulation of phosphorylated &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregates. Impaired intracellular calcium signalling, increased basal calcium, and impairments in mitochondrial calcium handling occurred early at day 34-41 post differentiation. Once midbrain identity fully developed, at day 48-62 post differentiation, SNCA-mutant neurons exhibited mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, lysosomal swelling and increased autophagy. Ultimately these multiple cellular stresses lead to abnormal excitability, altered neuronal activity, and cell death. Our differentiation paradigm generates an efficient model for studying disease mechanisms in PD and highlights that protein misfolding to generate intraneuronal oligomers is one of the earliest critical events driving disease in human neurons, rather than a late-stage hallmark of the disease.

### Keywords
Dopaminergic neurons, Alpha synuclein, Proteomics and parkinsons's disease, Hipscs

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Sonia Gandhi
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK


