### Accession
PXD041950

### Title
The influence of highly effective modulator therapies on the sputum proteome in cystic fibrosis C4PR_LIV

### Description
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited, multi-system disease caused by dysfunction of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein, a ubiquitous ion channel important for epithelial hydration. A direct consequence of this dysfunction is impaired mucociliary clearance, chronic airway infection and a persistent neutrophilic inflammatory response that results in progressive loss of lung function, development of respiratory failure and premature death. Partial restoration of CFTR function is now possible for most CF patients through mutation specific CFTR modulators. Ivacaftor monotherapy produces significant clinical improvement in CF patients with the G511D mutation. Dual therapy, combining ivacaftor with lumacaftor or tezacaftor, results in modest clinical improvements in patients homozygous for F508del. More recently, triple therapy with elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor (ETI) has led to dramatic improvements in lung function and quality of life in patients homozygous and heterozygous for F508del. Sputum proteomics is a powerful research technique capable of identifying important airway disease mechanisms by interrogating the proteome, an entire set of proteins within biological samples. It has confirmed the central role of neutrophilic immune dysregulation in CF and non-CF bronchiectasis, particularly involving the release of antimicrobial proteins and neutrophil-extracellular traps (NETs), and through impaired anti-inflammatory mechanisms. These processes produce distinct molecular signatures within the sputum proteome that become increasingly abnormal with chronic airway infection and progressive lung disease severity. In CF patients, airway and systemic inflammatory cytokines potentially related to these signatures reduce with the various forms of CFTR modulation. To date, no studies of ETI therapy in CF lung disease have assessed large-scale change in protein expression using untargeted proteomics. We hypothesised that ETI therapy would shift the sputum proteome toward health, potentially normalising airway biology in people with CF. The objectives of this study were to investigate changes in the CF sputum proteome with the introduction of ETI, correlate these with changes in clinical markers of disease severity, and make comparisons with the sputum proteome in healthy controls and in repeat samples from CF patients not suitable for ETI therapy. We also explored which molecular pathways associated with CF lung disease did not change with ETI.

### Sample Protocol
Sputum samples were thawed and weighed after which four times the weight of 0.1% (w/v) (6.5mM) dithiothreitol (DTT), dissolved in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline, was added. The mixture was vortexed vigorously for 30 s before incubating for 30 minutes on a roller mixer at room temperature. The samples were vortexed for 30 s every 10 minutes during this time. Samples were centrifuged at 450 g at 4 °C for 10 minutes and the supernatant fraction was transferred to low protein binding microfuge tubes and re-centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The liquid fractions were removed and combined. Processed sputum samples were aliquoted and stored at -80 °C. Sputum samples were diluted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) to a final volume of 160 μL where samples had a total protein concentration of 0.16 µg/uL. Samples were treated with a 1% (w/v) solution of RapiGestTM SF Surfacant (Waters) to a final concentration of 0.05% (w/v) before incubation at 80 °C for 10 minutes. Disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of DTT during sputum processing, so an additional 10 μL of 25mM AmBic was added. Iodoacetamide (IA) was added to a final concentration of 9 mM to alkylate the free sulfhydryl groups on the cysteine residues. After incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark trypsin was added to a 50:1 protein: protease ratio and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubated for 45 minutes at 37 °C. The samples were centrifuged to remove particulates for 15 minutes up to 13,000 g. Off-line desalting was performed using C18 trap columns, (Evotips, Evosep) as per the manufactures protocol. Peptides were eluted using acetonitrile 60% (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), dried down using a SpeedVac and suspended in 200 µL 973. The samples were then subject to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to QExactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) to aquire the masses of peptides derived from proteins extracted from the sputum samples. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (50cm) (Acclaim PepMap 100) at 12 μL/min over 7 min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) MeCN. The trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC) (Dionex). Peptides were eluted by applying a linear gradient of 3.8% to 50% solvent B (acetonitrile 80% (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) FA) over 35 min at 300 nL/min. Solvent A was HPLC grade water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode and full scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 16 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The total protein concentration of sputum varied considerably, samples were therefore normalised to a fixed total protein concentration prior to alkylation and tryptic digestion. Data analysis including run alignment and peak picking was carried out in Progenesis QI for Proteomics v4 (Nonlinear Dynamics), while database searching was carried out by MASCOT search engine (Matrixscience version 2.6). Samples were searched against a database comprised of all reviewed human sequences in the UniProt Human database (20,356 sequences; updated  12/08/2020) using trypsin as the specified enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and one trypsin missed cleavage, precursor and fragment ion error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the decoy database tool in MASCOT. Only those proteins identified with an FDR <1% were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sputum, Lc-ms/ms, Cystic fibrosis, Elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacafto, Modulator therapy

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Rosie Maher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Edward Emmott
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


