### Accession
PXD036398

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the cardiac muscle from the HMDP

### Description
Mitochondria play a key role in the normal function of the heart as well as in the pathogenesis of diseases. We report analysis of common genetic variations contributing to mitochondrial and heart functions using an integrative proteomics approach in a panel of inbred mouse strains called the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP). We performed a whole heart proteomic analysis in the HMDP (72 strains, n=2-3 mice) and retrieved 840 mitochondrial proteins (quantified in ≥50 strains).

### Sample Protocol
Muscle tissue from the HMDP were lysed in 6 M guanidine HCL (Sigma; #G4505), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water and precipitated overnight with five volumes of acetone at -20°C. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was resuspended in Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Protein was quantified with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized in Digestion Buffer to a final concentration of 2 µg/µl. Protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. Eight micrograms of peptide was directly labelled with 32 µg of 10-plex TMT (lot #QB211242) in 20 µl at a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile for 1.5 h at room temperature. The reaction was de-acylated with a final concentration of 0.3% (w/v) hydroxylamine and quenched with a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Each 10-plex experiment contained nine different strains with a tenth reference label (131 isobaric label) made up of the same peptide digest from pooled mix of C57BL/6J muscles. Following labelling, the peptides from each of the 18 TMT 10-plex batches were pooled and purified directly by Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns, washed with 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA and eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and thirty micrograms of peptide was fractionated on an in-house fabricated 25 cm x 320 µm column packed with C18BEH particles (3 µm, Waters). Peptides were separated on a gradient of 0 – 30% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 7.9) over 60 min at 6 µl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC and detection at 210 nm with a total of 48 fractions collected and concatenated down to 12 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions from skeletal muscle were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analyzed on a Dionex ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were separated on 40 cm x 75 µm column containing 1.9 um C18AQ Reprosil particles on a linear gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile over 2 h. Electrospray ionization was performed at 2.3 kV with 40% RF lens and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (350-1550 m/z, 1e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed with CID of 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) (rapid scan rate, 2e4 AGC, 50 ms injection time, 10 ms activation time, 0.7 m/z isolation) of the top 10 most abundant peptides. Synchronous-precursor selection with MS3 (SPS-MS3) analysis was enabled with HCD of 60 NCE (100-500 m/z, 50K resolution, 1e5 AGC, 105 ms injection time) (McAlister et al., 2014). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 and searched against the Mouse UniProt database (November 2018) using SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994). The precursor MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavage. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. All data was searched as a single batch and the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) of each database search filtered to 1% FDR using a target/decoy approach with Percolator (Käll et al., 2007). The filtered PSMs from each database search were grouped and q-values generated at the peptide level with the Qvality algorithm (Käll et al., 2009). Finally, the grouped peptide data was further filtered to 1% protein FDR using Protein Validator. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node for TMT quantification based on MS3 scans in Proteome Discoverer. TMT precision was set to 20 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference were used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10. The data was filtered to retain Master proteins that were measured in at least 50 mice.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hmdp, Cardiac, Myocardium, Systems genetics

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


