### Accession
PXD030932

### Title
Characterization of lysine acetylation in Toxoplasma gondii proteome lacking acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT1).

### Description
Acetyl-CoA participates in post-translational modification of proteins, central carbon and lipid metabolism in several cell compartments. In mammals, the acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT1) facilitates the flux of cytosolic acetyl-CoA into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), enabling the acetylation of proteins of the secretory pathway, in concert with dedicated acetyltransferases including Nat8. However, the implication of the ER acetyl-CoA pool in acetylation of ER-transiting proteins and their relevance throughout the parasites’ life cycle is unknown. Here, we evaluated the impact of blocking putative cytosolic acetyl-CoA import on acetylation of proteins through KO of the homologue of AT1 in the parasite Toxoplasma gondii.

### Sample Protocol
Five replicates of wild-type and AT1-KO freshly egressed parasites were lysed from host cells by repeatedly by passage through syringe (3x 28G) and subsequently purified through filtration (3µm pore size, Millipore/Merck). The parasites were subsequently pelleted at 2800 x g, for 20 minutes at 4ºC. 1ml of ice cold 8M urea in 50mM HEPES buffer with protease inhibitor at pH 6.6 was then added to the pellets and resuspended gently using a pipette. This was followed by a sonication step of the samples at 4°C in an ultrasonic bath for 10 cycles (10 seconds sonication on and 30 seconds sonication off) and immediate transfer on ice. Extracted proteins were reduced using 20mM of dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37 °C before alkylation with 55mM of iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 4M. Proteins were digested with LysC (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 during 4 h at 37 °C. The samples were diluted again using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 1 M. Proteins were then digested with Trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 overnight at 37 °C. Resulting peptides were purified by C18 reverse phase chromatography (Sep-Pak C18, Waters) before drying down. Dried peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 % NP-40, pH 8). Acetylated peptides were mixed with anti–acetyl-lysine antibody immobilized on agarose beads (ImmuneChem-ICP0388) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Following incubation, the beads were washed twice with IP buffer, once with washing buffer (IP buffer without NP-40) and twice with ice cold ultra-pure water. Elution was performed using 0.1 % TFA. Enriched peptides were then dried down. The peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 120-min gradient. Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). RAW files were processed using MaxQuant , version 1.6.8.0. Spectra were searched against the T. gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 30 downloaded from ToxoDB), the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 2020-11-27 version), the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant, and the corresponding reverse databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and six missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at their default values. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and Acetyl (K, variable). Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at PSM, protein and site levels. The match between runs option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Acetyl-CoA participates in post-translational modification of proteins and in central carbon and lipid metabolism in several cell compartments. In mammals, acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT1, also known as SLC33A1) facilitates the flux of cytosolic acetyl-CoA into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), enabling the acetylation of proteins of the secretory pathway, in concert with the activity of dedicated acetyltransferases such as NAT8. However, the involvement of the ER acetyl-CoA pool in acetylation of ER-transiting proteins in Apicomplexa is unknown. Here, we identified homologs of AT1 and NAT8 in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei parasites. Proteome-wide analyses revealed widespread N-terminal acetylation of secreted proteins in both species. Such extensive acetylation of N-terminally processed proteins has not been observed previously in any other organism. Deletion of AT1 homologs in both T. gondii and P. berghei resulted in considerable reductions in parasite fitness. In P. berghei, AT1 was found to be important for growth of asexual blood stages, production of female gametocytes and male gametocytogenesis, implying its requirement for parasite transmission. In the absence of AT1, lysine acetylation and N-terminal acetylation in T. gondii remained globally unaltered, suggesting an uncoupling between the role of AT1 in development and active acetylation occurring along the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Acetyl-coa transporter 1, Nanolc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


