### Accession
PXD035721

### Title
Selective androgen receptor degrader (SARD) to overcome antiandrogen resistance in castration-resistant prostate cancer

### Description
Clinical resistance such as androgen receptor (AR) mutation, AR overexpression, and AR splice variants (ARVs) restrict the second-generation antiandrogens benefit in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Several strategies have been implemented to develop novel antiandrogens to circumvent the occurring resistance. In this study, based on rational drug design, we discovered and identified a bifunctional small molecule Z15 as a potent AR antagonist and AR selective degrader. Z15 could directly bind to the AR ligand-binding domain (LBD) and inhibited DHT-induced AR nuclear translocation. Furthermore, Z15 promoted AR degradation through the proteasome pathway. As a result, our in vitro and in vivo studies showed Z15 efficiently suppressed AR and AR mutant transcription activity, downregulated mRNA and protein levels of AR target genes, as well as overcame AR LBD mutations, AR amplification, and ARVs-induced resistance in CRPC. In conclusion, our data illustrate the synergistic importance of AR antagonism and degradation in advanced prostate cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP Cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 × 106 cells in T25 culture flask. After 48 h incubation, 5 µL test compounds were added to each flask at the designated concentrations. After another 8 h incubation, the cell samples were lysed and the proteins were digested according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The cut-off values for identification of potential hits were set at Fold Change < 0.67 or Fold Change > 1.5 and P value < 0.05. Enrichment of pathway analysis: Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.

### Publication Abstract
In patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), clinical resistances such as androgen receptor (AR) mutation, AR overexpression, and AR splice variants (ARVs) limit the effectiveness of second-generation antiandrogens (SGAs). Several strategies have been implemented to develop novel antiandrogens to circumvent the occurring resistance. Here, we found and identified a bifunctional small molecule Z15, which is both an effective AR antagonist and a selective AR degrader. Z15 could directly interact with the ligand-binding domain (LBD) and activation function-1 region of AR, and promote AR degradation through the proteasome pathway. In vitro and in vivo studies showed that Z15 efficiently suppressed AR, AR mutants and ARVs transcription activity, downregulated mRNA and protein levels of AR downstream target genes, thereby overcoming AR LBD mutations, AR amplification, and ARVs-induced SGAs resistance in CRPC. In conclusion, our data illustrate the synergistic importance of AR antagonism and degradation in advanced prostate cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Human prostate cancer cell, Lncap, 4d-label free proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Beijing hospital
Beijing Hospital

### Submitter
Meng Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Meng Wu
Beijing Hospital


