### Accession
PXD020892

### Title
Dynamic molecular events associated to Plasmodium berghei gametogenesis through proteomic approach

### Description
We carried out a iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic insight into the rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei gamete morphogenesis providing valuable time course data. Time-course analyses were performed 7 and 15 min after gametogenesis induction (Time 0).

### Sample Protocol
A pyrimethamine-sensitive clone of Plasmodium berghei NK65 strain was used throughout the study. Gametocyte-infected RBCs from mice were separated from uninfected erythrocytes by a 48% NycoDenz gradient. After Giemsa-stained smears, one third of the sample was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen (Time 0) and xanthurenic acid (100 μM final concentration) was immediately added to the remaining two thirds to induce gametogenesis. A small amount of cell suspension was mounted onto a Malassez chamber to count the RBC number and to follow the exflagellation process under microscope. Half of the sample was frozen in liquid nitrogen after 7 min of incubation at room temperature (RT) and the remainder after 15 min of incubation. Samples were stored at −80 °C.  Three independent biological replicates were performed. Each enrichment had about 3 × 108 gametocyte-infected RBCs. Purity was checked on Giemsa-stained smears. Each sample was lysed in 10 volumes of 8 M urea containing a complete mixture of protease and phosphatase inhibitor, 2× Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 100, through three rapid cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing on ice. Lysates were lyophilized and stored at −80 °C until use. Lyophilized samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, vigorously vortexed and proteins were precipitated by ethanol/acetone. Briefly, each sample was vigorously vortexed and incubated overnight at −20 °C for protein precipitation. Samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 ×g, 15 min, at 4 °C and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed three times with ice cold ethanol/acetone/water solution (4/4/2). Proteins were resolubilized in 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, centrifuged at 13,000 ×g, 15 min, at 4 °C and the supernatant transferred into a new tube. Proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT at RT for 1 h and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for another hour. Proteins were first digested at RT by endoproteinase Lys-C for 12 h and by trypsin (Promega), for 4 h, at RT. The peptide sample was acidified with TFA 0.1% (v/v) final concentration and desalted using homemade 2 cm long microcolumns of Poros 20 R2 and Oligo R3 resins packed in p200 tips. Peptides were eluted with 70% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Dried up peptides were solubilized in 300 mM TEAB and the concentration of the peptide solution was determined by Qubit®️ quantification assay. Peptides were labelled using 4-plex iTRAQ Reagent Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions.   Briefly, iTRAQ-labelled multiplexed samples (around 280 μg per biological replicate) were resuspended in 1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile/5% TFA (v/v), and 0.6 mg of TiO2 beads per 100 μg of peptide sample then incubated under vigorous shaking for 10 to 15 min. Beads were spun down and the supernatant was transferred to new microtubes. Additionally, a new bunch of TiO2 beads was added to the supernatants (using 0.3 mg TiO2 per 100 μg of peptide); this procedure was done twice. The TiO2 beads from the three rounds of enrichment were combined and washed twice with 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA (v/v) and then phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.28% ammonia solution, pH 11, and dried out. The enriched and non-enriched phosphopeptide fractions were analysed in biological triplicate with two technical replicates each to increase the number of protein identified, using a Dionex Ultimate™️ 3000 RSLC nano system coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™️ mass spectrometer. Samples were first loaded onto a 2 cm × 100 μm fused silica trap column packed in-house with ReprosilPur 120 Å C18-AQ 5 μm resin . After trapping samples were fractionated in a 35- cm × 75 μm reverse phase capillary column ending with a fused silica emitter packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 Å C18-AQ 3 μm resin. In brief, peptides in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid were injected into the trap column with 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) under flow rate of 3 μL/min. After washing, peptides were resolved over 210 min with 230 nL/min flow rate in the analytical column through use of organic gradients: 2–40% solvent B until 170 min; and then 40–85% until 185 min; 85% until 190 min; and reequilibrated at 2% until 210 min. Peptides were ionized by Nanospray Flex™️ ion source at 2.5 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. Acquisition by the mass spectrometer was performed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The DDA cycle consisted of a full scan in FTMS comprising a 300–1650m/z range under a resolution of 120,000 full width at half-maximum at m/z 400.The 25 most abundant ions with intensity of at least 3000 counts were selected and fragmented by HCD. The fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 50%.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s. Ions with charge state of +1 or undetermined were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The PatternLab v.4.0.0.27 was used for identification and quantitative comparison of proteins as following procedures described in its bioinformatics protocol. The search used to compare experimental spectra against those theoretically generated from a sequence database using the embedded Comet MS/MS search engine v. 2015.020. The database included 5143 protein sequences of P. berghei ANKA downloaded from PlasmoDB, 55957 sequences of Mus musculus downloaded from non-redundant NCBI, and 127 common contaminant sequences to proteomic experiments automatically included by Patternlab 4.0. Peptide search parameters were as in accordance to PatternLab's protocol; the mass spectrometer raw files search considered all tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides candidates, a tolerance of two missed cleavages, cabamidomethylation of cysteines and N-terminus and lysine iTRAQ-4plex tagging as fixed modifications, iTRAQ-4plex in tyrosine as variable modification, fragment bin tolerance of 1.0005 with an offset of 0.4 Da, M peak only as theoretical fragment ion and search range comprising the mass range of 550 to 5500 Da. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine amino acid residues as variable modifications were also considered in Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) searches of phospho-enriched peptide datasets. Statistical filtering and validation of peptide spectrum matches was performed using PatternLab Search Engine Processor in order to meet a subset of protein sequences that satisfies a FDR < 1%. Quantitation only considered proteins with at least two peptides and peptide with pvalue < 0.05%. For phosphopeptide enrichment, one peptide was accepted as long as it had an XCorr > 2.5 and an XDScore (for phosphosite probability) > 75

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Quantitative proteomics, Gametogenesis, Phosphopeptide, Exflagellation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF BRASILIA
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, DF 70910–900, Brazil

### Submitter
SEBASTIEN CHARNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Charneau
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, DF 70910–900, Brazil


