### Accession
PXD045088

### Title
Impaired cAMP Processivity by Phosphodiesterase-Protein Kinase A complexes in Acrodysostosis

### Description
Acrodysostosis represents a group of rare genetic disorders characterized by defective skeletal development and is often accompanied by intellectual disabilities. Mutations in the 3’5’cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent Protein Kinase (PKA) type I regulatory subunit isoform α (RIα) and phosphodiesterase (PDE) PDE4D have both been implicated in impaired PKA regulation in Acrodysostosis. How mutations on PDEs and RIα interfere with regulation of cAMP-PKA signaling is not understood. cAMP-PKA signaling can be described in two phases. In the activation phase, cAMP binding to RIα dissociates the free C-subunit. PDEs hydrolyze cAMP bound to RIα, priming the cAMP-free RIα for reassociation with the C-subunit, thereby completing one PKA activation cycle. Signal termination is thus critical for resetting PKA to its basal state and promoting adaptation to hormonal hyperstimulation. This proceeds through formation of a transient signal termination RIα:PDE complex that facilitates cAMP channeling from the cAMP-binding domain of RIα to the catalytic site of PDE. Signal termination of cAMP-PKA proceeds in three steps: Step 1)  Channeling: Translocation of cAMP from the CNB of RIα to the PDE catalytic site for hydrolysis  Step 2) Processivity: Binding of free cAMP from the cytosol at both CNBs of RIα and Step 3) Product (5’AMP) release from the PDE hydrolysis site through competitive displacement by a new molecule of cAMP that trigger subsequent activation cycles of PKA. We have identified the molecular basis for two acrodysostosis mutants, (PDE8 T690P) and RIα (T207A) that both allosterically impair cAMP-PKA signal termination. A combination of amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDXMS) and Fluorescence Polarization (FP) reveal that PDE8 T690P and RIα T207A both blocked processive hydrolysis of cAMP by interfering with competitive displacement of product 5’AMP release from the nucleotide channel at the end of each round of cAMP hydrolysis. While T690P blocked product 5’AMP release from the PDE, T207A greatly slowed release of substrate from RIα. These results highlight the role of processivity in cAMP hydrolysis by RIα:PDE termination complexes for adaptation to cAMP from GPCR hyperstimulation. Impairment of the signal termination process provides an alternate molecular basis for acrodysostosis.

### Sample Protocol
HDXMS experiments were carried out to map the conformational effects of RIα T207A and PDE8 T690P on nucleotide binding and signal termination of PKA. All deuterium exchange reactions were carried out by adding 3 μL sample to 27 μL deuterium labeling buffer (99% D2O, 20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-ME) for final sample concentration of 1 μM and final deuteration of 90%. All deuterium exchange buffers for PDE8 were supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2 and 20 μM ZnSO4. To measure the effect of RIα T207A and PDE8 T690 on nucleotide channeling in RIα:PDE8, deuterium labeling buffer was supplemented with 330 μM cAMP,  3 mM 5’AMP or as indicated. HDXMS of mutant signal termination complexes were carried out by complexation of PDE8 with RIα at a ratio of 2:1. RIα T207A was complexed with WT PDE8 and RIα was complexed with PDE8 T690P respectively to characterize the ACRDYS signal termination complexes. Although an exact affinity for PDE8 and RIα has not been reported, our previous results mapping interactions of RIαwith aPDE8 homolog, RegA have estimated a KD ~0.1 μM. Under our experimental conditions and protein concentrations for both HDXMS and FP, there would be complete complexation of PDE8 with RIα. Deuterium exchange was carried out in triplicates at 25°C for 1-, 10- and 30-min labeling times. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 20 μL chilled 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid to lower the pH to 2.5.   Quenched samples were injected into an ACQUITY nano-UPLC HDX sample manager (Waters, Milford, USA) and digested into peptides in an immobilized pepsin column (Poroszyme, ABI, Foster city, USA) under continuous flow rate of 100 μL/min in 0.1% Formic Acid. Peptides were then trapped in a VanGuard trap column (Waters, Milford, USA) and loaded onto a ACQUITY BEH C-18 reverse-phase chromatography column (Waters, Milford, USA) and eluted under 8-40% gradient of Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid at 40 μL/min pumped from a ACQUITY Binary Solvent Manager (Waters, Milford, USA). Peptides were ionized by ESI and analyzed in a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, USA) in MSE mode as previously described. The mass spectrometer was calibrated continuously with calibrant 200 fmol/μL Glu-Fibrinopeptide B at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. The total run time of LC-MS was 13 min consisting of a 3 min pepsin digestion step followed by a 10 min separation and acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Pepsin proteolyzed fragment peptides from undeuterated controls were identified using Protein Lynx Global Server 3.0 (PLGS) using amino acid sequences for RIα (P00514) and PDE8 (O60658) obtained from UniprotKB. A sequence of porcine pepsin was not included in the search since immobilized pepsin was used. Peptides searches were performed by selecting non-specific protease representing pepsin with number of missed cleavage sites – 1, false discovery rate – 4, low energy counts – 250.0 and elevated energy counts – 100.0. The sequence for PLGS was changed from T207 to A207 for RIα T207A and T690 to P690 for PDE8 T690P mutants. Deuterium exchange was analyzed using DynamX v3.0 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and peptides were filtered with cutoffs for minimum intensity - 5000, minimum peptide length - 5, maximum peptide length – 25, mass tolerance - 10 ppm, minimum products – 1 and file threshold - 2. Deuterium exchange values (Da) were calculated by subtracting the centroids of deuterated mass envelopes from the centroids of corresponding undeuterated mass envelopes. Deuterium exchange profiles comparing two different states were plotted in difference plots and mapped onto a molecular docking model generated from HDXMS analyses of the WT RIα:PDE8 complex described by Krishnamurthy et al 2014.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein kinase a, Signal termination, Acrodysostosis, Amide hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, Allostery, Processivity

### Affiliations
Dept. of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
Dept. of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University

### Submitter
Varun Venkatakrishnan

### Lab Head
Dr Ganesh Anand
Dept. of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA


