### Accession
PXD006176

### Title
Syntaxin-3 is a Weibel-Palade body localized SNARE protein that regulates Von Willebrand factor secretion from endothelial cells

### Description
Endothelial cells store von Willebrand factor (VWF) in rod-shaped secretory organelles, called Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs). WPB exocytosis is coordinated by a complex network of Rab GTPases, Rab-effectors and SNARE proteins. We have previously identified STXBP1 as the link between the Rab27A-Slp4-a complex on WPBs and the SNARE proteins syntaxin-2 and -3. In this study we investigate the function of syntaxin-3 in VWF secretion. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and in blood outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) from healthy controls endogenous syntaxin-3 immunolocalized to WPBs. A detailed analysis of BOECs isolated from a patient with variant microvillus inclusion disease (MVID), carrying a homozygous mutation in STX3 (STX3-/-), showed a loss of syntaxin-3 protein and absence of WPB-associated syntaxin-3 immunoreactivity. Ultrastructural analysis revealed no detectable differences in morphology or prevalence of immature or mature WPBs in control versus STX3-/- BOECs. VWF multimer analysis showed normal patterns in plasma of the MVID patient, and media from STX3-/- BOECs, together indicating WPB formation and maturation are unaffected by absence of syntaxin-3. However, a clear defect in Ca2+ and cAMP-mediated VWF secretion was found in the STX3-/- BOECs. Co-immunoprecipitation studies showed that syntaxin-3 associates with the WPB SNAREs SNAP23 and VAMP8. Our data reveal syntaxin-3 as a novel WPB-associated SNARE controlling VWF secretion and highlight the complex regulation of WPB exocytosis by multiple SNARE complexes.

### Sample Protocol
BOECs were cultured in 10 cm culture dishes in triplicate. Upon confluency, cells were rinsed 3x in PBS and subsequently scraped in 100 ul SDS lysis buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5, supplemented with MS grade Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Next, cell lysates were incubated for 5 minutes at 95°C, sonicated using a Branson Sonifier 250 (Branson Ultrasonics S.A., Geneva, Switzerland) and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000g. The cleared lysates were obtained and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford. 50 μg of protein was processed into tryptic peptides using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method.1 10 μg peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile as described before.2,3 Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA to a final volume of 5 μl. Three μl was injected in the Mass Spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). References 1. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N and Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Meth. 2009;6(5):359–362.  2. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y and Mann M. Stop And Go Extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal. Chem. 2003;75(3):663–670.  3. Gazendam RP, van de Geer A, van Hamme JL, Tool ATJ, van Rees DJ, Aarts CEM, van den Biggelaar M, van Alphen F, Verkuijlen P, Meijer AB, Janssen H, Roos D, van den Berg TK and Kuijpers TW. Impaired killing of Candida albicans by granulocytes mobilized for transfusion purposes: A role for granule components. Haematologica. 2016;101(5):587–596.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific), using the same settings as described in 3. All MS data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).  The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8.4 Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2015).5 Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for reverse hits, ‘only identified by site’ and potential contaminants using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale. Samples were grouped per BOEC donor (STX3-/- patient, 4 healthy controls) (5 groups, 3 samples per group) and proteins were filtered for at least 3 valid values in at least one of the 5 groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Global changes in protein levels were assessed employing four separate volcano plots where the syntaxin-3 patient BOECs were pair wise compared with the healthy control BOECs (FDR 0.05, S0: 0.4). Proteins with a significantly changed level were defined as proteins with a significantly changed expression in all four pair wise comparisons. References 3. Gazendam RP, van de Geer A, van Hamme JL, Tool ATJ, van Rees DJ, Aarts CEM, van den Biggelaar M, van Alphen F, Verkuijlen P, Meijer AB, Janssen H, Roos D, van den Berg TK and Kuijpers TW. Impaired killing of Candida albicans by granulocytes mobilized for transfusion purposes: A role for granule components. Haematologica. 2016;101(5):587–596.  4. Cox J and Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367–72.  5. Bateman A, Martin MJ, O’Donovan C, Magrane M, Apweiler R, Alpi E, Antunes R, Zhang J, et al. UniProt: A hub for protein information. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43(D1):D204–D212.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Syntaxin-3, Von willebrand factor, Weibel-palade body, Proteomics, Snare machinery, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Bart van den Eshof

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


