### Accession
PXD019695

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mitochondrial regulation of the 26S proteasome

### Description
The proteasome is the main proteolytic system for targeted protein degradation in the cell. Its function is fine-tuned according to cellular needs. Inhibition of the respiratory chain impairs proteasome activity, regulation of proteasome function by mitochondrial metabolism, however, is unknown.  Here, we demonstrate that mitochondrial dysfunction reduces the assembly and activity of the 26S proteasome. Defects in respiratory chain caused metabolic reprogramming of the Krebs cycle and deficiency in the amino acid aspartate resulting in reduced 26S proteasome function. Aspartate supplementation fully restored assembly and activity of 26S proteasome complexes. This metabolic reprogramming involved sensing of aspartate via the mTORC1 pathway and the mTORC1-dependent transcriptional activation of defined proteasome assembly factors. Metabolic regulation of 26S function was confirmed in patient-derived skin fibroblasts with respiratory dysfunction containing a single mitochondrial mutation. Importantly, treatment of primary human lung fibroblasts with the respiratory chain inhibitor and anti-diabetic drug metformin similarly reduced assembly and activity of 26S proteasome complexes, which was fully reversible and rescued by supplementation of aspartate or pyruvate.  Our study uncovers a fundamental novel mechanism of how mitochondrial metabolism adaptively adjusts protein degradation by the proteasome. It thus unravels unexpected consequences of defective mitochondrial metabolism in disease or drug-targeted mitochondrial reprogramming for proteasomal protein degradation in the cell. As metabolic inhibition of proteasome function can be alleviated by treatment with aspartate or pyruvate, our results also have therapeutic implications.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts from mtDNA mutator mice were generated as previously described (Kukat et al., 2014). Filter-aided sample preparation for proteomic analysis Protein content was determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and 10 µg RIPA protein lysate (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 0.5 % Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 % SDS) was subjected to tryptic digest using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Grosche et al., 2016; Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 2 µl 100 % trifluoroacetic acid prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Proteomic analysis For LC-MS/MS acquisition a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled to a RSLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. Approx. 0.5 µg of peptides were automatically loaded to the HPLC system equipped with a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). After 5 min, peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters, Milford, MA) by a nonlinear gradient of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile ranging from 3 % to 41 %. The high-resolution (60 000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106 and a maximum of 50 ms injection time. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15 000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 1 x 105 and a maximum of 100 ms injection time. Normalized collision energy was set to 28 and all spectra were recorded in profile type.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for label-free quantification Spectra were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label-free quantification as previously described (Grosche et al., 2016) with the following changes: spectra were searched against the Swissprot mouse database (Release 2017.02, 16686 sequences). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modification, with only one missed cleavage site. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % with a percolator ion score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Mitominer analysis Mitochondrial assignment of proteins was assessed using the Mitominer software (Mitominer 4.0) (Smith and Robinson, 2016). Analysis was performed based on gene symbols. Bioinfomatic MS data analysis  Progenesis output tables were analyzed using the Perseus software suite (version 1.5.8.7) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Log2 transformed mass spectrometry intensity values were filtered to have at least three out of four quantified values in either the WT or the mutator group. Zero values were imputed with a normal distribution of artificial values generated at 1.6 standard deviations, subtracted from the mean, of the total intensity distribution and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. This places the imputed values at the lower limit of the intensity scale, which represents detection limit of the used instrumentation. For gene annotation enrichment analysis of the data from isolated mitochondria, we used 710 proteins that were confirmed to be true mitochondrial proteins based on the Mitominer software (see above). Gene annotation enrichment analysis was performed with the 1D annotation enrichment algorithm as previously described (Schiller et al., 2015). As gene annotations for significance tests, we used the Uniprot Keyword annotation as well as Gene Ontology terms Biological process (GO:BP), Molecular function (GO:MF) and Cellular Component (GO:CC) (Cox and Mann, 2012). In brief, it is tested for every annotation term whether the corresponding numerical values have a preference to be systematically larger or smaller than the global distribution of the values for all proteins, which is reported as normalized enrichment score. Additional pathway analysis was performed with the DAVID Bioinformatic Resources 6.8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, 26s proteasome, Proteasome assembly factors, Respiratory complex i, Pyruvate, Aspartate, Metabolic reprogramming

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Germany.

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Meiners
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Germany.


