### Accession
PXD015213

### Title
A snapshot of blood plasma proteomics in clinical response to atypical antipsychotics in schizophrenia – An exploratory study

### Description
Antipsychotics are usually the first option to treat schizophrenia; however, for a considerable fraction of patients, it lacks efficacy. Furthermore, there are no known biomarkers to indicate a treatment’s efficacy in a patient. Schizophrenia causes a large socioeconomic burden on countries along with an unquestionable impairment of the quality of life of patients and their relatives. As proteomics can identify, quantify, and characterize proteins in different conditions, it is a powerful tool to study complex diseases such as schizophrenia, also capable of revealing potential biomarkers. To improve treatment efficacy during the early stages of schizophrenia, a critical time period, molecular markers for a positive treatment response were sought. Blood plasma samples were collected in vivo from 26 patients before treatment with the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone; they were then classified as good (GR) and poor (PR) responders. We were able to identify a potential panel of proteins that may predict a positive outcome to olanzapine and risperidone treatment. Although still exploratory, this data will assist in the development of personalized medicine strategies with potential clinical implementation

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples (30 μl) were injected into a high pressure liquid chromatograph system (HPLC) to immunodeplete the 14 most abundant proteins (alpha-1-antitrypsin, A1-acid glycoprotein, serum albumin, alpha2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoptrotein A-II, complement C3, fibrinogen alpha/beta/gamma, haptoglobin, IgG A, IgG G, IgG M, transthyretin, and serotransferrin) using the Agilent Hu14 Affinity Removal System (Agilent; Wokingham, UK). Protein flow-throughs containing enriched, low-abundance proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM,  60C, 30 min), then  alkylated with iodoacetamide (300 mM, RT, 30 min in the dark) and digested with trypsin (Promega, Heidelberg, Germany) at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w trypsin/protein) overnight at 37°C prior to 2D-nanoUPLC-HDMSE analyses. Peptides were injected into a 2D-RP/RP Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded into an M-Class BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 5 µm, 300 µm X 50 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). We performed a high pH fractionation for 10 min at a flow rate of 2 µL/m using five steps (11%, 14%, 17%, 20%, and 50%) of acetonitrile for the first dimension of chromatography, then peptide loads were carried to a second dimension separation in a nanoACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 Column (1.8 µm, 75 µm X 150 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Peptides trapped in the second dimension were eluted with an acetonitrile gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) over 29 minutes at a flow rate of 0.5 L/min. The measurement was done in MSe mode, using a NanoLock Spray (Waters, Manchester, UK) ionization source in positive ion mode (nanoESI (+)).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against the UniProt revised human proteomic database, version 2019_01 (20,402 entries). For proper spectral processing and database searching conditions, we used Progenesis QI for Proteomics (QIP v4.0) software package with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accounting Informatics (Waters). Then, the multivariate statistical methods in Peptide Ion Stats was used to perform alignment and peak detection, creating a list of peptide ions of interest, after which the ion accounting algorithm determined protein identity. The following parameters were considered to identify peptides: 1) Digestion by trypsin with at most two missed cleavages; 2) variable modification by oxidation (M) and fixed modification by carbamidomethyl (C); 3) a calculated false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% across all conditions, calculated by a reverse databank created on-the-fly; 4) mass error less than 20 ppm; and 5) ion match criteria of at least 2 fragment ions per peptide and at least 5 fragment ions per protein. Identifications that did not satisfy these criteria were rejected. Also, as a default parameter, we apply protein grouping, which hides proteins whose peptides are a subset of other proteins. Keratins were removed from our data.

### Publication Abstract
Antipsychotics are the main line of treatment for schizophrenia. Even though there are significant rates of medication drop out due to side effects and limited response of approximately 50% of patients. This is likely due to incomplete knowledge in how these drugs act at the molecular level. To improve treatment efficacy during the critical early stages of schizophrenia, we aimed to identify molecular signatures at baseline (T0) for prediction of a positive response to the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone after 6&#xa0;weeks (T6) treatment. Blood plasma samples were processed and analyzed by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics using two-dimensional nano-liquid chromatography, coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Data were obtained in MS<sup>E</sup> mode (data-independent acquisition) in combination with ion-mobility (HDMS<sup>E</sup>). We were able to identify a potential panel of proteins that might predict a positive outcome to olanzapine and risperidone treatment. The proteins found to be differentially abundant between T0 and T6 in good responders compared to poor responders were analyzed in silico for enrichment pathways and found to be mostly involved with immune system functions. This data can contribute to better understand the biochemical signaling mechanisms peripherally triggered by antipsychotic medication and eventually used to develop surrogate biomarker tests to help improve treatment outcomes and guide development of new treatment approaches. SIGNIFICANCE: The application of proteomics to the study of the atypical antipsychotic effects on the blood plasma proteome from schizophrenia patients could help in the search for new targets to improve the current therapies, as well as in the development of new therapeutic strategies. In this original article, we provided clues that atypical antipsychotics might be associated with good response by modulating proteins that play a role in inflammation and/or immune system pathways. In addition, the proteins with differential abundance found in the comparison between good and poor responders at the baseline might compose a signature for prediction of response effectiveness.

### Keywords
Antipsychotics, Olanzapine., Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Risperidone, Mass spectrometry, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Neuroproteomic, Biology Institute, Brazil
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP)

### Submitter
Sheila Garcia-Rosa

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Dept. of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Neuroproteomic, Biology Institute, Brazil


