### Accession
PXD002374

### Title
Mollivirus sibericum infection cycle characterization

### Description
We describe a fourth type of giant virus infecting Acanthamoeba, Mollivirus sibericum, isolated from the same permafrost sample than Pithovirus sibericum.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from each time point of infection were in-gel digested and the resulting peptides analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS (4 hours analyses using Q-Exactive Plus).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant software (Cox J & Mann M, 2008, Nat Biotechnol) (version 1.5.1.2). Spectra were searched against the Mollivirus protein sequence databank (523 entries), A. castellanii protein sequence databank (16,206 entries) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein Nter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. LFQ and iBAQ values were calculated from MS intensities of unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Acanthamoeba species are infected by the largest known DNA viruses. These include icosahedral Mimiviruses, amphora-shaped Pandoraviruses, and Pithovirus sibericum, the latter one isolated from 30,000-y-old permafrost. Mollivirus sibericum, a fourth type of giant virus, was isolated from the same permafrost sample. Its approximately spherical virion (0.6-&#xb5;m diameter) encloses a 651-kb GC-rich genome encoding 523 proteins of which 64% are ORFans; 16% have their closest homolog in Pandoraviruses and 10% in Acanthamoeba castellanii probably through horizontal gene transfer. The Mollivirus nucleocytoplasmic replication cycle was analyzed using a combination of "omic" approaches that revealed how the virus highjacks its host machinery to actively replicate. Surprisingly, the host's ribosomal proteins are packaged in the virion. Metagenomic analysis of the permafrost sample uncovered the presence of both viruses, yet in very low amount. The fact that two different viruses retain their infectivity in prehistorical permafrost layers should be of concern in a context of global warming. Giant viruses' diversity remains to be fully explored.

### Keywords
Virus, Nanolc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
EDyP
Exploring the Dynamics of Proteomes (EDyP)

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
Exploring the Dynamics of Proteomes (EDyP)


