### Accession
PXD043914

### Title
Impact of light and thioredoxins on the landscape of the plant thiol-disulfide proteome

### Description
Thiol-based redox regulation is a crucial post-translational mechanism to acclimate plants to changing light availability. Here, we conduct a biotin-switch-based redox proteomics study to systematically investigate dynamics of the thiol-redox network in response to temporal changes in light availability and across genotypes lacking parts of the NTRC/thioredoxin (Trx) systems in the chloroplast. Temporal dynamics revealed light leading to marked decreases in the oxidation states of 75  chloroplast proteins mainly involved in photosynthesis during the first 10 min, followed by their partial re-oxidation after 2-6 hours into the photoperiod. This involved f, m and x-type Trx proteins showing similar light-induced reduction-oxidation dynamics, while NTRC, 2-Cys-Prx and Trx y2 showed an opposing pattern, being more oxidized in the light, compared to the dark. In Arabidopsis trxf1f2, trxm1m2 or ntrc mutants, most protein candidates showed increased oxidation states, compared to the wild type, suggesting their light-dependent dynamics to be related to the NTRC/Trx network. In this context, deficiencies in f- and m-type Trxs were found to have different impacts on the thiol-redox proteome depending on the light environment, being higher in constant and fluctuating light, respectively, while NTRC deficiency having a strong influence in all light conditions. Results indicate the plant redox proteome to be subject to dynamic changes in reductive and oxidative pathways to cooperatively fine-tune photosynthetic and metabolic processes in the light. This involves f-type Trxs and NTRC to play a role in constant light conditions, while both m-type Trxs and NTRC being important to balance changes in protein redox-pattern during dynamic alterations in fluctuating light intensities.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plant, Columbia-0 (Col-0), T-DNA insertion mutant lines trxf1f2 (SALK_128365/GK-020E05-013161), trxm1m2 (SALK_123570/SALK_130686) and ntrc (SALK_012208), were grown in a growth chamber with LED light. The light intensity was set as 150 μmol photons m-2 s-1 with a 12-h-dark/12-h-light regime and temperature was set as 22oC. After three weeks, half of the plants were shifted to fluctuating light (FL) repeatedly exposed to 1 min high light (HL; 550 μmol photons m-2 s-1) and 5 min low light (LL; 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1) in the same dark-to-light regime, the other half remained in initial constant medium light (ML). The plants were then grown for another week, before whole rosette leaves were harvested six hours into the photoperiod. Biotin-switch assays using NEM and biotin-HPDP were performed according to Jaffrey and Snyder, 2001; Liu et al., 2014 with modifications on 50 mg of finely pulverized leaf sample.  In Solution Tryptic Digest and LC-MS/MS Analysis was basically performed as described by Hammel et al., 2018 . Proteins were resuspended in 8M urea / ammonia bicarbonate buffer, digested using LysC and trypsin and desalted using home-made C18-STAGE tips. Finally the peptides were resuspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 2% formic acid.  The LC-MS/MS system (Eksigent nanoLC 425 coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, ABSciex) was operated in μ-flow mode using a 25 μ-emitter needle in the ESI source. Peptides were separated by reversed phase (Triart C18, 5 μm particles, 0.5 mm × 5 mm as trapping column and Triart C18, 3 μm particles, 300 μm × 150 mm as analytical column, YMC) using a flow rate of 4 μl/min and a gradient ramping from 1 to 5% HPLC buffer B (buffer A 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) within 5 min, to 35% buffer B in 73 min and to 50% buffer B in 2 min, followed by wash and equilibration steps. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent analysis with one MS1 spectrum (350 to 1,250 m/z, 250 ms) and 35 triggered MS/MS scans in high sensitivity mode (110 to 1,600 m/z, 50 ms) for >2 times charged ions, resulting in a total cycle time of 2,050 ms. Fragmented precursors were excluded for 10 s and precursors with a response below 150 cps were excluded completely from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS runs was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann 2008). Library generation for peptide spectrum matching was based on Arabidopsis thaliana (UniProt reference proteome UP0000065489) including chloroplast and mitochondrial. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were considered as peptide modifications. Maximal missed cleavages were set to 3 and peptide length to 6 amino acids, the maximal mass to 6,000 Da. Thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were controlled for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Thiol-based redox regulation is a crucial posttranslational mechanism to acclimate plants to changing light availability. Here, we conducted a biotin switch-based redox proteomics study in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) to systematically investigate dynamics of thiol-redox networks in response to temporal changes in light availability and across genotypes lacking parts of the thioredoxin (Trx) or NADPH-Trx-reductase C (NTRC) systems in the chloroplast. Time-resolved dynamics revealed light led to marked decreases in the oxidation states of many chloroplast proteins with photosynthetic functions during the first 10&#x2005;min, followed by their partial reoxidation after 2 to 6&#x2005;h into the photoperiod. This involved f, m, and x-type Trx proteins showing similar light-induced reduction-oxidation dynamics, while NTRC, 2-Cys peroxiredoxins, and Trx y2 showed an opposing pattern, being more oxidized in light than dark. In Arabidopsis trxf1f2, trxm1m2, or ntrc mutants, most proteins showed increased oxidation states in the light compared to wild type, suggesting their light-dependent dynamics were related to NTRC/Trx networks. While NTRC deficiency had a strong influence in all light conditions, deficiencies in f- or m-type Trxs showed differential impacts on the thiol-redox proteome depending on the light environment, being higher in constant or fluctuating light, respectively. The results indicate plant redox proteomes are subject to dynamic changes in reductive and oxidative pathways to cooperatively fine-tune photosynthetic and metabolic processes in the light. The importance of the individual elements of the NTRC/Trx networks mediating these responses depend on the extent of light variability, with NTRC playing a crucial role to balance protein-redox states in rapidly fluctuating light.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Thioredoxin, Redox-proteomics

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
Biozentrum der LMU München Pflanzenmetabolismus Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany

### Submitter
Frederik Sommer

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Geigenberger
Biozentrum der LMU München Pflanzenmetabolismus Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany


