### Accession
PXD027707

### Title
Target identification of CQ31, a selective activator of the CARD8 inflammasome

### Description
Target identification of CQ31 using the photoreactive diazirine-alkyne probe, CQ73.

### Sample Protocol
Six normalized lysate samples from HEK 293T cells were pretreated in duplicate with DMSO (DMSO and probe) or CQ31 (100 uM, competition) for 30 min followed by incubatino with DMSO (DMSO) or photoreactive diazirine-alkyne probe, CQ73 (probe, competition) for 30 min. Samples were then irradiated for 30 min in the Photochemical Reactor equipped with 350 nm lamps at 4°C. Click reagents were added (1 mM CuSO4, 100 uM BTTAA ligand and 100 uM biotin-PEG3 azide, 1 mM TCEP) for 60 min at RT. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and resolubilized in 4% SDS in PBS. Samples were diluted to 0.2% SDS with PBS and high capacity neutroavidin beads were added. After 1 hour of rotating, beads were washed extensively prior to reducing (10 mM DTT), alkylating (20 mM iodoacetamide) and digesting (2 ug trypsin) on bead overnight. The digested peptides were collected and dried. After resuspending, peptide samples were labeled with TMT-sixplex (126 and 127 = DMSO; 128 and 129 = probe; 130 and 131 = competition) and pooled after quencing with hydroxylamine. The combined sample was purified using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce), and divided into two fractions (CQ73TMT1 and CQ73TMT2), and dried with a Genevac EZ-2 evaporator. Mass spectrometry data was collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 by searching against the Uniprot human database supplemented with common contaminant protein sequences and quantifying according to SPS MS3 reporter ions. MaxQuant was run using the following parameters: reporter Ion MS3 – 6plex TMT; variable modifications - methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da), asparagine or glutamine deamidation (+0.984 Da); fixed modification - carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine; digestion – trypsin/P; and a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xpnpep1, Inflammasome, Pepd, Cq31, Tmt-sixplex

### Affiliations
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA
Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, New York, New York, USA.

### Submitter
Andrew Griswold

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Bachovchin
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA


