### Accession
PXD021942

### Title
NSMF promotes the replication stress-induced DNA damage response for genome maintenance

### Description
Proper activation of DNA repair pathways in response to DNA replication stress is critical for maintaining genomic integrity. Due to the complex nature of the replication fork (RF), problems at the RF require multiple proteins, which remain unidentified, for resolution. In this study, we identified the NMDA receptor synaptonuclear signaling and neuronal migration factor (NSMF) as a key replication stress response factor that is important for ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR) activation. NSMF localizes rapidly to stalled RFs and acts as a scaffold to modulate replication protein A (RPA) complex formation with cell division cycle 5-like (CDC5L) and ATR/ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP). Depletion of NSMF compromised phosphorylation and ubiquitination of RPA2 and the ATR signaling cascade, resulting in genomic instability at RFs under DNA replication stress. Consistently, NSMF knockout (KO) mice exhibited increased genomic instability and hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress. NSMF deficiency in human and mouse cells also caused increased chromosomal instability. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that NSMF regulates the ATR pathway and the replication stress response network for genome maintenance and cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation, cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and then lysed in NETN buffer [0.5% Nonidet P-40, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 100 µM Na3VO4, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 50 µg/mL phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)] at 4°C for 10 min. Crude lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min, and supernatants were incubated with protein A-agarose-conjugated primary antibodies or FLAG-M2 affinity gel (Cat# A2220; Sigma-Aldrich). The immunocomplexes were washed three times with NETN buffer and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Western blotting was performed using the antibodies indicated in the figures. Proteins were visualized using secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies (Enzo Life Sciences, New York, NY) and enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Signals were detected using an automated imaging system (ChemiDoc™; Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). To identify NSMF-associated proteins, HEK293T cells were transfected with S-FLAG-streptavidin binding peptide (SFB)-tagged NSMF plasmid. SFB-NSMF and associated proteins were immunoprecipitated from cell lysates using FLAG-M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich), and the immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, bands were sliced from the protein gel and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described by Shevchenko et al. The tryptic digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Samples were eluted using a split gradient of 3-50% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) in 60 min and 50-80% solution B in 10 min followed column wash at 100% solution B for 10 min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (375-1500 m/z), AGC target of 5e5 and max injection time of 50ms. Peptides above threshold 5e3 and charges 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with dynamic exclusion after 1 time for 15 s and 10 ppm tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the uniprot-human DB using the Proteome Dsciverer Sorcerer 2.1 with SEQUEST-based search algorithm, and comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4 Q+S.

### Publication Abstract
Proper activation of DNA repair pathways in response to DNA replication stress is critical for maintaining genomic integrity. Due to the complex nature of the replication fork (RF), problems at the RF require multiple proteins, some of which remain unidentified, for resolution. In this study, we identified the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor synaptonuclear signaling and neuronal migration factor (NSMF) as a key replication stress response factor that is important for ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR) activation. NSMF localizes rapidly to stalled RFs and acts as a scaffold to modulate replication protein A (RPA) complex formation with cell division cycle 5-like (CDC5L) and ATR/ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP). Depletion of NSMF compromised phosphorylation and ubiquitination of RPA2 and the ATR signaling cascade, resulting in genomic instability at RFs under DNA replication stress. Consistently, NSMF knockout mice exhibited increased genomic instability and hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress. NSMF deficiency in human and mouse cells also caused increased chromosomal instability. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that NSMF regulates the ATR pathway and the replication stress response network for genome maintenance and cell survival.

### Keywords
Replication fork, Cdc5l, Lc-ms/ms, Rpa2, Atr

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
School of Life Sciences, Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Hongtae Kim
School of Life Sciences, Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea


