### Accession
PXD023736

### Title
A systematic exploration of antimicrobial resistance to beta-lactams, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones in Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae using proteogenomics

### Description
Background: Antimicrobial resistance is generally studied using a combination of growth inhibition measurements, sometimes in combination with DNA detection methods. However, the actual proteins that cause resistance such as enzymes, efflux pumps and a lack of porins cannot be detected by these methods. Improvements in liquid chromatography (LC) and mass spectrometry (MS) enabled easier and more comprehensive proteome analysis. In the current study, these three methods are combined into a multi-omics approach to analyze resistance against frequently used antibiotics within the beta-lactam, aminoglycoside and fluoroquinolone group in E. coli and K. pneumoniae. Objectives: We aimed to analyze which currently known antimicrobial resistance genes are detected at the protein level using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and to assess whether these could explain beta-lactam, aminoglycoside, and fluoroquinolone resistance in the studied isolates. Furthermore, we aimed to identify significant protein to resistance correlations which have not yet been described and to correlate the abundance of different porins to resistance. Methods: Whole genome sequencing, high-resolution LC-MS/MS and antimicrobial susceptibility testing by broth microdilution were performed for 187 clinical E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates. Resistance genes and proteins were identified using the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD). All proteins were annotated using the NCBI RefSeq database and Prokka. Results & Conclusion: Proteins of small spectrum beta-lactamases, extended spectrum beta-lactamases, AmpC beta-lactamases, carbapenemases, and proteins of 16S ribosomal RNA methyltransferases and aminoglycoside acetyltransferases can be detected in E. coli and K. pneumoniae by LC-MS/MS. The detected mechanisms could explain phenotypic resistance in most of the studied isolates. Differences in the abundance and the primary structure of other proteins such as porins also correlated with resistance. LC-MS/MS is a different and complementary method which can be used to characterize antimicrobial resistance in detail as not only the primary resistance causing mechanisms are detected, but also secondary enhancing resistance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Digests were diluted with 0.1 % trifluoracetic acid to a final peptide concentration of 200 ng/μl. Five μl of each injected sample was analyzed using a nano-LC (Ultimate 3000RS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). After preconcentration and washing the samples on a C18 trap column (1 mm × 300 μm internal diameter (ID), Thermo Fisher Scientific), samples were loaded onto a C18 column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID × 250 mm, 2 μm particle and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a linear 90-minute gradient (4-38% ACN/H20; 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 375-1,500) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 after accumulation of an AGC target of 400,000. A top speed method with a maximum duty cycle of 3 seconds was used. In these 3 seconds the most intense peptide ions from the full scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by HCD (normalized collision energy 30%) and measured in the iontrap with a AGC target of 10,000. Maximum fill times were 50 ms for the full scans and 50 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and only charge states from 2-7 were selected for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated after the first time a precursor was selected for fragmentation and excluded for a period of 60 seconds using a relative mass window of 10 ppm. Lock mass correction was activated to improve mass accuracy of the survey scan. After each measurement the column was rinsed with a blank to minimize carry-over. After each 10 samples a quality control was measured to assess shifting retention times and data quality.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 (Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, Mainz, Germany) was used to analyze the DDA data; default settings were used unless indicated otherwise. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Oxidation was set as a variable modification of methionine, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification of cysteine, and trypsin was set as enzyme. The used protein database was assembled using the WGS data which was first annotated using Prokka v1.13 38.In MaxQuant, the label free quantitation option with matching between runs was used.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance is mostly studied by means of phenotypic growth inhibition determinations, in combination with PCR confirmations or further characterization by means of whole genome sequencing (WGS). However, the actual proteins that cause resistance such as enzymes and a lack of porins cannot be detected by these methods. Improvements in liquid chromatography (LC) and mass spectrometry (MS) enabled easier and more comprehensive proteome analysis. In the current study, susceptibility testing, WGS and MS are combined into a multi-omics approach to analyze resistance against frequently used antibiotics within the beta-lactam, aminoglycoside and fluoroquinolone group in E. coli and K. pneumoniae. Our aim was to study which currently known mechanisms of resistance can be detected at the protein level using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and to assess whether these could explain beta-lactam, aminoglycoside, and fluoroquinolone resistance in the studied isolates. Furthermore, we aimed to identify significant protein to resistance correlations which have not yet been described before and to correlate the abundance of different porins in relation to resistance to different classes of antibiotics. Whole genome sequencing, high-resolution LC-MS/MS and antimicrobial susceptibility testing by broth microdilution were performed for 187 clinical E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates. Resistance genes and proteins were identified using the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD). All proteins were annotated using the NCBI RefSeq database and Prokka. Proteins of small spectrum beta-lactamases, extended spectrum beta-lactamases, AmpC beta-lactamases, carbapenemases, and proteins of 16S ribosomal RNA methyltransferases and aminoglycoside acetyltransferases can be detected in E. coli and K. pneumoniae by LC-MS/MS. The detected mechanisms matched with the phenotype in the majority of isolates. Differences in the abundance and the primary structure of other proteins such as porins also correlated with resistance. LC-MS/MS is a different and complementary method which can be used to characterize antimicrobial resistance in detail as not only the primary resistance causing mechanisms are detected, but also secondary enhancing resistance mechanisms.

### Keywords
Fluoroquinolones, K. pneumoniae, Beta-lactams, Whole genome sequencing, Data dependent acquisition, Aminoglycosides, Liquid chromatography, Minimum inhibitory concentrations, Porins, Comprehensive antibiotic resistance database, Antimicrobial resistance, Mass spectrometry, E. coli

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Lab. Neuro-oncologie en klinische en kanker proteomics Department of Neurology Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Lab. Neuro-oncologie en klinische en kanker proteomics Department of Neurology Erasmus MC


