### Accession
PXD003770

### Title
LC-MS/MS profiling of sample processing optimization of formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues

### Description
Despite a clinical, economic, and regulatory imperative to develop companion diagnostics, precious few new biomarkers have been successfully translated into clinical use, due in part to inadequate protein assay technologies to support large-scale testing of hundreds of candidate biomarkers in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. While the feasibility of using targeted, multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) for quantitative analyses of FFPE tissues has been demonstrated, protocols have not been systematically optimized for robust quantification across a large number of analytes, nor has the performance of immuno-MRM been evaluated. To address this gap, we used a test battery approach coupled with MRM-MS (targeting 515 analytes) to evaluate quantitatively the performance of three extraction protocols in combination with three trypsin digestion protocols (9 processes). An optimum process based on RapiGest buffer extraction and urea-based digestion was identified. The optimized process is generally amenable and enables highly reproducible, multiplex, standardizable quantitative MRM in archival specimens.

### Sample Protocol
Serial 10 µm slices were made from an individual archived FFPE of ER+/Her2+ breast cancer tumor sample and mounted on glass slides. Tissue sections were de-paraffinized, rehydrated and scraped off of the slide into a screw cap microfuge tube. Three solubilization and extraction protocols were conducted.  To each sample containing three FFPE tissue 10 µm sections, solubilization buffer (100 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3, 100 μL of 0.2% RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3, or 62.5 μL of Liquid Tissue) was added and incubated at 80-95 °C with mixing at 1000 rpm for 30-120 minutes.  Samples were then cooled on ice for 5 min. The Liquid Tissue samples were spun at 10000 rcf for 1 min at 20 °C and 137.5 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0 was added and vortexed. For TFE and RapiGest samples, 100 μL of TFE was added (no addition was made for RapiGest samples) and the samples were sonicated twice in cup horn probe (filled with ice water) at 50% power for 30 s. The samples were then incubated at 60-80 °C with mixing at 1000 rpm for 60-120 minutes and then cooled on ice for 5 min.  100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0 was added to RapiGest samples, and the samples were sonicated twice in cup horn probe (filled with ice water) at 50% power for 30 s. Following processing, all samples were stored at -80 °C until the day of digestion. Over 30 μg (by μBCA ) of cell lysate was diluted to 200 μL with denaturing buffer (6M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50% TFE in 50 mM NH4HCO3, or 0.1% RaipGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3; for urea, TFE, and RapiGest protocols, respectively). Lysates were reduced and alkylated and then diluted to 1.1 mL with 50 mM NH4HCO3 (urea protocol was diluted with 1.1 mL of 200 mM TRIS) before trypsin was added and digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against version 3.69 of the Human International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database with decoy sequences using the X!Tandem database search engine with a previously described score plugin, performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 2.0 Da with post search filtering of precursor mass to 50 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at 0.5 Da.  Identifications were made with an FDR < 0.01 based on a decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ffpe, Velos, Breast cancer tumor tissue

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Full Member, Clinical Research

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Paulovich, Amanda G
Full Member, Clinical Research


