### Accession
PXD026732

### Title
Effects of dietary protein from different sources on biotransformation, antioxidation, inflammation and exerted a great impact on lipid metabolism and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation in the rat liver

### Description
In this work, the effects of different sources of meat protein on liver metabolic enzymes were investigated. Rats were fed for 90 days with semisynthetic diets in which casein was fully replaced by isolated soybean, fish, chicken, pork, or beef proteins. Then, liver proteomics was performed using iTRAQ and LC−ESI−MS/MS. The results indicated that intake of meat protein diets significantly reduced the protein levels of CYP450s, GSTs, UGTs, and SULTs compared to those of the casein and soybean protein diet groups. The total antioxidant capacity and lipid peroxidation values did not differ between four meat protein diet groups and the casein diet group. However, GSH activity in the fish, chicken, and beef protein groups was significantly higher than those of the casein and soybean protein groups. The beef protein diet significantly upregulated the expression of immune-related proteins. The Keap1-Nrf2-ARE signaling pathway was suggested to involve the diet-mediated regulation of biotransformation, inflammation, and redox status.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction. Liver proteins were extracted according to the procedures of Song et al. with minor modifications.Briefly, 0.1 g of liver samples were homogenized for 60 s in 1 mL iced protein lysis buffer (Beyotime P0013K) containing 1% protease inhibitors (SIGMA P8340) and 1% protease inhibitors (SIGMA P0044). The homogenates were centrifuged (4°C, 16000g) for 1 h, and the pellets were discarded. The supernatant and chilled acetones with 10% (v/v) TCA (1:5) were mixed and stored in −20 °C for 4 h . The samples were centrifuged (4 °C, 16000g) for 15 min, and the pellets were collected. After washing with chilled acetone, the pellets dissolved in UA buffer (8 M urea + 0.1M/HCl at pH 8.5), sonicated, and centrifuged (4 °C, 16000g) for 15 min, and the supernatant used for the quantification of protein concentration. A certain volume of protein samples (150 μg protein) were mixed with 400 μL o f U A b uffer in the ultrafiltration tube and centrifuged (4°C, 14000g) for 15 min. The samples were mixed with 200 μL of UA buffer and 50 mM DTT, and then incubated at 60 °C. Subsequently, 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) was added and incubated for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. The supernatant was mixed with 100 μL of dissolution buffer (from iTRAQ kit). Then, the mixture was centrifuged (4, 30000g) for 15 min and collected the pellets. This step was repeated twice to remove iodoacetamide. The pellets were trypsin digested (protein/trypsin was 30:1) at 37 °C for 16 h,then centrifuged and quantified by a NanoDrop spectrophotometer.  ITRAQ Labeling and High pH Reverse Phase Fractionation. Peptides were labeled by an 8-plex iTRAQ reagent kit (Applied Biosystems) based on the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptides samples mixed with an iTRAQ reagent and incubated at 20 °C for 2 h.Then, all the labeled samples were pooled and vacuum-dried. A total of 11 peptide mixtures were prepared. Labeled peptide fractionation was performed by high pH reverse phase fractionation chromatography. First, the labeled peptides were reconstituted in 100 μL o f b uffer A (98% acetonitrile, 2% H2O) and loaded onto the column. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min using a gradient of 97% to 3% buffer A and 3% to 97% buffer B (2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O) for 60 min. After that, elution was measured by absorbance at 214 nm. The eluted peptides were collected every 1 min and separated into 60 fractions. According to the differences in the fraction polarity (fraction collection time), these fractions were mixed into 8 samples and vacuum-dried.  Nano LC-MS/MS Conditions. The identification of samples was performed as described previously. After dissolving in 0.1% formate, the peptides (1.5 g) were loaded onto a column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Subsequently, the peptides eluted on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C18, 75 μm × 10 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) by a gradient of 97% to 3% buffer A (0.1% formate) and 3% to 97% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formate) at 300 nL/min flow rate over 160 min. The MS/MS conditions were in accordance with a previous study.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. Data analysis was handled with Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein was identified by a Sequest HT engine against the UniprotKB Rattus norvegicus database (updated January, 2016). Searching parameters were in accordance with a previous study.The selection of differential protein based on the average of |Fold Change (FC)| ≥ 2.0 in meat protein diet groups (fish, F; chicken, C; pork, P; beef, B) was compared to the other two groups (soybean, S; casein, L).

### Publication Abstract
Associations between meat diets and human health have been widely considered. In this study, we focused on long-term effects of different sources of meat protein on liver metabolic enzymes. For 90 days, rats were fed with semisynthetic diets that differed only with protein source. Casein was used as a reference and isolated soybean, fish, chicken, pork, and beef proteins were compared. Changes in liver proteome were determined by isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling and liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS). Fish and pork protein diets upregulated the gene expression involved in cholesterol synthesis and esterification, and pork protein diet also upregulated the gene expression of high-density lipoprotein receptor and low-density lipoprotein receptor. Chicken, pork, and beef protein diets upregulated the gene expression involved in cholesterol reverse transport and bile acid production, which increased the total cholesterol level in the fish protein diet group. Total cholesterol levels in liver were lower in the pork and beef protein diet groups. Triglyceride levels in liver were lower in chicken, pork, and beef protein diet groups. Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 was upregulated by chicken, pork and beef protein diets, and promoted the degradation and metabolism of triglyceride, resulting in lower triglyceride in the three diet groups. Meat proteins at a recommended level could be more conducive to cholesterol degradation, triglyceride decomposition, and energy balance maintenance at a healthy level. The findings give a new insight into the associations between meat diet intake and human health.

### Keywords
Rat liver, Biotransformation, Proteomics, Dietary protein, Inflammation

### Affiliations
College of Food Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China
570141984@qq.com

### Submitter
Zixin Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Chunbao Li
College of Food Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China


