### Accession
PXD011469

### Title
Threonine dehydratase couples L-cysteine metabolism to cadmium resistance in Pseudomonas stutzeri 273 through cadmium sulfide nanoparticle biomineralization

### Description
Cysteine is an amino acid containing sulfhydryl (-SH) group which is the basis of cysteine involved in sulfur metabolism and heavy metal detoxification in microorganisms. Here, we demonstrate that adding L-cysteine significantly improves the cadmium resistance and removal ability of Pseudomonas stutzeri 273. Threonine dehydratase (TSD) connects L-cysteine metabolism and cadmium resistance through CdS nanoparticle biomineralization with the ability of catalyzing L-cysteine desulfuration and H2S generation in P. stutzeri 273. Gene knockout of TSD in P. stutzeri 273 results in the decrease of L-cysteine and cadmium resistance, decline of H2S generation, and reduction of CdS biosynthesis ability.

### Sample Protocol
Strains, media, and chemicals. Pseudomonas stutzeri 273 was isolated from the sediment samples collected by RV KEXUE in the East China Sea in the year of 2014 (35). P. stutzeri 273 and its mutants were incubated in LB broth (10 g/L peptone, 10 g/L NaCl, 5 g/L yeast extract, pH 7.0) under vigorous agitation at speed of 150 rpm at 28 ℃. Escherichia coli DH5α was used as the host for plasmid construction.  E. coli S17-1 was used as a vector donor in conjugation. E. coli BL21 was used for recombinant protein overproduction. E. coli DH5α, E. coli SY327, E. coli S17-1, and E. coli BL21 were grown in LB medium at 37 °C with shaking speed of 150 rpm. Solid medium was made by adding 15 g/L agar. Antibiotics used for deletion marker selection were added at the following final concentrations: 25 μg/mL chloramphenicol (Cm), 25 μg/mL gentamicin (Gm), 100 μg/mL ampicillin (Amp), and 100 μg/mL kanamycin (Kan).

### Data Protocol
P. stutzeri 273 is collected in China General Microbiological Culture Collection Center under collection number CGMCC 7.265. The complete genome sequence of P. stutzeri 273 has been deposited at GenBank under the accession number CP015641(39). The gene sequences of threonine dehydratase (TSD), cystathionine γ-lyase1 (CSE1) and cystathionine γ-lyase2 (CSE2) were obtained from GenBank. The accession number of the three genes were shown in Supplementary Table S1. The consensus phylogenetic tree of CSE1, CSE2 and TSD in P. stutzeri 273 with other related proteins obtained from GenBank was constructed by the neighbor-joining method with MEGA 7.0.

### Publication Abstract
Biomineralization is often used by microorganisms to sequester heavy metal ions and provides a potential means for remediating increasing levels of heavy metal pollution. Bacteria have been shown to utilize cysteine for the biomineralization of metal sulfide. Indeed, in the present study, the supplement of L-cysteine was found to significantly improve both cadmium resistance and removal abilities of a deep-sea bacterium Pseudomonas stutzeri 273 through cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoparticle biomineralization. With a proteomic approach, threonine dehydratase of P. stutzeri 273 (psTD) was proposed to be a key factor enhancing bacterial cadmium resistance through catalyzing L-cysteine desulfuration, H<sub>2</sub>S generation and CdS nanoparticle biomineralization. Consistently, deletion of the gene encoding psTD in P. stutzeri 273 resulted in the decline of H<sub>2</sub>S generation, decrease of cadmium resistance, and reduction of cadmium removal ability, confirming the unique function of psTD directing the formation of CdS nanoparticles. Correspondingly, the single-enzyme biomineralization of CdS nanoparticle driven by psTD was further developed, and psTD was shown to act as a capping reagent for the mineralization reaction, which controlling the size and structure of nanocrystals. Our results provide important clues for the construction of engineered bacteria for cadmium bioremediation and widen the synthesis methods of nanomaterials.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas stutzeri 273, Qrt-pcr, Mutants

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Chaomin Sun
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China


