### Accession
PXD010553

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Brain and Medullar Reveals the Dysregulation of Myosin Complex and Striated Muscle Contraction Pathway in ALS mouse model

### Description
In this study, we used this strategy to reveal the proteome changes of cerebral cortex, hippocampus and medulla of SOD1*G93A mice. Hundreds of changed proteins and many of important biological process were found in the ALS mouse brain.

### Sample Protocol
1 Hippocampus, cerebral cortex and medulla isolation 16 weeks old SOD1*G93A mice and littermates were euthanized using 0.1% pentobarbital and perfused with 0.01 M PBS. The cerebral cortex, hippocampus and medulla were then dissected on ice and stored at -80 °C for later use.  2 Sample preparation All the tissues transfer to ice-cold homogenization buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× cocktail [Roche, IN, USA]) and sonicated for 10 cycles (15 second on and 15 second off). Protein solutions were obtained by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 12,000 rpm. Nanodrop 2000C (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) was used for the detection of protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  3 TMT labeling In each group, six individual samples were pooled together with a total of 100 µg protein and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C, then methylated by 25 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The reduced protein was digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:100 w/w) and desalted with reversed-phase column chromatography (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The digestions were then dried by a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 100 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 200 mM, pH 8.5). 0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 41μl acetonitrile was used for protein labeling and the mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 1 h and quenched by hydroxylamine. Samples were labeled by TMT as follow: [TMT-126, hippocampus of WT mice; TMT-127, hippocampus of SOD1*G93A mice; TMT-128, cortex of WT mice; TMT-129, cortex of SOD1*G93A mice]; [TMT-130, medulla of WT mice; and TMT-131, medulla of SOD1*G93A mice]. All the labeled peptides were mixed together, desalted, dried and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1% FA (as shown in Figure 2). Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit was used for fraction before analyzed by LC-MS/MS according to the manufactures instruction.    4 Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS The labeled digestion fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). A silica capillary column (75 μl internal diameter (ID), 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μl; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA) and condition of a 120 min gradient elution was used for the further separation of fractions of labeled peptides. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was manipulated by Xcalibur 2.1.2 software in a data-dependent acquisition mode. A single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (400-1, 800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) was followed by top 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, HCD).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithms embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) against the Uniprot_mouse database (download from uniprot database on March 22th, 2018). The search criteria were set according to the recommended parameters with the following alterations: trypsin was used for protein digestion and two missed cleavage sites were allowed, static modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT6-plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminal of peptides), and the oxidation (methionine, M) were set as dynamic modification. 20 ppm was set as precursor ion mass tolerances for all the MS data acquired from the Orbitrap mass analyzer and 20 mmu was used for the MS2 spectra data. Protein changes were evaluated by the comparison of reporter ions from each group, both the 1.5 and 0.67 were set as up and downregulation thresholds

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Muscle contraction and hippocampus, Sod1

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518055, China.
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention

### Submitter
Benhong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Benhong Xu
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518055, China.


