### Accession
PXD028597

### Title
A multi-omics approach identifies pancreatic cancer cell extracellular vesicles as mediators of the unfolded protein response in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

### Description
Although cancer derived extracellular vesicles (cEVs) are thought to play a pivotal role in promoting cancer progression events, their precise effect on neighboring normal cells is unknown.  In this study, we investigated the impact of pancreatic cancer ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) derived EVs on recipient non-tumorigenic pancreatic normal epithelial cells upon internalization. We show that PDAC cEVs increase the proliferation and invasive capability of recipient normal cells. We further demonstrate that cEVs induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) in recipient normal pancreatic epithelial cells within 24 hours. Subsequently, leveraging a layered multi-omics approach, we analyzed EV cargo from a panel of 6 PDAC and 2 normal pancreas cell lines, using multiple EV isolation methods. We found that cEVs were enriched for an array of biomolecules which can induce or regulate ER stress and the UPR, including palmitic acid, sphingomyelins, metabolic regulators of tRNA charging and proteins responsible for protein trafficking and degradation. We further show that palmitic acid, at doses relevant to those found in cEVs, is sufficient to induce ER stress in normal pancreas cells. These results suggest that cEV cargo packaging may be designed to disseminate proliferative and invasive characteristics upon internalization by distant recipient normal cells, hitherto unreported. This study is among the first to highlight a major role for PDAC cEVs to induce stress in recipient normal pancreas cells, that may modulate a systemic response leading to altered phenotypes. For the first time, our study implicates cEV transported palmitic acid as a potential driver in this process. These findings reveal new paths of investigation toward understanding the role of lipids packaged as cEV cargo providing advantage to proliferating tumor cells in promoting cell transformation in the surrounding microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample preparation: 50μL of EVs were dried by lyophilization. Samples were then lysed to extract proteins using the phase-transfer surfactant (PTS) aided procedure66. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubation in 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were next diluted fivefold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37°C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C. To remove the PTS surfactants from the samples, the samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% TFA, and ethyl acetate solution was added at 1:1 ratio. The mixture was vortexed for 2 min and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The organic phase (top layer) was removed, and the aqueous phase was collected. This step was repeated once more. The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted using Top-Tip C18 tips (Glygen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C. 2. LC-MS/MS Analysis: 20% (~1 μg) of each dried peptide sample was dissolved in 10.5 μL of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid with 3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile containing spiked-in indexed Retention Time Standard containing 11 artificially synthetic peptides (Biognosys). The spiked-in 11-peptides standard mixture was used to account for any variation in retention times and to normalize abundance levels among samples. 10 μL of each sample was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were captured on a 2-cm Acclaim PepMap trap column and separated on a heated 50-cm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing C18 resin. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 60-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 300 nL/min. The UHPLC was coupled online with a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 375 to 1,500 with the resolution of 60,000) was followed by MS/MS of the 15 most intense ions (30,000 resolution; normalized collision energy - 28%; automatic gain control target (AGC) - 2E4, maximum injection time - 200 ms; 60sec exclusion].

### Data Protocol
3. Proteomics data processing: Raw data files were searched directly against the human Swiss-Prot database updated on July 16, 2019 with no redundant entries, using Byonic (Protein Metrics) and Sequest search engines loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS2 tolerance was set at 20ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da), and variable modifications of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues and acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N terminus of proteins. Search was performed with full trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false-discovery rates of proteins and peptides were set at 0.01. All protein and peptide identifications were grouped, and any redundant entries were removed. Only unique peptides and unique master proteins were reported. 4. Label-free quantitation: All data were quantified using the label-free quantitation node of Precursor Ions Quantifier through the Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the quantification of proteomic data, the intensities of peptides were extracted with initial precursor mass tolerance set at 10 ppm, minimum number of isotope peaks as 2, maximum ΔRT of isotope pattern multiplets – 0.2 min, PSM confidence FDR of 0.01, with hypothesis test of ANOVA, maximum RT shift of 5 min, pairwise ratio-based ratio calculation, and 100 as the maximum allowed fold change. The abundance levels of all peptides and proteins were normalized to the spiked-in internal iRT standard. For calculations of fold-change between the groups of proteins, total protein abundance values were added together, and the ratios of these sums were used to compare proteins within different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Although cancer-derived extracellular vesicles (cEVs) are thought to play a pivotal role in promoting cancer progression events, their precise effect on neighbouring normal cells is unknown. In this study, we investigated the impact of pancreatic cancer ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) derived EVs on recipient non-tumourigenic pancreatic normal epithelial cells upon internalization. We demonstrate that cEVs are readily internalized and induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) in treated normal pancreatic epithelial cells within 24&#xa0;h. We further show that PDAC cEVs increase cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and that these changes are regulated at least in part, by the UPR mediator DDIT3. Subsequently, these cells release several inflammatory cytokines. Leveraging a layered multi-omics approach, we analysed EV cargo from a panel of six PDAC and two normal pancreas cell lines, using multiple EV isolation methods. We found that cEVs were enriched for an array of biomolecules which can induce or regulate ER stress and the UPR, including palmitic acid, sphingomyelins, metabolic regulators of tRNA charging and proteins which regulate trafficking and degradation. We further show that palmitic acid, at doses relevant to those found in cEVs, is sufficient to induce ER stress in normal pancreas cells. These results suggest that cEV cargo packaging may be designed to disseminate proliferative and invasive characteristics upon internalization by distant recipient normal cells, hitherto unreported. This study is among the first to highlight a major role for PDAC cEVs to induce stress in treated normal pancreas cells that may modulate a systemic response leading to altered phenotypes. These findings highlight the importance of EVs in mediating disease aetiology and open potential areas of investigation toward understanding the role of cEV lipids in promoting cell transformation in the surrounding microenvironment.

### Keywords
Human, Extracellular vesicles, Pancreas, Cancer

### Affiliations
Professor of Oncology and Biochemistry Associate Director: Center for Metabolomic Studies. Georgetown University Medical Center Washington, DC, USA 20007
Georgetown University Medical Center

### Submitter
Amrita Cheema

### Lab Head
Dr Amrita K Cheema
Professor of Oncology and Biochemistry Associate Director: Center for Metabolomic Studies. Georgetown University Medical Center Washington, DC, USA 20007


