### Accession
PXD036934

### Title
Structural and functional analysis of peptides derived from KEX2-processed repeat proteins in agaricomycetes using reverse genetics and peptidomics

### Description
Bioactivities of fungal peptides are of interest for basic research and therapeutic drug development. Some of these peptides are derived from “KEX2-processed repeat proteins” (KEPs), a recently defined class of precursor proteins that contain multiple peptide cores flanked by KEX2 protease cleavage sites. Genome mining has revealed that KEPs are widespread in the fungal kingdom. Their functions are largely unknown. Here, we present the first in-depth structural and functional analysis of KEPs in a basidiomycete. We bioinformatically identified KEP-encoding genes in the genome of the model agaricomycete Coprinopsis cinerea and established a detection protocol for the derived peptides by overexpressing the C. cinerea KEPs in the yeast Pichia pastoris. Using this protocol, which includes peptide extraction and mass spectrometry with data analysis using the search engine Mascot, we confirmed the presence of several KEP-derived peptides in C. cinerea as well as in the edible mushrooms Lentinula edodes, Pleurotus ostreatus and Pleurotus eryngii. Processing by the dipeptidyl aminopeptidase STE13 is likely involved in the biosynthesis of some of these peptides. While CRISPR-mediated knockouts of the C. cinerea kep genes did not result in any detectable phenotype, knockout of kex genes caused defects in mycelial growth and fruiting body formation. These results suggest that KEP-derived peptides may play a role in the interaction of C. cinerea with the biotic environment and that the KEP-processing KEX proteases target a variety of substrates in agaricomycetes, including some important for mycelial growth and differentiation. In the past, fungal RiPPs and KEP-derived peptides were mostly studied using forward genetics, where the peptides were first isolated and characterized and only then the corresponding precursor genes were identified (e.g., ustiloxins, phomopsins, candidalysin, Rep1, omphalotin). In this paper, we established a protocol for the identification of KEP-derived peptides in fungal samples by a combination of reverse genetics and peptidomics. The protocol was developed using the model agaricomycete Coprinopsis cinerea, but is also applicable to other fungi. In a first step, we bioinformatically screened the predicted proteome of C. cinerea for KEP-encoding genes. Second, we expressed six different KEP genes from C. cinerea in the yeast Pichia pastoris to (1) establish a protocol for extraction and detection of KEP-derived peptides by mass spectrometry in P. pastoris culture supernatants known for their low complexity in terms of proteins and peptides (Higgins 1995); (2) obtain an indication that the detected KEPs were indeed processed to peptides, and (3) use the structures of the detected peptides as a guide for which peptides to expect in C. cinerea in terms of peptide length and peptide modifications. In a third step, we applied the established peptide extraction and detection method to detect KEP-derived peptides in culture supernatants and tissue samples of the agaricomycetes C. cinerea, Lentinula edodes, Pleurotus ostreatus and Pleurotus eryngii.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide extractions from liquid medium, including C. cinerea bead assay samples and P. pastoris supernatant samples, samples were either purified using Oasis HLB 1 cc vac cartridges (10 mg sorbent, 30 μm, Waters, US), Sep-Pak 1 cc cartridges (10 mg sorbent, 30 μm, Waters, US) or first dried using speedvac and then purified using SP3 (Single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation, Hughes et al. 2019). For initial peptide extractions of P. pastoris samples, extraction of KEP 497993 heterologous expression samples was tested using Sep-Pak C18 and Oasis HLB cartridges. The concentration of extracted peptides was highest with HLB cartridges, so they were used for extraction of all Pichia samples. For peptide extractions from fungal tissues, 30 mg of fruiting body caps, stipes and mycelium or 10 mg of basidiospores were soaked in 1.5 ml of methanol for 1 hour at 37°C while gently shaking. The methanol was then moved to a new tube and evaporated by speedvac. Other tested parameters included different solvents like water and acetonitrile and different soaking temperatures of room temperature, 37°C and 99°C (for water). After drying, the samples were reconstituted in ddH2O and passed through a 10 kDa Amicon filter. The peptides were then either purified using HLB columns, or dried using a speedvac for SP3. Solid phase extraction using HLB and Sep-Pak cartridges were done according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, the cartridges were conditioned with 1 ml of methanol, equilibrated with 1 ml of ddH2O and loaded with the aqueous samples. The cartridges were washed with 1 ml of 5% methanol and then eluted with 1 ml of 100% methanol. The samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in MS buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). For SP3 peptide extraction, dried samples were resuspended in 25 µl of 50 mM HEPES buffer and processed following the official guidelines with modifications (Hughes et al. 2019). Magnetic hydrophilic and hydrophobic beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBead Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles, GE Life, Germany) were mixed 1:1 and washed three times with ddH2O at a concentration of 10 µg/µl and then resuspended at a concentration of 5 µg/µl. The samples were then gently mixed with 15 µl of bead suspension. 800 µl of acetone were added and the samples carefully mixed. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 8 min, then moved to a magnetic rack for 2 min. The supernatants were removed and the beads washed twice with 200 µl of 95% acetonitrile. Then, the beads were resuspended in 25 µl of 2% DMSO for peptide elution. The samples were sonicated for 1 min and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The tubes were moved to the magnetic rack and the supernatant transferred to a new tube. The samples were dried by speedvac and redissolved in MS buffer. The approximate peptide concentration was determined using nanodrop (Witec, Switzerland) and samples were diluted to concentrations of 2 mg/ml. Samples were measured using liquid chromatography higher-energy collisional dissociation tandem mass spectrometry (LC-HCD-MS/MS) on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system. Chromatographic separation was performed using trapped elution using a nanoEASE Symmetry C18 100 A column (5 µm, 1/PK 180 µm x 20 mm), followed by analytical elution using a nanoEase HSS C18 T3 100 A column (1.8 µm, 1 P/K 75 µm x 250 mm). Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. For the initial measurement of Pichia pastoris supernatant samples as well as C. cinerea supernatant and tissue samples, the samples were measured using an untargeted approach. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B in 90 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min, followed by a linear gradient from 30% to 95% in 5 min and a return to 5% in 10 min. Full MS was measured using data-dependent acquisition with a resolution of 120 000, automated gain control (AGC) target 3 x 106, scan range 350 to 1500 m/z and maximum IT 50 ms. MS/MS spectra acquisition was performed using a resolution of 30 000, AGC target 105, maximum IT 50 ms. The minimum AGC was 4.5 x 103 and the dynamic exclusion time 30 s

### Data Protocol
In the subsequent Mascot search, the mgf file containing all MS/MS spectra of the measurement was searched against databases containing the C. cinerea KEPs, the C. cinerea proteome (Coprinopsis cinerea AmutBmut pab1.2, from https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov, manually annotated) or L. edodes and P. ostreatus KEPs (Le Marquer et al. 2019; Umemura 2020). The search settings were: no enzyme cleavage, error windows of 10 ppm for peptide tolerance and 0.05 Da for MS/MS tolerance, measured on a Q-exactive instrument and with an enabled decoy database. Variable modifications that were tested included N-terminal pyro-glutamation, C-terminal amidation, hydroxylation, oxidation and methylation. To avoid false-positives, a false-discovery-rate was calculated, based on matches from a “decoy” database containing only randomized and inverted sequences. No true matches are expected from the decoy database, so the number of false matches is a good estimate of the number of false positives from the target database. In the analysis of P. pastoris samples, we set the false-discovery rate in Mascot to 1%, meaning that the risk of a false positive being called significant is lower than 1%. For all the potential KEP-derived peptide candidates from C. cinerea, L. edodes, P. ostreatus and P. eryngii, the Mascot hits were manually screened for interesting peptide candidates. Peptides with fewer than six residues were excluded, while modified peptides or peptides with a promising sequence (e.g., a repetitive core region flanked by KEX2 cleavage sites) were chosen for a verification using synthetic peptides. We ordered synthetic peptides at Genscript Biotech (USA, pyro-QVPVDEPA) and EZBiolab (USA, all other peptides) at 85% purity for verification. We measured the synthetic peptides with a concentration of 100 ng/ml. An initial comparison of the spectra of the synthetic peptides to the fungal samples was done using the software Skyline 20.2.0.343 (MacCoss Lab Software, USA) on the basis of the (isotope) dot product ((i)dotp). For a final confirmation of peptide presence and for figures, the retention times and MS/MS spectra were compared manually in the software Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific, USA). Once the peptides were confirmed, samples were remeasured using a targeted approach with an inclusion list containing the masses of the peptides of interest. For the time course samples (Fig. S5) and the knockout comparison samples (Fig. 6), a shorter linear gradient was used from 5% to 30% acetonitrile in 50 min, followed by a linear gradient from 30% to 95% in 5 min and a return to 5% in 10 min. We performed BLAST searches in the respective fungal species using the confirmed peptide sequences to ensure that they do not arise from cleavage of another protein. The abundance of peptides in fungal samples was quantified by comparing the peak area values of the extracted ion chromatogram to the respective synthetic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fungi, Pleurotus eryngii, Pleurotus ostreatus, Ms/ms database search, Mascot, Peptidomics, Coprinopsis cinerea, Lentinula edodes

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
ETH Zürich, Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Eva Vogt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Künzler
ETH Zürich, Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland


