### Accession
PXD018819

### Title
Herpes simplex virus  infections of cortical brain cells:  the proteome and secretome of the host

### Description
Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) infections of the brain cause a severe neuroinflammatory condition – Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE). During the acute phase, HSV-1 changes the host cells to facilitate its own replication and to escape host immunity. However, the host reacts with a severe neuroinflammation which may be beneficial for viral clearance or detrimental inducing neuronal damage and hindering regeneration. Indeed, surviving HSE-patients often suffer from an incomplete regeneration with memory deficits and other neuropsychiatric symptoms. HSV-1 infects different cell types such as neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes all of which participate in the host response. This includes a changed paracrine signaling. However, the host response has not been characterized on a global molecular level so far. Here, we infected primary mixed cortical cells with HSV-1 and analyzed the proteome and the secretome of the host. We identified 28 differentially regulated proteins in the host proteome involved in endocytosis, vesicle trafficking at the golgi-apparatus, and inflammasome formation. In the secretome, we identified 71 differentially regulated proteins with a subset involved in axonal regeneration. Endocytosis and vesicle trafficking are critical for viral entry and envelopment. The suppression of inflammasome activity is crucial for viral spread. Thus, our proteomic analysis hints for potential molecules regulating viral production and spread in brain cells. Moreover, the secretome analysis gives rise to a set of proteins involved in neuroregeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and each lane was cut into 4 gel slices. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and peptides were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS. nanoLC was combined with LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) and run in DDA mode under standard conditions.

### Data Protocol
raw data files were searched with the MaxQuant software against the reviewed mouse entries of Uniprot. An FDR of less than 0.01 was applied on peptide and protein level. Maxquant results were further analyzed by Perseus software. Replicates were grouped and compared and different visualization methods were applied. Proteins were stated up- or down-regulated if a p-value less than 0.05 and an altered abundance of at least factor 2 was reached.

### Publication Abstract
Infections of the brain with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) cause life-threatening Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) characterized by viral replication in neurons and neuro-inflammation including an infiltration of peripheral immune cells. HSV-1 reprograms host cells to foster its own replication and for immune evasion, but eventually the immune responses clear the infection in most patients. However, many survivors suffer from long-term neuronal damage and cannot regenerate all brain functions. HSV-1 influences the physiology of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia, and significantly changes their protein expression and secretion pattern. To characterize temporal changes upon HSV-1 infection in detail, we inoculated mixed primary cultures of the murine brain cortex, and performed quantitative mass spectrometry analyses of the cell-associated proteome and the secretome. We identified 28 differentially regulated host proteins influencing inflammasome formation and intracellular vesicle trafficking during endocytosis and secretion. The NIMA-related kinase 7 (NEK7), a critical component of the inflammasome, and ArfGap1, a regulator of endocytosis, were significantly up-regulated upon HSV-1 infection. In the secretome, we identified 71 proteins including guidance cues regulating axonal regeneration, such as semaphorin6D, which were enriched in the conditioned media of HSV-1 infected cells. Modulation of inflammasome activity and intracellular membrane traffic are critical for HSV-1 cell entry, virus assembly, and intracellular spread. Our proteome analysis provides first clues on host factors that might dampen the inflammasome response and modulate intracellular vesicle transport to promote HSV infection of the brain. Furthermore, our secretome analysis revealed a set of proteins involved in neuroregeneration that might foster neuronal repair processes to restore brain functions after clearance of an HSV-1 infection.

### Keywords
Encephalitis, Hsv-1, Nek7, Inflammasome, Arfgap1, Herpes simplex virus-1, Semaphorin, Glutathione, Rab gtpases

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School
Hannover Medical School
Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Picjh

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Hannover Medical School


