### Accession
PXD028343

### Title
PROTEOMIC PROFILING OF AMNIOS FOR PRETERM BIRTH BIOMARKER DISCOVERY

### Description
Spontaneous preterm birth (PTB) complicates about 12% of pregnancies worldwide, remaining the main cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. A consistent number of PTB are caused by microbial-induced preterm labor, mediated by an inflammatory process, that threatens both maternal and newborn health. In search for novel predictive biomarkers of PTB and PROM, and to improve understanding of infection related PTB, we performed a proteomic analysis of amnions from premature newborns. Samples were studied by Orbitrap mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analyses. A total of 6352 proteins were identified. A ranked core of 159 proteins maximized the discrimination between the different clinical stratification groups of amnions allowing to distinguish FIR 0 from FIR 3, stratified in function of MIR grade, among which Matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9) was the top differentially expressed protein. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of the core proteins showed significant changes in the biological pathways associated to inflammation and regulation of immune and infection response. Data suggest that the conditions determining PTB would be a transversal event, secondary to the maternal inflammatory response causing a breakdown in fetal-maternal tolerance, with fetal inflammation being severe than maternal one. We also highlight matrix metallopeptidase-9 as a potential amnion-associated predictive biomarker of PTB that can be assayed in the maternal serum, for future investigation.

### Sample Protocol
The amnion membrane samples were cleaned up from other placentas membranes, measured (about 2x2 cm), and then  homogenized in 400 ul of Guanidine Lysis Buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5), in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors, by a T 10 basic ULTRA-TURRAX homogenizer (IKA). The process required six cycles of homogenization of 20 sec. Then the homogenized samples were heated 10 min at 95°C and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cicles of 30 sec.  After the lysis process samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14000 g. The proteins amounts of the supernatants were measured by Tryptophan method [1] and 100 ug of each sample were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by FASP method [2] using 30k Vivacom filtration devices (Sartorius). Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin and LysC (at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme to sample protein respectively, both in micrograms), mixing and incubating at 37°C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software 15 version 1.6.14.0. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match). For peptide identification a minimum length of 6 amino acids was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 March 2020). In the processing the Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications and the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C).

### Publication Abstract
Spontaneous preterm birth (PTB) complicates about 12% of pregnancies worldwide, remaining the main cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Spontaneous preterm birth PTBs is often caused by microbial-induced preterm labor, mediated by an inflammatory process threatening both maternal and newborn health. In search for novel predictive biomarkers of PTB and preterm prelabor rupture of the membranes (pPROM), and to improve understanding of infection related PTB, we performed an untargeted mass spectrometry discovery study on 51 bioptic mid zone amnion samples from premature babies. A total of 6352 proteins were identified. Bioinformatics analyses revealed a ranked core of 159 proteins maximizing the discrimination between the selected clinical stratification groups allowing to distinguish conditions of absent (FIR 0) from maximal Fetal Inflammatory Response (FIR 3) stratified in function of Maternal Inflammatory Response (MIR) grade. Matrix metallopeptidase-9 (MMP-9) was the top differentially expressed protein. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of the core proteins showed significant changes in the biological pathways associated to inflammation and regulation of immune and infection response. Data suggest that the conditions determining PTB would be a transversal event, secondary to the maternal inflammatory response causing a breakdown in fetal-maternal tolerance, with fetal inflammation being more severe than maternal one. We also highlight matrix metallopeptidase-9 as a potential predictive biomarker of PTB that can be&#xa0;assayed&#xa0;in the maternal serum, for future investigation.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Preterm birth, Amnios, Proteomics, Inflammation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


