### Accession
PXD025054

### Title
LC-MSMS study of hiPSC-derived β-like cells in different 3D Eevironments

### Description
In this project hiPSC-derived β-like cells were studied in two different 3D enviromnets; size-adjusted cell aggregates (using Aggrewell™ plates) and inside alginate capsules. The hiPSC derived from a patient with maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1), which is a monogenic diabetes form, caused by a mutation in the HNF4A gene. We also generated and included a CRISPR/cas9 corrected isogenic control line. Human islets were also included as positive control.  In the data analysis we compared to proteome of the cells in 3D environments compared to the frat 2D enviromnet. We found HNF4A mutation specific effects with both distinct 3D environments, where the cells are challenged differentially in term of oxygen, nutrient supply and cell-to-cell contact. We identified HNF4A mutation-specific phenotypes, including a unique proteome signature suggesting metabolic changes in the alginate bead environment, and mutation-specific cellular phenotypes and a unique proteome signature in the aggregation environment.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to cell lysis, alginate encapsulated celle were retrieved form the alginate beads by performing decapsulation. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS, protease inhibitors (Roche complete with EDTA), pH 8.5), and homogenized by pipetting up and down. In order to disrupt the cell structures, we sonicated the cells followed by centrifugation (14000 G, 3 minutes). Protein concentration was measured by using a BCA protein assay (232225, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 25 µg of each sample were taken out for global proteomic analysis. For the global proteomic analysis, In brief, the samples were reduced, alkylated and incubated in trypsin for 16 hours at 37 °C, followed by desalting and TMT labelling. Furthermore, the samples were fractionated, combined and analysed by mass spectrometry. The study design compromised 3 TMT 11 plexes. In order to compare samples across the pluxes we applied a reference mix samples. The reference mix sample contained equal amount of all the samples in the study and was aliquot into six samples, as the reference mix amounted two of the 11 samples in each plex. The reference mix was prepared after desalting the samples. The combined labelled peptide samples were pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC, using an Agilent (P/N 770995-902) 300Extend-C18, 5 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm id column, connected to an Agilent Technology off-line LC-system.The labelled peptides were fractionated into 96 fractions, and further combined into a total of 12 fractions. From each of the 12 fractions, ~5 μg was dissolved in 1% aqueous formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline33, and spec- tra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human uniprot database (March 11, 2014). earches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis33, 34. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software.Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. First, raw TMT-rations were normalized on signal to noise. In order to cross compare between the plexus, the median of the two reference samples were calculated for the individual proteins (row in excel sheet) within each TMT-plex and subsequently each value in the row were divided on the calculated reference mix median. Finally, the values were log2 transformed and a median of each sample (TMT channel, column in excel sheet) were calculated were the calculated median was subtracted from the individual values in the column. For pathway analysis we used Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) software (version 48207413).tatistical analysis was tested using unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test in excel (Microsoft). A p-value of ≤ 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of monogenic diabetes are particularly useful because we can gain insight into the molecular events of pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell failure. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1) is a form of monogenic diabetes caused by a mutation in the HNF4A gene. Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) provide an excellent tool for disease modeling by subsequently directing differentiation toward desired pancreatic islet cells, but cellular phenotypes in terminally differentiated cells are notoriously difficult to detect. Re-creating a spatial (three-dimensional [3D]) environment may facilitate phenotype detection. We studied MODY1 by using hiPSC-derived pancreatic &#x3b2;-like patient and isogenic control cell lines in two different 3D contexts. Using size-adjusted cell aggregates and alginate capsules, we show that the 3D context is critical to facilitating the detection of mutation-specific phenotypes. In 3D cell aggregates, we identified irregular cell clusters and lower levels of structural proteins by proteome analysis, whereas in 3D alginate capsules, we identified altered levels of glycolytic proteins in the glucose sensing apparatus by proteome analysis. Our study provides novel knowledge on normal and abnormal function of HNF4A, paving the way for translational studies of new drug targets that can be used in precision diabetes medicine in MODY.

### Keywords
Nf4a, Crispr/cas9, Hipsc, Cell aggregates, Alginate encapsulation, Mody1, Global proteomics, Tmt quantification, Β-cell differentiation

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Medicine, Norway

### Submitter
Yngvild Bjoerlykke

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Raeder
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Medicine, Norway


