### Accession
PXD022988

### Title
Counterion Optimization Dramatically Improves Selectivity for Phosphopeptides and Glycopeptides in Electrostatic Repulsion-Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (ERLIC)

### Description
A well-hydrated counterion can selectively and dramatically increase retention of a charged analyte in hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC).  The effect is enhanced if the column is charged, as in electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC).  This combination was exploited in proteomics for the isolation of peptides with certain post-translational modifications (PTMs).  The best salt additive examined was magnesium trifluoroacetate.  The well-hydrated Mg+2 ion promoted retention of peptides with functional groups that retained negative charge at low pH, while the poorly-hydrated trifluoroacetate counterion tuned down the retention due to the basic residues.  The result was an enhancement in selectivity between 6- to 66-fold.  These conditions were applied to a tryptic digest of mouse cortex.  Gradient elution produced fractions enriched in peptides with phosphate, mannose-6-phosphate, N- and O-linked glycans.  The numbers of such peptides identified either equaled or exceeded the numbers afforded by the best alternative methods.  This method is a productive and convenient way to isolate peptides simultaneously that contain a number of different PTMs, facilitating study of proteins with “crosstalk” modifications.  The fractions from the ERLIC column were desalted prior to C-18-reversed phase (RP) LC-MS/MS analysis.  Between 47-100% of the peptides with more than one phosphate or sialyl- residue or with a mannose-6 phosphate group were not retained by a C-18 cartridge but were retained by a cartridge of porous graphitic carbon.  This finding implies that the abundance of such peptides may have been significantly underestimated in some past studies.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatography materials: PolyWAX LP and PolySAX LP™ columns and C-18 and PGC (HyperCarb) TopTips (items TT200C18 and TT200CAR, respectively) for solid-phase extraction (SPE) were supplied by PolyLC (Columbia, MD, USA).  Synthetic peptide standards were from United BioSystems Inc. (Herndon, VA, USA).  HPLC-grade titanium dioxide (Sachtopore-NP; 5-µm, 300-Å) was from ZirChrom Separations, Inc. (Anoka, MN, USA).  Preparation of mobile phases: Salts, acids, bases, and organic solvents were sourced as described [20].  In brief, stock solutions of mobile phase salt additives were prepared by mixing a known amount of the acid (e.g, trifluoroacetic acid) with water and adding the base (e.g., magnesium hydroxide) until pH 2.5 was attained.  This pH was selected as one where phosphate residues would be fully charged, sialyl- residues would be at least half charged, and Asp- and Glu- residues of peptides would be  ~ 5% charged.  Figures for molarity are for the mobile phase overall, i.e., after addition of the organic solvent portion.  Upon addition of the acetonitrile (ACN), the pH was neither measured nor adjusted.  It was considered that reproducible technique would afford reproducible results, and in any case the dissociation constants of ionizable groups in peptides would shift in parallel with those of the salt ions upon addition of ACN.   Preparation of mouse cortex digest:  Wild-type mouse cortexes were homogenized, then lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH=8, 5 mM CaCl2, 20 mM NaCl, 1 EDTA-free Roche protease inhibitor tablet and 1 Roche PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor tablet) with a probe sonicator for 3 pulses at 60W, 20kHz for 15 s, each followed by a 30 s pause for cooling at 4ºC. Crude lysates were then centrifuged at 14000g for 5 min, after which the supernatant was collected and protein concentrations were measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Lysate was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 1 h, followed by alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by adding DTT to 5 mM. The resulting solution was then diluted with Tris buffer (pH=8) to 0.9 M urea and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio at 37 ºC for 18 h. Digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% and desalted with Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were distributed into 1-mg aliquots, dried under vacuum and stored at -80 ºC until ERLIC separation.  Offline ERLIC fractionation: 1 mg mouse cortex tryptic digest was fractionated by either a PolyWAX LP or PolySAX LP™ column (200 mm × 2.1 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD). Three sets of binary mobile phase combinations were used in the total of six fractionation experiments: (1) MP A1: 20 mM sodium methylphosphonate with 80% ACN, pH = 2.5; MP B1: 300 mM triethylammonium phosphate with 10% ACN, pH=2.5; (2) MP A2: 20 mM magnesium trifluoroacetate with 80% ACN, pH = 2.5; MP B2: 300 mM triethylammonium trifluoroacetate with 10% ACN, pH = 2.5; (3) MP A3: 20 mM ethylenediamine trifluoroacetate with 80% ACN, pH = 2.5; MP B3: 300 mM ammonium trifluoroacetate, 10% ACN, pH = 2.5.  The gradient was set as follows: 0-5 min, 0% B; 5-48 min, 0-100% B; 48-53 min, 100% B. The column was reequilibrated at 100% A for 15 min between runs. Eluent in the linear gradient was collected with a FC-4 fraction collector (Rainin Dynamax) at 2-min intervals starting from the 6th min (MP1) or the 7th min (MP2 and MP3) and combined into 12 fractions. Eluate after the 12h fraction was pooled into the last 2 fractions 13 and 14. Each fraction was dried under vacuum.  Solid phase extraction/desalting: Every peptide fraction from the 6 experiments were desalted with OMIX C18 tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). For the PTM crosstalk analysis using mobile phase combination 2, C18 SPE flow-through was collected and run through an additional HyperCarb SPE procedure per the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates from SPE were dried and stored at -80 ºC prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc, San Carlos, CA) embedded within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mus musculus proteome database (August 13, 2016; 24903 entries). Trypsin digestion missed cleavages was set at < 3. The parent mass error tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.01 Da. Fixed modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) on C residues. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M (+15.99492 Da, rare1), deamidation (+0.984016 Da, rare1) of N or Q. N-glycosylation (common1), O-glycosylation (common1) and phosphorylation (common4) . Glycan modifications were specified as Byonic embedded mammalian N-glycan database (309 entries) expanded with typical mannose-6-phosphate glycans including HexNAc (2) Hex (4-9) Phospho (1-2) modification, HexNAc (3-4) Hex (4-9) Phospho (1-2), HexNAc (2) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1) and HexNAc (3) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1)). Identifications were filtered to 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR).  Typical mannose-6-phosphate glycans including HexNAc (2) Hex (4-9) Phospho (1-2) modification, HexNAc (3-4) Hex (4-9) Phospho (1-2), HexNAc (2) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1) and HexNAc (3) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1)) and O-glycosylation (Byonic embedded mammalian O-glycan database with 89 O-glycans) were set as common dynamic modifications and searched separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphate, Ptm, Erlic, Fraction, Glyco, Peptide

### Affiliations
1Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA 2School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 777 Highland Ave., Madison, WI 53705 USA
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Yusi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
1Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA 2School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 777 Highland Ave., Madison, WI 53705 USA


