### Accession
PXD006442

### Title
Deciphering of the human interferome and its kinetics of protein induction and repression by mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome analysis

### Description
Interferons (IFNs) are pleotropic cytokines secreted upon encounter of pathogens and tumors. Applying their antipathogenic, antiproliferative and immune stimulatory capacities, recombinant IFNs are frequently prescribed as drugs to treat different diseases. IFNs act by changing the transcription of cells. Due to characteristics like rapid induction and signaling, IFNs represent prototypic model systems for various aspects of biomedical research. In respect to the signaling and activated promoters, IFNs can be subdivided in two groups. Here, alterations of the cellular proteome of human cells treated with IFN and IFN were elucidated in a time-dependent manner by mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome analysis. The majority of protein regulations were strongly IFN type- and time-dependent. In addition to the expected upregulation of IFN-induced proteins, an astonishing number of proteins become profoundly repressed especially by IFN. Taken together, our comprehensive analysis deciphers the human interferome and its kinetics of protein induction and repression.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Human MRC-5 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured in 6-well plates with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS) and 100 U/ml Penicillin and 100 µg/ml Streptomycin. The treatment with 500 U/ml IFN-α and IFN-γ- (Hu-IFN-α2a, IFN-γ; PBL Assay Science, Piscataway, NJ, USA) containing media started after cells were washed with PBS. Cells were subsequently incubated for 4 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively, at 37 °C and 5 % CO2.  Cell harvesting and lysis Cells were harvested and washed twice with ice-cold sterile PBS (4°C, 2 min, 4,000 rpm [07 rcf]), suspended and lysed in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat (TEAB) containing 0.1 % (w/v) Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). After three minutes of sonification, cell suspensions were centrifuged for 40 min at 4 °C and 12,700 rpm (18,213 rcf) to remove cell debris. Supernatant was stored at -80°C until usage.  Digestion protocol For each sample, a protein amount of 4 µg was reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Trypsin was added (3 µl, c = 0.1 µg/µl) for digestion for 16 h at 37 °C. Enzyme activity was quenched by acidification using 10 % (v/v) of TFA for 30 min at 37 °C. Insoluble hydrolyzed surfactant was removed by 10 min centrifugation at 14,000 g. The supernatant was collected and dried in a centrifugal evaporator. 300 ng of each sample were pooled to obtain a master mix used for the monitoring of LC performance during the whole experiment and the alignment of LC-MS/MS runs in the subsequent quantitative analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis For an unbiased analysis, samples derived from different experimental groups were analyzed in a randomized fashion. For each measurement, 300 ng of tryptic peptides were dissolved in 15 µl 0.1 % (v/v) TFA and injected into an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC nanoLC system online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were pre-concentrated for 7 min on a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) using 30 µl/min 0.1 % (v/v) TFA and subsequently separated on an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) by applying a gradient from 5 to 40 % solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid; solvent B: 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid, 84 % acetonitrile; 400 nl/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 in a data dependent mode. The 20 most abundant ions of a spectrum acquired at MS1 level were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation and measured in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was conducted using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Database search was performed with Mascot (v. 2.5.1, Matrix Sciences Ltd., London, UK) against the UniProt-SwissProt database (Release 2014_10; v. 2.5; 546,790 sequences). Taxonomy was restricted to Homo sapiens (20,194 sequences). Trypsin was set as cleaving enzyme with one allowed missed cleavage site. Mass area was set to 350-10,000 Da and mass tolerances to 5 ppm for the precursor and 0.4 Da for fragment ions, respectively. Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static. Confidence of peptide identification was assessed using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Peptide identifications with false discovery rate (FDR) < 1 % were considered. Protein grouping function was applied. The quantitative data analysis was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics (v. 2.0.5387.52102; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Briefly, LC-MS/MS runs were imported and aligned to a master mix run. During feature detection, only signals with at least three isotopes and charges of +2 to +5 were considered. After deleting features not satisfying the mentioned criteria, raw abundances of the features were normalized for correcting experimental variations. In the subsequent step, LC-MS/MS runs exhibiting normalization factors between 0.5 and 2.0 were considered for further analysis and grouped according to the experimental groups. Identifications of peptides and proteins obtained were then mapped to the respective features by importing the result files from Proteome Discoverer. Protein quantification was conducted using non-conflicting peptides only and protein grouping option was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Interferons (IFNs) are pleotropic cytokines secreted upon encounter of pathogens and tumors. Applying their antipathogenic, antiproliferative, and immune stimulatory capacities, recombinant IFNs are frequently prescribed as drugs to treat different diseases. IFNs act by changing the gene expression profile of cells. Due to characteristics such as rapid gene induction and signaling, IFNs also represent prototypical model systems for various aspects of biomedical research (e.g., signal transduction). In regard to the signaling and activated promoters, IFNs can be subdivided into two groups. Here, alterations of the cellular proteome of human cells treated with IFN&#x3b1; and IFN&#x3b3; were elucidated in a time-resolved manner by quantitative proteome analysis. The majority of protein regulations were strongly IFN type and time dependent. In addition to the expected upregulation of IFN-responsive proteins, an astonishing number of proteins became profoundly repressed especially by IFN&#x3b3;. Thus, our comprehensive analysis revealed important insights into the human IFN-regulated proteome and its dynamics of protein induction and repression. Interestingly, the new class of IFN-repressed genes comprises known host factors for highly relevant pathogens such as HIV, dengue virus, and hepatitis C virus.

### Keywords
Interferon alpha, Interferome, Label-free quantification, Interferon gamma

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany
1) Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany 2) Institute of Virology, University Hospital, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45120 Essen, Germany

### Submitter
Dominik Andre Meger

### Lab Head
Dr Dominik Andre Megger
1) Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany 2) Institute of Virology, University Hospital, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45120 Essen, Germany


